My friends, thank you. Thank you so much.
I can inform you that the government of Australia has changed for just the seventh time.
You obviously enjoyed hearing it, so let me say it again, the government of Australia has changed. For just the seventh time in 60 years the government of Australia has changed.
The Coalition has won 13 seats clearly, with 10 seats still in play and I can inform you that the Australian Labor Party’s vote is at the lowest level in more than one hundred years.
So, tonight, for the last time in this campaign it is my honour to address you, the people of Australia.
Mr Rudd has conceded defeat.
He has been the prime minister of this country, not once, but twice, so I acknowledge his service to the people of our nation.
I now look forward to forming a government that is competent, that is trustworthy and which purposefully and steadfastly and methodically sets about delivering on our commitments to you, the Australian people.
Something very significant has happened today. Today, the people of Australia have declared that the right to govern this country does not belong to Mr Rudd, or to me, or to his party, or to ours, but it belongs to you, the people of Australia.
It is the people of Australia who determine the government and the prime ministership of this country and you will punish anyone who takes you for granted.
That is how it should be in a great democracy such as ours.
So, my friends, in a week or so the Governor-General will swear in a new government.
A government that says what it means, and means what it says.
A government of no surprises and no excuses.
A government that understands the limits of power as well as its potential.
And a government that accepts that it will be judged more by its deeds than by its mere words.
In three years’ time the carbon tax will be gone, the boats will be stopped, the budget will be on track for a believable surplus and the roads of the 21st century will finally be well underway.
From today I declare that Australia is under new management and that Australia is once more open for business.
Today, hundreds of thousands of people would have voted for the Liberal and National Parties for the first time in their lives.
I give you all this assurance – we will not let you down.
A good government is one that governs for all Australians, including those who haven’t voted for it.
A good government is one with a duty to help everyone to maximise his or her potential, indigenous people, people with disabilities, and our forgotten families, as well as those who Menzies described as ‘lifters, not leaners.’
We will not leave anyone behind.
I want to thank my strong and united Liberal and National Party Coalition team.
I thank Julie Bishop, Warren Truss, Joe Hockey.
I thank the Members of the Shadow Cabinet.
I thank my parliamentary team.
I thank all our candidates, those who have succeeded and those who haven’t, for the faith that you have placed in me.
I thank the Coalition Premiers, all of them, who have stood shoulder to shoulder with their federal colleagues throughout this campaign.
I thank the Liberal Party organisation, President Alan Stockdale and Federal Director Brian Loughnane – and, yes, it is right that you should show such enthusiasm for Brian Loughnane because he has run our most professional campaign ever.
I thank my personal staff led by Peta Credlin, who is the smartest and the fiercest political warrior I have ever worked with.
I thank my family who have given me so much and supported me throughout public life.
I thank the people of Warringah for returning me as their member of parliament for the eighth successive time.
Most of all, I thank you, the people of Australia, who have just given me the greatest honour and the heaviest responsibility that any member of parliament can have.
I am both proud and humbled as I shoulder the duties of government.
The time for campaigning has passed.
The time for governing has arrived.
I pledge myself to the service of our country.
I have many friends in this audience. I say thank you to each one.
We have been on a journey together – a long, long journey. May it continue and may it help to bring better times to this great country of which we are all so very, very proud.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


Thank you so much for making yourselves available. I very much appreciate your presence here today.
I’m looking forward to a fruitful association with the service chiefs and the military more generally.
I guess when you ask yourself, the roles of government – economic strength, social cohesion, national security – and obviously, you are at the heart of ensuring that we maintain our national security.
I want to congratulate you on the extraordinary professionalism of our armed forces. Our armed forces are certainly not large by international standards but they are universally admired as being as good as anyone in the roles that we play and that’s very much to your credit.
So, look, thank you. I hope you will let your services know that the new government wishes to work in ways which will respect their professionalism which will improve their capabilities and which will allow them to do their job at least as well in the future as you’ve been able to do in the past.
So, thank you so much.


My friends, it is my honour to welcome you back to Canberra as the Prime Minister-elect of Australia.
Governments change but rarely in this country.
Inevitably, all changes of government are historic and all of you can be proud of the part that you have played in this historic change.
Our task is but briefly to savour this moment. Our task is to give a great country and a great people the better government that the people of Australia deserve – that is our task.
We will now move purposefully, calmly and methodically to deliver on our election commitments to build a stronger economy for a stronger Australia.
That is what we must now do. That is what I am confident we have the team to do.
This is probably as well-prepared an opposition as has ever gone in to government, but the task is now ahead of us.
The challenges are considerable: we must stop the boats, we must scrap the carbon tax, we must build the roads and we must get the budget back into the black.
We will do these things because that is what the Australian people have elected us to do. That is what the Australian people have a right to expect.
My friends, we have won the trust of the Australian people. Our challenge now is to earn it and to keep it.
Thank you so much.


Thanks Dwayne and thanks ladies and gentlemen.
I am very honoured and thrilled on this day-of-days in Australian sport to address my first North Melbourne Grand Final Breakfast as Prime Minister.
But I’m under no illusions about my standing.
Australians love their sporting heroes but, at most, merely tolerate their politicians, so I want to thank you for making me so welcome today.
It’s always good to be here in Melbourne.
Melburnians have a way of keeping Sydneysiders in their place. I ran into a great Melburnian, Lindsay Fox, yesterday who congratulated me on the election. "Once," he said, "you were just a would be/could be, and now you’re a future has been."
I often think having politicians address sports breakfasts makes as much sense as having sportsmen address parliament, but having just listened to Andrew Demetriou, I’m confident that politics has at least as much to learn from sport as the other way around. Thank you for that gracious speech, Andrew.
It’s good to see people here in such numbers and with such enthusiasm because I know it has been a tough year for the AFL. Some people were even charged with bringing the game into disrepute. I’m grateful, I really am, that there’s no offence of bringing parliament into disrepute because I fear all MPs might be guilty.
But it hasn’t been all bad news this year.
My team, Greater Western Sydney, has done incredibly well – with one win. Sometimes you only need one win to have a great year and Kevin Sheedy tells me that next year will be even better.
I congratulate the Fremantle Dockers on making their first ever grand final and I congratulate the Hawthorn Hawks for making their second grand final in a row.
My philosophy is that if you lose one big event you deserve to win the next one. So, I'm going for the Hawks today.
But I gather there’s something in AFL called ‘Kennett’s Curse.’ I can’t believe there would be anything called 'Kennett’s Curse' because Jeff is a terrific person, I love him, but whatever 'Kennett's Curse' might be, let’s hope no one suffers from it today.
Today is a celebration of all that’s good in sport.
Today is a chance to marvel at that spirit; to strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.
Whoever wins, it will certainly be a great game of football.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
[ends]


30 September 2013
TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER 
THE HON. TONY ABBOTT MP
JOINT PRESS STATEMENT WITH 
HIS EXCELLENCY DR SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO,
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA,
ISTANA NEGARA, JAKARTA 
E&amp;OE……………………….……………………………………………………………
Thank you so much Bapak President. This has been a marvelous dialogue today, a very warm dialogue, a constructive one and I feel very honoured to have been treated so generously by you, by your ministerial team and by the people of Indonesia.
As you know Bapak President, this is my first visit to Indonesia as Prime Minister. This is, in fact, my first overseas trip as Prime Minister and I am grateful to you Bapak President for allowing me to keep a promise to make my first overseas trip as Prime Minister to Indonesia.
I should say on behalf of the people of Australia, how much in awe we are of Indonesia's achievements over the last six decades. Indonesia has done so much and it has done so much, so well.
Indonesia has built a strong sense of nationhood in a vast and diverse archipelago. Indonesia has successfully managed the transition from military rule to a robust democracy and Indonesia is now in the process of taking millions and millions of people from the third world to the middle class.
This is a historic transformation with the potential to change our world for the better.
We did hold wide-ranging discussions on a large number of subjects. I absolutely agree with you, Bapak President, that we need to do so much more to build our economic partnership.
We have made some mistakes in the past. Let us make a new start, particularly in the area of agriculture and food security. Never again should this country take action which jeopardises the food supply of such a friend and partner as Indonesia is.
The fact that there is a very strong and very high level delegation of business leaders travelling with me to Indonesia, as part of this visit, testifies to the desire of the Australian people to build a much stronger, much more broadly based and much more dynamic economic relationship, based on greater trade and investment in the years to come.
We also discussed further developing our people-to-people links with, for instance, the creation of a new Australia Indonesia Studies Centre at Monash University to parallel the Australia-United States Studies Centre and the Australia-China Studies Centre at other universities in our country.
I am enthusiastic, as you know, about the new Colombo Plan which won't just see the best and the brightest of our region coming to Australia, but will henceforth see Australia's best and brightest travelling to the region.
Yes, we have much to teach our region, but our region, particularly Indonesia, has so much to teach us and if Australia is to fully participate in the Asian Century, we need the Asia literacy that this two way street Colombo Plan will give us in the years and decades ahead.
And yes, Bapak President, we had a very frank discussion about issues of sovereignty and about issues of people smuggling. These discussions were candid, constructive and collegial. People smuggling is an issue of sovereignty, especially for Australia. I appreciate how seriously Indonesia has taken this issue in the past and I look forward to working even more cooperatively with Indonesia on this issue in the future. But I do want to stress publicly, as well as privately Bapak President, Australia's total respect for Indonesia's sovereignty, total respect for Indonesia's territorial integrity and I say to you, Bapak President and to the people of Indonesia that the Government of Australia takes a very dim view, a very dim view indeed, of anyone seeking to use our country as a platform for grand standing against Indonesia. We will do everything that we possibly can to discourage this and to prevent this.
I admire and respect what you and your government have done to improve the autonomy and the life of the people of West Papua and I am confident that they can have the best possible life and the best possible future as a part of an indissoluble Indonesia, as an integral part of Indonesia.
As I said Bapak President, we had very cordial, constructive and collegial discussions on the issue of people smuggling. Much of the detail will be left to further discussions between the Coordinating Security Minister of Indonesia and the Border Protection Minister of Australia, but we are resolved together, united to tackle this problem and to beat it on land and at sea, and at the borders of our countries. We are determined to end this scourge, which is not just an affront to our two countries, but which has so often become a humanitarian disaster in the seas between our two countries.
Bapak President, I am confident that the future is bright for both our two countries and I am confident that Australia has a significant role to play as Indonesia advances to be one of the world's strongest economies and to be one of the world's leaders.
I know that Indonesia's future is bright. I know that in the years to come, Indonesia will loom economically larger compared to Australia, but for many years to come, we will have so much to offer Indonesia in a spirit of partnership, in a spirit of friendship and I am determined that we will play our part to ensure that in the decades ahead, Indonesia does indeed emerge as one of the leaders of a better world.
Bapak President, the best days of this relationship are ahead of us and they will be better days, thanks to your friendship for Australia and for your success as an Indonesian statesman on the global stage.
Thank you so much for today's talks.
[ends]


President and Ibu Yudhoyono, ministers, ambassadors, business leaders, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
It is an honour to be in this grand setting, that’s witnessed so much history, to pay tribute to Indonesia, our largest and most important neighbour; and to honour you, Bapak President, a patriot who has led by example, a moderniser of your country and a strong voice for decency in the wider world.
Long ago I promised a foreign policy focussed on Jakarta rather than Geneva and that a visit to Jakarta would be the very first trip I made as prime minister – and here I am, within two weeks of being sworn in.
Indeed, I hope a convention has now been established: that Jakarta should always be an incoming Australian prime minister’s first overseas visit.
That would be a fitting way for us officially to acknowledge the strength and significance of the friendship between our two countries.
Indonesia has created a modern nation from a vast and diverse archipelago; lifted tens of millions from the third world to the middle class; transitioned from military rule to robust democracy; improved human rights; and now stands on the threshold of rapid economic take-off.
Along with India, Indonesia is the emerging democratic superpower of Asia.
It’s that important.
Australia has always considered itself a good friend of Indonesia and is now determined to be a trusted partner.
We stood by Indonesia during the Asian financial crisis and at the time of the devastating East Asian tsunami.
We worked together in counter terrorism after the Bali bombings.
After the 2005 bombing, I personally witnessed your visit, Bapak President, to the Australian casualties in Sanglah hospital and was moved by the way you comforted each one of them.
Now, we are working together to counter a range of security challenges, including people smuggling, which has led to more than 1100 deaths at sea in the waters between our countries.
I am grateful to you, Bapak President, and to your government for this cooperation and look forward to building on these foundations.
Yours are the actions of a true friend and will never be forgotten – just as Australia will never forget Indonesia’s work to bring to justice the killers of so many innocent people, including nearly 100 Australians, after the Bali and Jakarta bombings.
There have been times, I’m sorry to say, when Australia must have tried your patience: when we “put the sugar on the table” for people smugglers; or cancelled the live cattle trade in panic at a TV programme.
There have been times when all sides of Australian politics should have said less and done more.
I am confident that these will soon seem like out-of-character aberrations and that the relationship will once more be one of no surprises, based on mutual trust, dependability and absolute respect for each other’s sovereignty under the Lombok Treaty.
As your closest first world economy with a strong interest in its neighbour’s success, and with the right attitudes, Australia is Indonesia’s obvious and natural partner in development.
Nowhere on earth would there be such an abundance of goodwill between two quite distinct countries.
In any year, hundreds of thousands of Australians come to Indonesia as tourists and tens of thousands of Indonesians come to Australia as students.
These are the movements that our citizens freely choose to make because they individually appreciate what each of our countries can offer.
Our challenge is to build on this goodwill in ways which deepen Australia’s relationship with Asia and which accelerate Indonesia’s rise.
We must succeed.
As you said, Bapak President, when you last addressed the Australian Parliament, “Our two countries have a great future together.
We are not just neighbours, we are not just friends; we are strategic partners.
We are equal stakeholders in a common future with much to gain if we get this relationship right and much to lose if we get it wrong.”
I respectfully concur and adopt your words as my own.
Australia has more significant economic and security relationships yet no other relationship – not one – is more important than our friendship with Indonesia due to its size, proximity and potential to be a global leader.
Tomorrow, I will outline a deeper cultural engagement including a new Australia Indonesia study centre at Monash University to match the United States and China centres elsewhere in Australia.
With your permission, Bapak President, and to honour your friendship with Australia, the new, two-way street version of the Colombo Plan will feature a Yudhoyono fellow: the best and brightest young Australian who elects, in any year, to study in Indonesia.
And I will outline new measures to build an economic partnership with Indonesia that’s scarcely less significant in the years to come than China is now.
That’s why I’m accompanied on this trip by 20 business leaders to promote trade and investment between our two countries.
Our relationship has so much promise – and everything will be easier once the people smuggling complication is gone.
There will be no more vital task for the new Australian government than to build on the mutual respect and affection between our two countries and I am confident that this visit has been a strong start.
[ends]


I’m here in Jakarta within two weeks of being sworn in as prime minister because of the importance I place on the relationship between two great neighbours and two major economies.
Australia currently has more significant economic relationships – but we have no more important overall relationship because of Indonesia’s size, proximity and potential.
Indonesia is a member of the G20 and a leader of ASEAN as well Australia’s most important neighbour.
It’s the world’s most populous Muslim nation.
It’s the world’s third largest democracy.
And along with India, it’s the emerging democratic superpower of Asia.
At present, Indonesia’s annual GDP per person is less than $4000 – or a tenth of Australia’s – but it’s growing at about 6 per cent a year.
It may be many years before individual Indonesians’ standard of living equals that of Australians but it probably won’t be very long before Indonesia’s total GDP dwarfs ours.
From Australia’s perspective there should be an urgency to building this relationship while there’s still so much that Australia has to give and that Indonesia is keen to receive.
There’s been trade of one sort or another between Australia and Indonesia at least since the 17th century and it’s now 80 years since the first trade commissioner was appointed to what was then Batavia.
Despite these connections and despite the annual pilgrimage that hundreds of thousands of Australian tourists make to Bali and elsewhere in the archipelago; and that tens of thousands of Indonesian students make to our universities and colleges, a fully mature economic relationship is yet to be achieved.
Annual two-way trade between Australia and Indonesia is still only about $15 billion.
In fact, our two way trade with New Zealand, with just four million people, exceeds our current two way trade with Indonesia with its 250 million people.
Obviously, there’s plenty of room to improve.
That improvement should start today with me and my ministers and with the business leaders in this room.
Australia and Indonesia have so much we can do together.
The global centre of economic gravity is shifting to Asia and on present trends, Indonesia will be the number four economy in the world by mid-century.
Fifty per cent of Indonesians are aged under 30, ready to play their part in this economic miracle.
Even now, they make up a technologically literate workforce, enjoying a standard of living their parents or grandparents could not have imagined.
There are more billionaires in Indonesia today than in Japan and, here in Jakarta, the minimum wage has risen by 44 per cent in the past year.
There are still 100 million Indonesians living on less than $1000 a year.
Within two decades though, there will be 135 million middle class Indonesians whose demand for goods and services – including financial services, health services, educational services, infrastructure and food – will be backed by purchasing power.
Protein is becoming a more important part of the Indonesian diet, particularly among prosperous urban communities and, within two years, beef consumption in Indonesia is expected to exceed domestic production by about 21,000 tonnes a year.
This is a chance here for each of us to play to our strengths: Indonesia, an acknowledged world leader in fattening and finishing, with some of the world’s finest intensive feedlots; and Australia, with our vast grazing lands and our long pastoral history, skilled at breeding beef cattle at a globally competitive price.
We can work together – but it will take some effort, especially after the shock of the former Australian government cancelling the live cattle export trade in panic at a TV programme.
Nothing like this can ever be allowed to happen again.
Last year, I visited abattoirs in Indonesia which were quite comparable to those in Australia and reject any notion that Indonesian standards are lower than Australia’s.
The new Australian government is determined to put this episode behind us and to build on the joint Red Meat and Cattle Forum established in July to foster partnership between the meat industries here and in Australia.
Australian business has rarely been keener to explore investment opportunities and build partnerships that transfer skills and build local industries – here and at home.
I also welcome Indonesia’s desire to invest in Australia – including in agriculture.
As I said on election night, Australia is under new management and is once more open for business.
We are open to investments that will help to build the prosperity of both nations.
Food security is just one area of opportunity – another is the rapidly expanding demand for services.
Educational services are a good example. Indonesia is already home to 100,000 former students from Australian universities.
Of those Indonesian students who choose to study abroad, roughly one in four make Australia their destination.
While tens of thousands of Indonesian students are studying in Australian universities and colleges, only a few hundred Australians are returning the compliment by studying in Indonesia.
Starting next year, the new Australian government will establish a new Colombo Plan that doesn’t just bring the best and the brightest students from the wider Asia-Pacific region to Australia but takes Australia’s best and brightest to the region.
The Colombo Plan, operating from the 1950s to the 1980s, saw tens of thousands of the future leaders of our region educated at Australian universities.
A contemporary, two way street version of the Colombo Plan, would acknowledge how much the region can teach us as well as how much we can offer our region.
Operating at different levels and for different periods of time, and often with a business internship component, this new Colombo Plan could provide us with a new and more contemporary version of Rhodes scholars and Fulbright fellows, this time with a strong Asia-Pacific orientation.
As well, within a decade, working with the Australian states and territories, the new government aims to have 40 per cent of high school students studying a foreign language – as was the case in the 1960s – only this time the emphasis will be on Asian languages as well as European ones.
This New Colombo Plan aims to ensure that we are a more Asia literate country, more able to play our part in the Asian Century.
Specific policies like these will have an impact, over time.
Still, deepening and broadening the Australia-Indonesia relationship means millions of human interactions, tens of thousands of business deals and hundreds of institutional arrangements in which Australians and Indonesians get to know each other, learn from each other and help each other.
National leaders can do so much – but only so much.
That’s why Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, Trade Minister, Andrew Robb and I are accompanied by a strong business delegation of leaders from Australia’s financial services, health, agriculture, resources, infrastructure, telecommunications, office management and manufacturing sectors.
I thank each of you for taking the time and trouble to make this trip and to build these links. Government initiatives mean little if they are not backed by dozens, hundreds, and ultimately tens of thousands of individual contacts between Australians and the people in other countries that we deal with.
As befits a country that’s under new management and once more open for business, it’s my intention to take a trade delegation with me on all significant overseas trips to showcase Australia and to let our partners know more about how we can work together to mutual advantage.
We’re establishing a register in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade for businesses that want to be part of trade delegations accompanying ministerial visits.
I also thank the organisations working tirelessly to promote Australia-Indonesia business links such as the business partnership group, Kadin, and the Indonesian-Australian Business Council.
Such organisations are indispensable because they know their way around the local scene.
At another level, governments come together bilaterally to forge formal arrangements like the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
One of my first acts as prime minister was to ask the Minister for Trade and Investment, Andrew Robb, to accelerate the work with his Indonesian counterparts towards this new deal.
The new government’s approach is very straightforward: we will take a respectful, consultative, no-surprises approach to relations with Indonesia.
Our aim is to rebuild confidence so that both sides respect each other and trust other to keep commitments.
Trust is essential to the future success of the businesses represented here today.
There’s the hard grind of establishing regulatory certainty.
There’s the patient negotiation that helps to eliminate barriers to trade and investment and facilitate market access.
Then there’s the further engagement that takes place in the regional and global forums – such as ASEAN, the East Asia Summit, APEC, and the G20.
Forums like these are critical to the long-term prosperity of every country – and Australia hosting the G20 in a year’s time; and Indonesia, hosting APEC in a week’s time, will both be pushing for regional and global strategies to promote economic growth.
The new Australian Government intends to showcase fiscal restraint, deregulation, tax cuts and investment in economic infrastructure.
Another example is the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, currently being negotiated under the auspices of ASEAN.
Australia and Indonesia have much to gain from a regional free trade area encompassing ASEAN member states and the nations with which they have existing free trade agreements.
The 16 nations that this would cover account for roughly half of the world’s population, about a third of world GDP and a quarter of global exports.
This further agreement would not just cover trade in goods and services, but such matters as competition, dispute resolution, intellectual property and technical cooperation.
It’s negotiations like these – hard, open, with no surprises – that deliver the transparent and stable regulatory regimes that give companies the confidence to make the long-term investment decisions that boost economic growth and ultimately deliver a safer and freer world.
Early next year, right across Indonesia, Australia will present a major cultural festival to strengthen our engagement here, beyond the cabinet room and beyond the boardroom.
The aim is to showcase Australian creativity and innovation and to foster creative collaborations between Indonesians and Australians.
A business programme operating in parallel with this cultural festival will help promote trade and investment.
Then there’s the new Australia Indonesia studies centre at Monash University to be jointly funded by government and the private sector to build business, cultural, educational, research and community links and to promote greater understanding of Indonesia and its growing importance to Australia.
A more culturally aware Australia and an economically stronger Indonesia would mean more Australian students in Indonesia and more Indonesian tourists in Australia.
More and more Australians now see Indonesia as a place to do business and to embark on joint ventures, as well as to have a holiday, as the business leaders’ presence here testifies. Our challenge is to ensure that more and more Indonesians see Australia as a good place to invest and do business: in short, as a trusted partner.
I am proud to be here in Jakarta with such a group of business leaders acting as ambassadors for our country.
I’m confident you can engender the trust in Australia that’s essential for our future.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of Margie and I, Margie and I are absolutely honoured to welcome all of you to Kirribilli House, one of the Prime Ministerial residences here. I’m particularly thrilled to be in the presence of Her Excellency the Governor and Sir Nicholas Shehadie, in the presence of the Premier and Mrs Rosemary O’Farrell, our former Governor-General, Major General Michael Jeffery, so many very distinguished people. You honour Margie and me by being here today, so thank you so much for coming.
This is a very special day. It is the hundredth anniversary of the Royal Australian Navy. It is the centenary of our Navy. So it’s a day when we look back over our history. It’s a day when we remember all of the things that have helped to make us a nation; but it’s also a day that we look forward and it’s great to have here today, in the presence of His Royal Highness Prince Harry, so many young Australians who have done something with their lives. We have Paralympians, we have other sporting heroes, we have young entrepreneurs. Perhaps most poignantly we have people who have served our country in war and paid a very high price indeed and Margie and I salute you and our nation salutes you and I know that Prince Harry wishes to honour you on this particular occasion.
I’m not going to make a long speech. I want to conclude with just a couple of remarks. Prince Harry, I regret to say that not every Australian is a monarchist, but today everyone feels like a monarchist.
You grace us as your family has graced our nation from its beginning and it’s quite fitting on a day such as this when we think back over a hundred years of the Australian Navy, that you are here as the Crown is a symbol of stability, continuity, decency, in our public life. So thank you so much for being here.
Finally ladies and gentlemen, we’re all Australians. Our very diverse backgrounds, very different heritage, but we are all Australians and on a day such as today, we should all count our blessings. We have all won the lottery of life by virtue of being Australians and to be here on this day in your presence, your Royal Highness, is particularly special.
Thank you.
[ends]


It is an honour for me – on behalf of a grateful and respectful nation – to say thank you to the men and women of the HMAS Newcastle.
And particularly to say thank you to you, their friends and family for the support and encouragement that you have given to your loved ones.
As the Admiral has just reminded us, this is one of 55 Australian Naval deployments to the Middle East area of operations.
This is the fourth time HMAS Newcastle has deployed to the Middle East.
The work that the HMAS Newcastle has done is important work for our country and the world.
Your loved ones have been protecting our interests, upholding our values and supporting our citizens.
Your loved ones have been in a great tradition of Australian military commitments to the Middle East: the Light Horse in Palestine, the second Australian Imperial Force in the deserts of north Africa and more recently our forces in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Our forces go forth to do good, and HMAS Newcastle has done well in the Middle East over the last six months.
We are proud of the men and women of the HMAS Newcastle.
We are also proud of you – their families and loved ones.
Our military forces can only go abroad with the support of the people of Australia and no one supports our military forces more than their families and friends.
It is always difficult when your loved ones are away.
As the Admiral has pointed out – you, too, have served our country.
You, too, have made sacrifices for our country.
They also serve who wait for their loved ones to return.
Thank you so much on behalf of our country.
[ends]


Thanks very much, Aunty Agnes, for your gracious Welcome to Country and thanks very much, Ara Creswell, for that wonderful and warm introduction.
Thanks, ladies and gentlemen, for being here to help launch Carers Week. Thanks, everyone, for coming together in support of Australia's 2.5 million carers and the people who they care for.
It is a credit to us as a society that we do care for those who are caring for those who are most vulnerable in our midst.
I want particularly to acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues, the Assistant Minister, Mitch Fifield about whom I will say a little more later and Senator Zed Seselja, the newly-elected Senator for the ACT. It’s good to have both of you here.
I have two tasks today. The first is to help to initiate Carers Week this year. The second is to help introduce the panel discussion which will take place later on today here at the National Press Club, which I think will elucidate many of the issues which are important to carers and those they care for.
Most of all, though, it is my job to acknowledge Australia’s 2.5 million carers, those whose principal task – the task that they have set themselves in their lives – is to care for someone else, someone they love.
Carers, as we know, come from every walk of life. Every carer’s circumstance is different. But what distinguishes every carer from every other one of us is that each carer has said that his or her principal task will be to dedicate himself or herself to someone who matters; someone who needs help. This is a truly remarkable thing. It is a truly magnanimous thing.
Many of us make the decision at some point in our lives to be dedicated to someone else. When we stand up and make marriage vows or a marriage commitment, we dedicate ourselves in one sense to someone else. But most of us, when we do this, are dedicating ourselves to the good times that we are going to have with someone else. What carers do is dedicate themselves to the tough times as well as the good times, as Aunty Agnes has just helped to remind us.
Yes, there are good times in the life of every carer; times of intense satisfaction; times of intense love. But for so many carers, there are also times of intense difficulty and intense frustration. There is nothing romantic about most of the work that carers do. It often involves relentless toil and the inability to leave the person they’re caring for, even for a moment, without the risk of something terrible befalling that person.
It’s no wonder, under these circumstances, that there is such a high family breakdown rate for carers, such high rates of mental health issues, poor incomes. It is a great life, but it’s a tough life. It is a worthy life, but it is a difficult choice that the carers of this country have made and that’s why it’s so important that we acknowledge them on an occasion such as this. And yet it’s important to remember that whatever the difficulties that individual carers have and might face, carers themselves are so often inspirational leaders in our communities and in our nation at large. There would hardly be a person who comes into contact regularly with a carer who is not uplifted and inspired by the work that that carer does and by the life that that carer lives.
It is inevitably invidious to single out individuals, but on an occasion such as this, I think I should single out Helen Johnson whom I met on Pollie Pedal a couple of years ago, caring for Ben, her son who was born with very significant disabilities. People like Tania Hayes, caring for Warren, her husband, who has, as we've just learnt, very significant disabilities arising from some medical complications.
Helen and Tania are typical of the 2.5 million carers in our midst. They are fine, inspirational people. Not only do our carers save our society billions of dollars, but they are a reminder to all of us of our best selves. They are a reminder to all of us of that capacity that humans have to give and not to count the cost; a capacity which most of us are not called upon to realise, but which some of us are called upon to realise and do so often in full measure.
So, it’s terrific to be here today. I’m now the leader of a government. This is not the first time, though, that I have been in government and obviously those of you who have dealt with government have your own opinions about how government has handled the issue of caring and the issue of disability in our society.
I like to think that the former Howard Government in which I served had a pretty strong record when it came to carers and to people with disabilities. In the last four budgets of the Howard Government, we were able to give very substantial bonuses to carers. We were able to do that because good economic management had provided substantial surpluses that the government was able to distribute in this way.
There was, during the time of the Howard Government, a very considerable extension of carers’ payments and carers’ allowances and while the surpluses of those days are no longer there – we hope to have them again quite soon, but they’re not there for the moment – the commitment of the Coalition to carers and to people with disabilities is certainly undimmed and the challenge for the new Coalition Government is to at least match and, if possible, to surpass the commitment that our predecessor made to carers and to people with disabilities and obviously that starts with the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I am proud that the last parliament, for all of its tumult, for all of its rancour – and, as you all know, even by the standards of Australian parliaments, it was a pretty rancorous parliament – but I am proud that one very good thing at least has come from the last parliament and that is the foundations of our National Disability Insurance Scheme, because despite all the difficulties of the last three years, despite all of the partisanship, we were able to come together and agree that the National Disability Insurance Scheme was an idea whose time had come; that a decent society owed it to our most vulnerable to give them a new deal and a better deal.
I’m pleased that the Coalition supported the National Disability Insurance Scheme every step of the way. We supported the proposed Productivity Commission inquiry when the new Opposition Leader, then the Parliamentary Secretary Bill Shorten, proposed this back in 2010. We welcomed and supported the Productivity Commission report when it came out. We voted through the Parliament the enabling legislation and we supported the levy which will substantially if not totally fund the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The NDIS’ emergence from the last parliament is a sign that while our public life can sometimes be dispiriting, that even in the midst of things which most people don’t like, a lot of good work can be done. I hope that the people of Australia will draw encouragement from the fact that even a dispiriting parliament was able to produce something as a lasting monument. But there is a long way to go. There is a very, very long way to go. The legislation and the trials that are now under way are simply a start. They are a good start, a very good start, but that is all they are – they are a start.
There will be many valuable lessons to be learnt from the trials and the launches now underway which the Government will incorporate into the final design of the National Disability Insurance Scheme when it becomes fully operational in 2019. But I do want to assure everyone here, everyone watching right around our country, that we will make this work. We will make this work. This is too important for our country to fail this test. It is, nevertheless, a vast undertaking; an undertaking almost unprecedented in the life of our country.
Yes, there is much that we can build upon here. There is the Victorian Traffic Accident Commission and the work that it does. There is the work that’s newly begun under Lifetime cover in New South Wales. There is much that we can build on here and there is much that gives us confidence that we can get this right. I should say that there is no better person to guide the National Disability Insurance Scheme from little more than a dream to a reality than the Minister, Mitch Fifield, who is here with us today.
I’m blessed with a very good team, but very few members of my team worked as hard in their portfolio, worked as effectively in their portfolio as Mitch Fifield did with the disability sector. It's a big job, Mitch, but I know you're up for it, I know you’ll do it very, very well indeed and I also know that millions of Australians will be relying on you and us to get it as right as we humanly can. Don’t feel daunted, Mitch, please.
Of course, the National Disability Insurance Scheme will do much to help people with disabilities and will do much to improve the lives of those who are caring for someone with a disability, but it will never remove the need for carers. It will never replace the vital role played by people who are doing what they do, not for money, but for love; people who are doing what they do, not because they were trained to it from a relatively early age, but because they were committed to it by something that happened in their lives or something that happened in the life of someone they loved.
It is, after all, the real test of a person; it is, after all, the measure of a society not what we do for money, but what we do for love, not what we have to do, but what we choose to do because we see a need, we see an opportunity and we rise to the challenge, we grab the occasion, and that is what carers in their own way do.
I may not have spoken this way – if I may speak candidly with you – even a few years ago, because a few years ago I hadn't been brought into contact with the world of caring, as I have been over the last few years through Carers Australia and the Pollie Pedal which over the last two years has been dedicated to Carers Australia. The Pollie Pedal for those of you who don’t know is the annual charity bike ride that my colleagues and I have been doing since 1998 – you may have seen some news coverage about it in recent days – but over the last couple of years, we've been raising money for Carers Australia. We haven't just been raising money. In all of the towns and villages and communities along the way, thanks to the work of Carers Australia, we have been meeting with and mixing with carers and those they care for. It’s humbling because you realise the difficult circumstances that so many Australians face. It’s daunting because you ask yourself, “What would I do if I was confronted with something like this?” But it’s inspiring because you see how many people rise so magnificently to meet the challenges of life.
No one knows what the future holds. No one knows what fate has in store for us. We can be confident, though, that at some stage in most of our lives, we will need care or be a carer and that’s why it’s so important that we celebrate carers; that’s why it's so important that we remember carers at a time like this.
It’s good that carers have a champion in Carers Australia – a body that can speak up for them and can inform the wider world of the work that carers do, of the life that carers have. It’s also very fortunate that Carers Australia has Ara Creswell as its chief executive. It has been an honour to work with you, Ara, over the last couple of years and I look forward to working with you in all sorts of different capacities for many years to come.
Thank you.


It’s hard to make a great deal of money. It is even harder to spend it very wisely.
Some time ago Andrew Forrest became one of our most significant entrepreneurs, now he is becoming one of our greatest philanthropists and I salute him on both counts.
You only make a fortune by providing a service to people.
Andrew Forrest is serving our country twice.
First, he is building the mines of which our country’s prosperity and our people’s livelihoods depend and second, he is investing his share of the proceeds not in his life but in that of others.
This University, indigenous employment and in combatting modern day slavery to name only the most prominent of his many causes.
He is a living, breathing embodiment of the parable of the talents.
He is a credit to his family, including his famous forbear.
He is a tribute to this University which taught him economics.
He is not an academic, but the very soul of that restless curiosity and yearning of higher things which should define a university.
Not a Rhodes Scholar, but exactly the kind of person that Cecil Rhodes sought.
He is the epitome of that stern but just injunction to whom much is given, much is expected.
Of course, it is my understanding that in the Forrest household it is Andrew who makes the revenue decisions, but it is Nicola who makes the spending decisions.
So, it is really you, Nicola, that we have to thank for tonight’s extraordinary benefaction.
The two of you are a remarkable partnership and we all salute both of you.
Ladies and gentlemen, until recently Australia has had a comparatively thin culture of philanthropy but that is changing I am pleased to say.
There has been Kerry Stokes’ generosity to the War Memorial, the Packers’ to the Chang Institute, the Lowys’ to many good causes. There was Greg Poche who donated $30 million to the Mater Hospital in Sydney. There was Graham Tuckwell who donated $50 million to the Australian National University and now the Forrests’ donation to higher learning here in Western Australia.
One of the things that I have always admired about our most successful people is their fiercely competitive spirit.
Wouldn’t it be good to see our greatest magnates outbidding each other not to buy a bigger boat or to build a bigger mansion but to create a better future, to leave a better legacy for our country?
That way great individual wealth would seem less a personal benefit and more a national asset.
We wouldn’t just be a richer country, we would be a better country.
So, may there be many more nights like this to celebrate generosity on an epic scale and hearts as big as our country.
Thank you.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for welcoming me. My parliamentary colleague and former Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Warren Snowdon, thank you so much for the support that you give to Legacy.
Before I formally address you, I do want to take a moment just to acknowledge the fire emergency which is still unfolding in New South Wales and to convey our nation’s sympathies to all those who are suffering, to all those who have lost homes, whose homes have been damaged, and in particular, to acknowledge that there has already been loss of life and we fear more.
Australia is a country which is prone to natural disaster but every time it strikes, it hurts and we grieve for all of those who are now hurting because of what’s happened in New South Wales. I hope later today to be in at least one of the affected communities, but I think I should begin this formal address with an acknowledgement of just what has happened and with our nation’s sorrow and sympathy for all who are suffering.
On that note, may I now move to begin my address to this Legacy conference. Of course, you were expecting the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Senator Ronaldson. I know he was very much looking forward to being here. I know some of his former constituents in Ballarat were very much looking forward to seeing him here. He is doing our nation’s work in Europe to help prepare for the Centenary of ANZAC but he does very much send his apologies. I gather he’ll be saying something to you by way of video message later in the conference and I’m very honoured to be here as the Prime Minister representing the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs!
Ladies and gentlemen, Australia has always played a significant part in the affairs of the world. We have always done what we can to defend our interests, to uphold our values, to protect our citizens and, where necessary, to support our allies. We’ve always done this – always have, and as far as I’m concerned, always will.
Our nation was formed in the midst of conflict and the new nation participated in the Boer War, then of course we sent large forces to World War I, large forces to World War II, significant forces to Korea, to Vietnam and, more recently, to Iraq and Afghanistan.
As well as our participation in war, there’s been our role in peacekeeping operations around the globe over the last 60 years. The British Commonwealth occupation forces in Japan, the forces that we’ve sent to Cyprus, Sinai and other parts of the Middle East, the forces that we sent to Somalia in the early 90s and, more recently, the forces that we’ve sent to East Timor and the Solomon Islands.
The truth is that you cannot have casualty-free combat. Even the best and most professional armed forces will take casualties in combat and we have suffered as a nation because of the stand that we have taken for justice and for our friends, right around the world. We suffered 60,000 war dead in World War I. We suffered almost 40,000 war dead in World War II. In Korea and in Vietnam there were hundreds of war dead and, tragically, we have lost 40 outstanding young men in Afghanistan. Then, of course, there are those who have died from complications arising from their war service.
We cannot ask our young men and women to put themselves in harm’s way for our country if we don’t ensure that we give them the best possible care on their return. And it’s not enough simply to care for those who come back; we must also care for the loved ones of those who don’t come back; for the widows and the orphans of those who have paid the highest possible price in the service of our country.
This is where Legacy has responded magnificently, on behalf of our country, to help the loved ones of those who did not return. For 90 years, you have been caring for the widows and the dependents of those who have not returned. In more recent times there are those who did return, but returned incapacitated or became incapacitated as a result of their war service and as time goes by, I am sure you will evolve as an organisation into that premier group, supporting the families of all who have suffered because of their service in the armed forces of our country.
There are 50 clubs, there are some 6,000 Legacy volunteers serving on average, as I understand it, 100 hours a year for this important cause, looking after right now some 100,000 widows and dependent children. This is magnificent and necessary work. Nothing can make up for a lost father, a lost husband, a lost brother, a lost parent, a lost spouse, a lost sibling, but Legacy does what can be done to fill that void, practically and emotionally, and I salute you for all the work you do.
You carry the torch for the families of our war dead. Be yours to hold it high, be ours to salute you for what you do.
So, I do salute you. I do encourage you in your work and I do very much encourage you in your deliberations over this conference as you work out how best to promote and advance not only the work of Legacy but the ideals of Legacy in the year and in the decades ahead.
I thought I might also – because you are part of the wider Defence community – say a few words about some other relevant issues, starting with the Defence policy of the new government.
As we know, for all sorts of reasons, Defence spending has dropped over the last few years; regrettably, to the lowest levels as a percentage of GDP since 1938. The incoming government will do its best – budgetary circumstances permitting – to restore Defence spending to two per cent of Gross Domestic Product and we hope to do so again – as soon as budget circumstances permit – by increasing Defence spending by three per cent in real terms every year.
In the meantime, there will be no further cuts to Defence spending. We will be as efficient as we can, but there will be no overall cuts to Defence spending under the incoming Coalition Government.
It’s important that we give our Defence forces what they need to do their job. It’s particularly important that we give our veterans what they need to live a decent life and what they need to appropriately acknowledge and honour their service to our country.
We will retain the Department of Veterans’ Affairs because you deserve a dedicated department to serve you.
We will properly index DFRDB and DFRB pensions come the 1st of July next year. Despite the difficult budgetary circumstances that the incoming government faces, this will be done in next year’s budget and it will apply for veterans over 55 from the 1st of July next year.
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, a few words on the Centenary of ANZAC – the business which detains my distinguished friend and colleague, Senator Ronaldson overseas right now. Yes, as all of us know, Gallipoli was in a sense, the cauldron that helped to shape a young nation. It wasn’t our first war – that was the Boer War. Nevertheless, it was the conflict, it was the battle, it was the campaign which seized the imagination of a young nation and helped to shape the way we think about ourselves as Australians.
We know a fair bit about the Gallipoli campaign. It’s a story that we tell again and again each year on ANZAC Day, but the coming few years mark not just the Centenary of ANZAC, they will mark the centenary of many First World War events and it is important while we acknowledge and honour the Centenary of ANZAC that we also acknowledge and remember the role that the First Australian Imperial Force played, not just at Gallipoli and in the Dardanelles Campaign, but elsewhere in that terrible conflict. There was the Australian Light Horse who effectively drove the Turks from Palestine and there was, of course, the mighty First AIF and work that was done over three years on the Western Front.
This was a time when Australia and Australians shaped the world. So, in thinking of the Centenary of ANZAC, we should think not just of Gallipoli itself, not just of the ideals of duty and service which motivated the young men who rallied to the colours in those days, but of our role in world history at that time.
So, the incoming government, as its predecessor before it, is determined to ensure that we appropriately celebrate and appropriately honour the Centenary of ANZAC. I thank the former minister Warren Snowdon for the hard and good work that he has done to this end and I am confident that we can build on that work to ensure that we leave a lasting legacy for the future.
We are increasing the amount that will be available for local Centenary of ANZAC commemorations and appropriate events to $125,000 per electorate. There will be a major travelling exhibition put together by the Australian War Memorial and in just over twelve months, there will be the opening and dedication of a memorial and commemorative centre at Albany in Western Australia, which was the last sight of our country that many of those troops had. These will happen.
I guess the question is, can and should we do more? There are a couple of projects which I think are worth considering.
First, a national war cemetery in Canberra – Australians’ Arlington, if you like – in which significant ex-soldiers could be interred.
Second, a major interpretative centre on the Western Front – something that does for Australia and for the Australians who visit the Western Front in such large numbers these days what the Canadians have done to commemorate their extraordinary work in World War I.
These are questions that I hope we might ponder and decide in the next few months so that we can ensure that we go through the four years, if you like, of the Centenary of ANZAC with something to remember and with a lasting legacy, so that this generation has appropriately honoured the sacrifice, the service, the achievements of our mighty forbears.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is an honour to be with you today.
Every one of you give up a significant and substantial part of your life to serve your fellow Australians – in your case, particularly deserving fellow Australians: those who have been left behind by those who have served our country in the armed forces.
I cannot think of a better cause.
I cannot think of a more honourable and worthy thing to do.
I thank you for it.
I congratulate you for it.
On behalf of our nation, I wish you well for the future.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, my fellow Liberals, thank you so much. It is a real honour and a real thrill to be here, the first State Council of our Liberal Party around Australia that I’ve had the chance to address as Prime Minister.
Before I commence this address, let me simply take a few moments to remember all of those people in New South Wales who have lost homes because of the devastating bushfires over the last couple of days. We remember them, we remember their communities, we remember all of those who are on the frontline of the fires: the fulltime professionals, the part time professionals, the volunteer professionals, in the state emergency services and the rural fire services. We remember all of them and we send our best wishes to them as they confront loss, as they confront challenge, as they rally together as Australians always do in difficult times.
South Australia is a state which understands fire, which has suffered its own fire emergencies on numerous occasions. It’s happened in the past, it will happen in the future. When South Australia suffers, the other states rally to your cause. When New South Wales suffers, I’m sure South Australians would wish to acknowledge that and to send nothing but best wishes beaming across the distance to all those people in New South Wales.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a real thrill to be here in Adelaide for your conference. An important conference for our party because it marks a transition from Grant Chapman, one of my former parliamentary colleagues who has been an outstanding President, to Alexander Downer, another one of my former parliamentary colleagues who I know will be an equally outstanding President. I salute Alexander. I am grateful for our friendship. I acknowledge the fact that Alexander was a truly great Minister in what was arguably one of the very greatest governments our country has had and I know he is absolutely the man to lead and guide the party as you approach the vital election in March of next year.
Here in South Australia, our party could hardly be in better shape. I salute my Senate team: Cory Bernardi, Sean Edwards, David Fawcett and Anne Ruston. I salute our House of Representatives members: Rowan Ramsay, Andrew Southcott, Tony Pasin, newly elected for Barker, and of course marvellous Matt Williams, magnificent Matt Williams, the newly elected member for Hindmarsh.
But I particularly salute and pay tribute to those outstanding members of the new executive Government: Simon Birmingham, who will ensure that our water is right, that we appropriately manage the balance between the environment and the needs of our agricultural industries and the cities and towns of the Murray-Darling Basin; Jamie Briggs who is going to be at the forefront as the Assistant Minister for Infrastructure, at the forefront of delivering the roads of the 21st Century; and of course my friend and colleague the Hon. Christopher Pyne, Leader of the House of Representatives and Minister for Education.
It’s nice for the first time in almost six years to have at the federal level a Minister for Education who doesn’t think that more money is the solution to every problem. It’s good to have as Minister for Education at the federal level someone who appreciates that the key to better schools, the key to better educational institutions is not just more money, but it’s better teachers, it’s better teaching, it’s more principal autonomy, it’s more community engagement and it’s more rigorous curricula. That is the key to better education in this country. Christopher Pyne understands it and thank God we have someone who does.
I want to say thank you to all of my federal colleagues for the support that they have so consistently given to me over the last four years almost since I became the leader of our federal party. But most of all I want to thank every one of you in this room for the support that you have given to them. We have been a good team. We have been a happy family. Sure, from time to time we’ve had our discussions, we’ve even had our arguments, but we’ve treated each other with respect and we’ve resolved them like adults and that’s why we are now in Government in Canberra.
Can I also say thank you to the South Australian Division for a very strong result at the recent federal election. We had a five and a half per cent two party preferred swing to the Liberal Party at that poll. It’s our best result in almost a decade and of course, the icing on the cake was an almost eight per cent swing in Hindmarsh to give us that seat. Well done, South Australia.
But of course, even elections which we win have their bittersweet moments. It doesn’t matter how well you do, there are always some who are disappointed. I pay tribute to our candidates who fought the good fight but sadly are not with us in Canberra: Tom Zorich, Sue Lawrie, Carmen Garcia, Damien Mills and Nigel McKenna. You did the right thing by our party. You did the right thing by our country. You had a go, and sure, it wasn’t quite enough to get there but in the end we are judged not so much by what we have done but by what we have tried to do. You tried to do something magnificent and we salute you.
So my friends, there is a new Government in Canberra. We inherited a mess but we have made a good start. We inherited a mess but we have made a good start. Think of the legacy of the departed Labor government in Canberra: 200,000 more unemployed, a commonwealth gross debt skyrocketing towards $400 billion, the five biggest deficits in our history, and worst of all, more than 50,000 illegal arrivals by boat under a government which had completely lost control of our borders.
We were elected, my friends, because we promised to fix this. We promised to stop the boats, to get the Budget back under control, to scrap the carbon tax and to build the roads of the 21st century. That is what we will do and that is what we are doing. Yes, we’ve only been there for one month and one day but we have made a good start.
I said on election night that Australia was under new management and Australia was open for business. Well, I can report that on that very night, by our election, we saved the motor industry of this country from Labor’s $1.8 billion fringe benefits tax hit on company cars. So at the very least, on the day after our election the motor show rooms of this country were once more open for business.
We said we would launch Operation Sovereign Borders, and we have. Lieutenant General Angus Campbell is running Operation Sovereign Borders. Former Major General Jim Molan is my special envoy for people smuggling, working already in the capitals of our region. We said we would reintroduce temporary protection visas and we have. The message has gone out – no one coming illegally to Australia by boat will ever come to this country. The message has gone out – no one who has come to Australia illegally by boat can ever expect to receive permanent residency of this country. That is the message that has gone out and I have to say it is a message which appears to have been heeded.
Never forget that in July, just three months ago in July, the worst month in our history for illegal boat arrivals almost 5,000 came in a single month. They were coming in July at the rate of 50,000 a year.
Now, we can’t work overnight miracles. We have no magic wand. But there’s no doubt the difference that new policies and new resolves make. So far in the one month and one day that this Government has been in place, illegal arrivals by boat are running at the rate of just 10 per cent. They’re down 90 per cent on what was happening at its worst under Labor.
Now I don’t pretend that the people smugglers won’t test us. I don’t say that there won’t be worse months as well as better months in the time ahead. I don’t pretend that the boats have already stopped. But I can say to you with great confidence, my friends, they are stopping. They are stopping and they will be stopped.
We said we’d have an indigenous advisory council and a business advisory council and we do.
I said that my first overseas trip as Prime Minister would be to Indonesia and it was. I think leaders of other countries have been quite pleased to go to a meeting with an Australian Prime Minister and for the first time in six years not get a lecture. I will stand up for Australia, I will sing our praises but I don’t pretend that I have all the answers for other countries. Lord knows it’s hard enough to have the answers for your country let alone to have the answers for every other country in the world! So we will never make the mistake that was made so frequently by our immediate predecessors.
And yes, we are negotiating free trade agreements. We are accelerating those negotiations. I hasten to say, free trade agreements that are in the best interest of our country as well as in the best interests of other countries; free trade agreements that will have significant benefits for us as well as significant benefits for our partners.
We said that there would be a one-stop-shop for environmental approvals and I’m pleased to say that yesterday in Brisbane, I signed a memorandum of understanding with Premier Campbell Newman to ensure that within 12 months that will be a reality.
We said that the Australian victims of overseas terrorism would receive modest compensation along the lines of the compensation available to the victims of domestic crime here in Australia and within a week or so, that compensation will be flowing.
Ladies and gentlemen, we said above all else we would scrap the carbon tax. Well, this week I released an exposure draft of legislation to do just that.
Let’s be under no illusions about the carbon tax. The carbon tax was never an environmental measure. Look at the former government’s own figuring and it made clear that despite a carbon tax tipped to be some $37 a tonne by 2020, Australia’s domestic emissions were going up, not down, from 578 million tonnes to 621 million tonnes. The carbon tax was never an environmental measure. The carbon tax was always socialism masquerading as environmentalism. That’s why the carbon tax must go.
When I released the exposure draft legislation this week, I was able to say, based on the official advice that I had received, that abolishing the carbon tax would mean a nine per cent cut in power prices, a seven per cent cut in gas prices, a $200 a year reduction in your power bill, a $70 a year reduction in your gas bill, a $550 a year benefit to households. Wouldn’t that be a nice Christmas present for the people of Australia? But who’s the person who wants to steal Christmas, at least when it comes to abolishing the carbon tax? Who’s the person who quite likes to see those electricity bills nine per cent higher than they should be? Well it’s none other than the new Leader of the Opposition, good old ‘Electricity Bill’ Shorten.
Look, I know that the new Leader of the Opposition is beholden to the Greens. I know that the new Leader of the Opposition doesn’t want to repudiate too quickly the legacy of his predecessors. But unless Mr Shorten is prepared to accept the will of the Australian people, unless he is prepared to accept that the carbon tax is nothing if it’s not a tax on your power bills, I’m afraid his tenure at the top is likely to be very short indeed – notwithstanding all the changes to the Labor Party rules designed to ensure that the leader can never lose his job – because every time those power bills come through, people will be thinking, more bill shock! What’s his name? Bill Shorten? Bill Shock? What is it?
That’s what people will be thinking unless the new Leader of the Opposition is prepared to do what we were prepared to do after the 2007 election and that is to accept that in the end, we might be Liberal, we might be Labor, we might be National, but first and foremost we have to be democrats. In a great democracy like this, we have to accept the verdict of the people. We have to understand that the Australian people have said, let’s scrap this carbon tax. Let’s scrap this toxic tax. And that is exactly what we will be doing once the Parliament resumes in the middle of November.
It is always a thrill, my friends, to be here in Adelaide. Adelaide is a fabulous city. South Australia is a great state. I regard Adelaide as probably the world’s most liveable city. Great people, great climate, terrific restaurants, art, culture. This city has got everything going for it except, I regret to say, the strong economy that the people of South Australia deserve. It is so important that we scrap the carbon tax and scrap the mining tax as soon as we humanly can because as long as those taxes stay in place there will be a permanent handbrake on the economy of this great state.
I can’t guarantee that without the carbon  tax and without the mining tax the Olympic Dam mine expansion will go ahead but I can guarantee that with the carbon tax and with the mining tax it will never happen. It will never happen. For the sake of the people of South Australia, for the sake of the future of this great state, for the sake of your children and grandchildren, we must push on with the abolition of the carbon tax and the abolition of the mining tax and we must succeed.
My friends, not only must we reduce tax, not only must we cut red tape, not only must we get government spending under better control, but we must build the infrastructure of the future and this is where I am so happy to be working hand-in-hand with my friend and colleague, the state Liberal leader, Stephen Marshall. Stephen Marshall is a very sensible man. Stephen Marshall is precisely the kind of person who will get things done in this state.
As you know, a few months ago the federal Coalition committed to spending half a billion dollars on the North-South Road Corridor. We committed to spending half a billion dollars on what was the number one priority for upgrading the North-South Corridor, the Darlington Project. Well, the day after we made that commitment, the day after Stephen Marshall enthusiastically backed that commitment, mysteriously, the Darlington Project disappeared from the State Labor Government’s website. It had been the number one project, the number one priority on the State Labor Government’s North-South Road website. The instant the Coalition committed to it at federal and state level, it disappeared and since that time the State Labor Government, the Government which has so monumentally failed when it comes to delivering any serious infrastructure to the people of this state, the State Labor Government has been saying forget Darlington, let’s get on with the Torrens Project.
Well, I say that Stephen Marshall is the kind of guy that gets things done. Stephen Marshall is the kind of guy who would never want to see happen in this country the kind of hyper-partisan deadlock that we have seen recently in the United States. Stephen Marshall came to me the other day and he said, ‘Tony, let’s do them both. Let’s do them both.  And while we are on about it, let’s try to get the whole North-South Road Corridor upgraded within a decade.’ Let’s face it. We’ve been talking about it since 1968. A story which we have been telling since 1968 should finally come to a satisfactory conclusion and that is exactly what will happen with Liberals working together at both the state and federal level to get things done.
Ladies and gentlemen, we will get these projects done. We will have cranes over our cities. We will have bulldozers on the ground. I am so pleased that to drive all of this, particularly here in South Australia, we have one of the most dynamic, young politicians in our country, Minister Jamie Briggs, the Assistant Minister for Infrastructure. Jamie, you have a heavy responsibility and I know you will not let us down.
My friends, this is a great city, in a great state, in a great country. We all know that for the last few years we have been less than we could be. We have been less than we should be. But we all know that things are changing. We all know that things are changing for the better and things will have changed for the better in March of next year, when not only do we have a Coalition Government in Canberra, but we have a Liberal government in Adelaide. Let’s make a new start, not just for our country but for our state. That’s why I am so pleased to be here today, to applaud and to thank the Leader of the Opposition Stephen Marshall and to say thank you to South Australians for everything you have done for our party.
[ends]


It’s very, very good to be here with you all today to pay tribute to the great work that has been done at the Alfred Hospital for about 130 years now and to celebrate the work of Australia’s health and medical research community.
We don’t always appreciate out there in the general community just how good we are as Australians at health and medical research. There’re 23 million of us but we are a comparative super power, certainly a world power, when it comes to health and medical research. We’re up there amongst the top five nations of the world when it comes to health and medical research – about one per cent of the world’s population, close to five per cent of the world’s refereed health and medical research. We are very, very good at it and because we are good at it, we do so much good for patients here in Australia and right around the world who benefit from the results of our health and medical research community.
We do, of course, get some recognition. We’ve had three Australian Nobel Prize winners in just the last decade in health and medical research. Three Australians of the year in just the last decade have been health and medical researchers, but frankly, we are so good at this that we do need to tell the story again and again and again and I’m pleased, as Prime Minister, to be here to do what I can in my own way today to let Australia and the wider world know just what we are doing with health and medical research here in this country right now.
The Government that I have the honour to lead is determined to do everything that we reasonably can, even in these fiscally challenged times, to ensure that Australia’s health and medical research effort continues. At this point in time, we don’t have additional funding but we are determined to try to ensure that the funding goes as far as it can. That’s why there are some changes coming to increase the length of most NHMRC grants so that people spend more of their time researching and less of their time filling out forms.
We are going to try to streamline and improve the assessment process through an early triage system so that over time, more of the grant applications ought to be successful. We don’t want to see a situation where our best people are filling out grant applications only to find four in five fail. So there’s lot of work that we are going to do even within the current fiscal envelope to ensure that your work bears even more fruit in the future than it has in the recent past.
I’m about to throw to Minister Dutton to say some more about the successful grant applications which are announced today – some $559 million of spending, which is announced today. I just want to say that the lion’s share has gone to Victoria, including to researchers at institutions based here in and around the Alfred Hospital.
As a Sydneysider, let me say how proud I am of the health and medical research which is done in Melbourne. You are proudly and by quite a way, the health and medical research capital of Australia and I’m pleased to be part of a Government which is able to support you in this way.
[ends]


Eric, members and delegates, ladies and gentlemen, my friends, thank you so much for that warm introduction. Thank you so much for that extraordinary welcome and I will know whether this speech has been successful by whether I get the same enthusiastic response at the end that I have at the beginning.
It is great to be here in Hobart. It's great to be amongst my Tasmanian colleagues. It is so good to be here to savour success and I want all of you to be so proud of the fact that while our Party, our Coalition did extremely well right around Australia at the recent election, nowhere did it do better than here in Tasmania. It was an 11.3 per cent swing to the Liberal Party here in Tasmania and I want to say congratulations and thank you.
I also want to note that my colleagues, in significant numbers are here to bask in your success. We are coming from all over Australia today to revel in the success of the Tasmanian Liberal Party. Mathias Cormann, the Minister for Finance. Bruce Billson, the Minister for Small Business. Arthur Sinodinos, the Assistant Treasurer. Paul Fletcher, the Parliamentary Secretary for Communications. We are all here to pay tribute to the Tasmanian Liberal Party and to say thank you for what you have done to ensure that this country of ours has the best possible government.
I want to say how well the Tasmanian division has done. It's been well led at every level. My distinguished friend and colleague and now Leader of the Government in the Senate, Eric Abetz. Our Senate team, Richard Colbeck, Stephen Parry, David Bushby and now our House of Representatives team, Andrew Nikolic, Eric Hutchinson and Brett Whiteley.
But I also want to pay tribute today to those who didn't get elected because every election, even a successful election, is a bitter-sweet experience. It's sweet for the victors, but inevitably it's a disappointment for those who worked just as hard, who carry our flag just as high and just as proudly, but for whatever reason don't succeed. So I do pay tribute today to Bernadette Black and to Tanya Denison, our House of Representatives candidates and I also pay tribute to Sally Chandler and Sarah Courtney, our Senate candidates. Please give them a round of applause.
One of the errors which members of Parliament sometimes fall into and the further up the greasy pole you get, the more prone you are to falling into the error, is to neglect the rank-and-file membership of our Party. We are only members of Parliament. We are only ministers in a government because we have decent Australians working night and day to put us there. I say thank you to the rank-and-file members of our Party here in Tasmania. I say thank you to your President, Geoff Page for the work that he's done, Richard Chugg, the former President, for the work that he did, but in particular I want to say thank you to the person who, in every division, tends to be the forgotten man, that is your State Director, Sam McQuestin.
State directors, they're the first people to be criticised, they're the last people to be praised and yet we cannot run successful election campaigns without highly competent, highly professional, incredibly hard-working state directors so, Sam, well done. I hope you are feeling very proud of what the Tasmanian division has achieved.
Well, my friends, tomorrow marks fifty days since the election. We inherited a mess but we have made a very strong start. Never forget the trough into which our country had fallen under the former government. Of course we were always a great people, of course we always had fundamental strengths, but those strengths were being mismanaged and misdirected by the former government. Never let us forget the legacy of the government that we have replaced. Unemployment, 200,000 higher than it was. Debt sky-rocketing beyond $400 billion because of their policies, because of the spending spree that the former government embarked upon and perhaps worst of all, a legacy of more than 50,000 illegal arrivals by boat because this was a government that had completely lost control of our borders.
Well, almost 50 days that on, the Australian public know that this country is under new management and this country is now, once again, as it should always be, open for business.
On day one – on day one – we freed the motor industry from the threat of Labor's fringe benefits tax hit and our motor showrooms were open for business. We said there would be an Indigenous advisory council and there is. We said there would be a business advisory council and there is. We said we would take control of the National Broadband Network and ensure that faster broadband was delivered more affordably and much more quickly than would ever have happened under Labor and we have. I said that the first overseas visit that I would make would be to Jakarta and it was. We said that we would revitalise the free trade agreement negotiations which had languished in some cases for 7 or 8 years and we've done precisely that. We said we would stop the boats and they are stopping. I don't want to underestimate the difficulty of that challenge but they are stopping. Over the last month, illegal arrivals by boat have been scarcely ten per cent of the peak under Labor in July. There is a hard road ahead. And thank you for acknowledging the good work that has been done not just by the Minister, Scott Morrison, but by everyone associated with Operation Sovereign Borders – our military, our Customs, our Immigration officials. These are people who had been set the wrong task by the former government. They were essentially managing a problem. Our determination is to end the problem. Our determination is not to guide the boats, our determination is to stop the boats and thanks to strong leadership from the top and extraordinary professionalism at every level, that is now happening.
We've released exposure drafts of the legislation to repeal the mining tax and above all else to repeal the carbon tax. Never forget what Labor did to Australia with its carbon tax. Not only was this a fundamental breach of promise, not only was this a basic betrayal of trust, because this was the tax, remember, that before the 2010 election was never going to happen. It was fundamentally wrong-headed because it was damaging our economy without helping our environment. Never forget that even under the former government’s own figures, the carbon tax was going to raise power prices by 10 per cent. It was going to raise gas prices by 9 per cent. It was going to shrink the aluminium industry by 60 per cent, the steel industry by 20 per cent. Even under the government's own figures, it wasn't actually going to reduce our emissions which the projections from the former government showed were going to rise from 578 million tonnes, now to 621 million tonnes in 2020, despite a carbon tax of $37 a tonne.
So let's be under no illusions, the carbon tax was socialism masquerading as environmentalism. That's what the carbon tax was. That's why the carbon tax has been rejected by the Australian people. We are implementing what the Australian people voted for and the only people who are still in denial about what the Australian people voted for are the members of the federal parliamentary Labor Party.
The best Christmas present that Bill Shorten could give the people of Australia would be to stand aside and let the carbon tax repeal legislation pass through the Senate. It can be done. There are four weeks of parliamentary sittings coming up, more than long enough to take this burden off the backs of Australian workers, to take this burden off the backs of Australian families. The only person in this country right now who is in favour of higher power prices is good old electricity Bill Shorten, good old electricity Bill. That's what people will be thinking every time their power bill comes in until the carbon tax goes, "That's Electricity Bill who's responsible for the fact that this bill is up to $200 more than it should be." They call it bill shock. Bill ‘shock’ Shorten. That's what people will be suffering, good old Bill ‘shock’ Shorten and you know we know that he's capable of changing his mind. We remember what he said about Kevin Rudd back in 2010. He changed his mind about Kevin. We remember what he said about Julia Gillard until quite recently. He changed his mind about her. Well, Bill, if you can change your mind on your colleagues, you can change your mind on something of far more weight for the people of Australia. And every day that Bill Shorten refuses to change his mind is another day when the people of Australia and the people of Tasmania will conclude that he is more interested in pandering to Greens than he is in listening to the clear unambiguous verdict of the Australian people. Well, shame, Bill, shame. Put the people first and vote down this tax.
So 50 days on, it's clear that Australia is under new management, it's clear that Australia is open for business and it's clear that the only people who are still the same is the Australian Labor Party. But we do have a big job in front of us. This a great country blessed with a creative people, with a God-given environment that's second to none. In a part of the world which is growing strongly and yet it's an uncertain world. We've seen consistent long-term economic mismanagement in so many of the countries that we are accustomed to look to for leadership. It's more important than ever that we get the economic management of our country and of our states right and that's why it's so important that the new government in Canberra focus on the great state of Tasmania and ensure that Tasmania can once again be one of the economic leaders of our federation rather than one of the economic laggards.
Some of you would have picked up the local paper this morning and you would have seen the headline. The dispiriting headline that Tasmania had fewer people and more jobs 35 years ago than it does today. Over 35 years, Tasmania has lost jobs and gained people. This is a sad indictment on the political and economic management of our country and our state. Tasmania, I regret to say, it has the highest unemployment, it has the lowest wages, it has the lowest GDP per head, it has the lowest life expectancy of any state in our Commonwealth. That must change and the fact that people here in Tasmania were so ready to vote overwhelmingly for change in the recent federal election shows that the Tasmanian people are eager to embrace a better future and that's what we have to give them.
Now, I have abundant confidence in the capacity of the people of Tasmania. I have been a very regular visitor to this state throughout my parliamentary career, but in particular since leading our Coalition, leading our Liberal Party in Canberra. I have been to Tasmania again and again and again and I know what the Tasmanian people can do. I know the creativity that the Tasmanian people are capable of. Yesterday, Will Hodgman and Ian Macfarlane and I were in Burnie, in the company of Tasmania's most successful businessman, Dale Elphinstone.
How many Australians are aware of the fact that Tasmania, from some factories in Burnie, produces something like 30 per cent of the word's underground mining equipment? Heavy engineering, sophisticated engineering. I was looking at a truck at Haulmax yesterday that in just a few weeks' time will be on its way to Canada to haul minerals above the Arctic Circle. When I went for my run in Hobart I thought, yes, Tasmania is the right place to produce that kind of equipment.
We should set no limits on what we can achieve. We should set no limits on our future. Yet, all too often, particularly here in Tasmania, we have programmed ourselves to fail. We have burdened ourselves with unnecessary taxes and regulations. We have set standards of perfection which no-one can achieve. Instead of getting on with a reasonable job, with a reasonable prospect of success and all that simply has to change. It simply has to change. Well, it will change. The incoming government in Canberra will commit $400 million to upgrading the Midland Highway. We'll commit $38 million to upgrading Hobart Airport. We'll commit $24 million to ensuring that we have an absolutely world-leading Antarctic research centre here in Hobart. We'll have a major projects approval agency based in Launceston to ensure that when people want to invest $50 million or more in Tasmania, the doors are opened, not shut.
We will do all these things but in the end, what we need here in Tasmania is new will and new leadership and that's what is sitting right here beside me today. New leadership and new will to strive, to seek, to find and not to yield for a better future for Tasmania and a better future for Australia. That's what we want. That's what we will deliver.
My friends, it is such an honour to be amongst you. I am confident that things are changing for the better. I know that our best days are ahead of us and I look forward so much to walking with the people of Tasmania into that better brighter future.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


Minister, Governor, Ambassador, Generals, warriors, peacemakers, ladies and gentlemen. Australia’s longest war is ending, not with victory, not with defeat, but with we hope an Afghanistan that’s better for our presence here.
For a year in 2001, and again since 2005, Australian soldiers have been in Afghanistan. Since 2005 a special operations task group, and subsequently a reconstruction taskforce have been deployed here in Uruzgan in support of the Provincial Reconstruction Team. Some 20,000 Australian men and women of our armed forces have served here in Afghanistan. Forty have died, 260 have been wounded, many more carry mental scars that may never heal. We salute their service. We mourn their losses and we honour their achievement. All Australians do, as this the first ever bipartisan visit to Afghanistan shows, and I thank the Australian Leader of the Opposition for his presence here today.
Thanks to Australia’s presence here and that of our American, Dutch, Singaporean and Slovakian allies, there are now 26 girls’ schools out of 200 schools in Uruzgan – that’s a twentyfold increase since 2001. Up to 80 per cent of expectant mothers receive at least some prenatal care, care that was almost non-existent a decade ago and 200 kilometres of roads and bridges have been upgraded.
This is still a poor and a difficult province – even by Afghan standards – but it is richer and better governed than it was thanks to Australia and thanks to our allies. Afghanistan is a better place for our presence here. Australia is better too. The threat of global terrorism is reduced. Our reliability as an ally is confirmed and our commitment to the universal decencies of humanity that we fought for here is made obvious.
Australians have re-found a martial tradition that might have faded away with our parents and grandparents. We have discovered new heroes in Mark Donaldson, Ben Roberts-Smith, Dan Keighran and others whose names will emerge in time, more than worthy to stand with the original Anzacs and we have learnt that all the fierce and indomitable people of this beautiful but forbidding land, are worthy of respect.
Australians don’t fight wars of conquest. We fight wars of freedom. We fight for peoples’ right to live their own lives and to worship in their own way and for their duty to respect others’ right to do likewise. That fight goes on, even though our fight here in Uruzgan is ending.
Elsewhere in Afghanistan, Australians will continue to train the Afghan Army. We will continue to fund Afghan development and we hope that the education of women and the growth of a freer society will go on, not because we’re pushing it, but because Afghans have concluded that it’s what’s best for them, that it’s an element of their best selves.
Still, this is a bittersweet moment for Australia; sweet because hundreds of soldiers will be home by Christmas; bitter because not all Australian families have had their sons, fathers and partners returned; sweet because our soldiers have given a magnificent account of themselves; bitter because Afghanistan remains a dangerous place despite all that has been done.
Our armed forces and our officials have done their duty. That duty never ends, although our duty here has. Now, the future of Uruzgan is in the hands of its own people. We hope they will remember us with pride as we remember our work here with pride.
Lest We Forget.
[ends]


Colonel, soldiers, civilians who are supporting our effort here in Uruzgan, Australians, Americans, friends and allies, it is a tremendous honour for me to be here along with the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister for Defence to salute you and to thank you for the extraordinary work you and your colleagues have done over close to a decade here in this country.
This is my fourth trip to Tarin Kot. I came here three times as Opposition Leader. I’m delighted to be here now as Prime Minister and it seemed to me that it would be wrong to go too far into a Prime Ministership and not pay my respects to the men and women in uniform and out of uniform who have done so much for our country, have done so much for the people of Afghanistan and so much for the wider world.
I want to make just three simple points. First point, you have done good work here in Uruzgan. As the Interior Minister and the Governor pointed out, there is education, there is health; and it’s not just education and health for some people, as far as it can be in a rugged and difficult country, it’s education and health for everyone including the women of Uruzgan province.
So you have done good work. You have done your work remarkably well with an extraordinary degree of professionalism  and whether it’s the different elements of the army, whether it’s the police, the civilians, ASIS, all of the various Australian units that have come together to make this work, you have done it with extraordinary professionalism.
We heard the Minister for the Interior say before the representatives of America, Holland, Britain, Singapore and others, that we were the best. That was a big call! Those of you who have worked with our American and British colleagues know that they are very good. Those of you who worked with the Dutch know that they did incredibly good work and whenever I ask about the Singaporean forces training in Australia, I am told we don’t want to get them unhappy because they pack a punch. So it’s great to know that the work that we have done here is respected and admired by our peers right around the world.
Finally, I want to say that it has been worth it. This has been a very difficult commitment. People have paid a high price. We’ve lost 40 of our best. We mourn them. We remember them. We honour them. We want to work with their families. We will never forget them. Some 260 have been wounded, many, very seriously. Then there are all of those who will carry mental and physical scars with them for the rest of their lives.
Still, to be able to help our allies, to defend our interests and uphold our values is just about the best thing that any Australian can do and as I look around at all of you in uniform and out of uniform I am tremendously honoured to be in your presence. I am in awe of your professionalism. I respect what you have done and along with every other Australian, I honour you. I honour you and I pay tribute to you and I am confident that you will never be forgotten here in this part of Uruzgan.
I would now ask the Leader of the Opposition to join me in these remarks.
[ends]


It is indeed an honour to be here at the War Memorial. It’s always an honour to be at the War Memorial. As you know, our work at Tarin Kot and Uruzgan province is now passing into history. This War Memorial is the custodian of our military history and it’s appropriate that I bring back from our soldiers in Tarin Kot, from our mission to Uruzgan, these artefacts.
This particular one has been with our troops throughout their time in Uruzgan province. This symbol is something that has been with them all the way in their successes, in their difficulties and it’s very apt that it’s now here at the Memorial to be preserved for posterity.
So, thank you so much for the work that you do. Thank you Brendan for the work you do. Thank you for the way the Memorial has so successfully kept the spirit of Anzac alive from the 1920s to today.
This bell which was given to Bill Shorten and myself about 36 hours ago, this was fashioned out of a shell casing that was recovered from the battlefield and it hung close to the chapel in Tarin Kot and was used to summons people for important events, including church services – so I think this is again a very apt thing for the Memorial to have.
[ends]


It is a real honour to be here this evening to be amongst some of the greatest researchers, thinkers and teachers in our country and to bask in your reflected glory.
None of us, whether we are scientific experts or scientific layman should ever underestimate the power of science and the impact of science on the modern world. The modern world is absolutely unimaginable without the work of our scientists, our innovators, our technicians, the people who make use of science to give us everything that we take for granted and which distinguishes the modern way of life from that of our forebears, several thousands of years ago.
The difference between us and our ancestors dwelling in caves is that we understand science and do our best to apply the fruits of that understanding to the way we live.
So science is absolutely critical to progress and scientists are the explorers and the adventurers of the modern age; and we’re lucky here in Australia that our scientists are amongst the very best in the world.
It’s always difficult to single any out but I do want to name a few of the Australian scientists who have made such a difference to our world.
There’s Professor Brian Schmidt, here with us tonight, helping to unlock the secrets of the universe.
There’s Professor Terry Speed, also here with us tonight, helping to unlock the secrets of the human body.
There’s Howard Florey, perhaps the Australian who has had more impact on our world than any other with his discoveries that lead to the first drug, penicillin, the first antibiotic which has done so much to save tens of millions of lives right around the world from that day to this.
There’s John O’Sullivan, a previous winner of the Prime Minister’s Science Award, whose work made WiFi possible.
There’s Frank Fenner, whose daughter is with us tonight, whose work helped in the eradication of small pox.
In the last decade this country has produced three Nobel prize winners and three Australians of the Year who are research scientists. So, we are very good at science here in this country and our challenge is to build on those strengths and to be even better in the years ahead.
And that’s where great teachers come into their own. As one of the greatest scientist of all time, Issac Newton is reported to have said, ‘if I see far, it is because I stand on the shoulders of giants’. We have giants in this land and it is the responsibility of the teachers of science to ensure that those giants are known to this generation and the future generations and to communicate the spark of enthusiasm which moved them to successive generations of Australians.
We need great teachers, we’ve got great teachers, as these awards tonight will help to demonstrate, but we also need government at every level to be supporting their work.
I’m pleased to pledge the incoming Government to continue to support science to the fullest extent possible.
We are spending an extra $200 million on health and medical research, particularly on dementia research.
We’re continuing the Primary Connections science education programme which is so important in unlocking youngsters’ enthusiasm for the study of science.
We are determined to drive the research dollar further by lengthening the tenure of NHMRC and ARC grants so that our best minds have more time to devote to research and spend less time filling out forms.
Yes, these are difficult fiscal times but this is a Government which is committing to do whatever it reasonably can to boost our brain power, to acknowledge the genius of the Australian scientific and research community.
While at this stage the new government is inevitably more promise than performance, I would ask all of you to look at the record of the previous Coalition government in which I served. As some of you would know, for four years I was the Health Minister and in that time our NHMRC funding almost doubled and over the life of the former Coalition government, total spending on health and medical research went from just over $100 million a year to just under $1 billion a year.
This is what we want to do. This is the kind of thing that we are determined to do once our fiscal circumstances give us the ability to do this kind of thing for the people of Australia and the people of the wider world who stand to benefit so much from the work of the Australian scientific community.
It’s been remarked upon, ladies and gentlemen, that we don’t have a minister for science as such in the new government. I know there are some in this room who might have been momentarily dismayed by that, but let me tell you, neither does the United States have a Secretary for Science, and no nation on earth has been as successful at innovating as the United States and I’d say to all of you, please, judge us by our performance, not by our titles; judge us by our performance, not by our titles.
This night doesn’t belong to the politicians, it certainly doesn’t belong to me. It belongs to those who are honoured tonight, who are rightly honoured tonight and who hopefully, through events like tonight, will be honoured by the entire Australian community.
I want to personally congratulate everyone being honoured and recognised tonight and I want to pledge myself and the incoming government to work closely with you for the benefit of our nation and the wider world.
Thank you so much.


I want to thank everyone for being here today.
This is an opportunity for Greg Hunt and myself to brief you on where the Government is going with the carbon tax repeal legislation.
It’s also an opportunity for you to brief us on just what impact the carbon tax is having on your operations and just how the carbon tax repeal will help your businesses and help consumers.
I am utterly determined – and the new government is absolutely committed – to the repeal of the carbon tax.
If there is one issue that was front and centre in the recent election, it was the carbon tax.
By any standards, the recent election was a referendum on the carbon tax and the Australian people unequivocally said let’s get rid of this thing.
The carbon tax is costing jobs.
It’s raising households’ cost of living.
It’s making business less secure.
It’s damaging our competitiveness.
That’s why it’s got to go and as far as I’m concerned, it will go as quickly as possible.
The first item of legislation that will be considered by the new Parliament will be the carbon tax repeal bill.
We don’t have the numbers in the Senate. Unfortunately, at least until the 1st of July, the numbers in the Senate remain with the Labor Party and the Greens.
My understanding and the understanding around Parliament House is that the Leader of the Labor Party, Mr Shorten, never supported the carbon tax. I hope he has the ability to impress upon his colleagues the need to allow the repeal legislation to go through for the good of working Australians, for the good of Australian households, for the good of Australian businesses, but whether that will be the case remains to be seen.
What I want to indicate to you, though, is that the Government is absolutely committed – completely, utterly, unshakeably committed – to the repeal of the carbon tax.
It’s a toxic tax. It should never have been introduced and the quicker we can get rid of it, the better for everyone.
[ends]


It is a tremendous honour to be here. It really is a tremendous honour to be here.
I am so thrilled to be amongst my friends and Liberal colleagues of Western Australia. I am delighted to bask in the reflected glory of a great Premier, Colin Barnett, and though, sadly, I am not myself a Western Australian, yes, the greatest honour I can have is to be the Prime Minister of Western Australia.
The first thing I want to do today, my friends, is to thank the Liberals of Western Australia for everything you have done for me, for my parliamentary colleagues, and for our country because we would not be in government but for the support and the strength of this great division of our great party.
I thank you, President Geoff Prosser, a former parliamentary colleague and a friend of many years standing.
I thank you, State Director Ben Morton, who has done an outstanding job. State Directors are the first people to be blamed when things go wrong. They’re the last people to be thanked when things go right and the least I can do, Ben, is thank you for the good work that you have done for your state and for our country.
Like many West Australians, you weren’t born here and like many West Australians you are, as it were, a citizen of the world. So we know not where you may end up but wherever it is, wherever it is the great work that you have done here in this state will always be remembered.
I thank my friend, my colleague, my partner, Julie Bishop, who has done an extraordinary job as the Deputy Leader of our party. Julie has for a long time been the senior federal West Australian Liberal. She has been a magnificent ambassador for this state and now she is doing an extraordinary job for our country.
All of my colleagues have made a good transition from Opposition to Government. I think all of my colleagues have understood the difference between Opposition and Government. All of my colleagues have appreciated the difference between Opposition, which is mostly theatre, and Government, which is all substance, but none have made the transition as smoothly and as surely and with more exhilaration and purpose than Julie Bishop and well done Julie for the extraordinary job you’ve done.
But I want to thank all of my West Australian colleagues. Obviously my Cabinet colleagues: David Johnston, the Defence Minister, Mathias Cormann, the Finance Minister, Ministers Michaelia Cash and Michael Keenan. I thank all of my Western Australian colleagues for the job they’ve done.
I want to particularly acknowledge my new parliamentary colleagues from Western Australia: Melissa Price, the new Member for Durack, Rick Wilson, the new Member for O’Connor, Ian Goodenough who has replaced the outstanding Mal Washer and of course Christian Porter who has replaced Judi Moylan and it takes a lot of guts to surrender a ministry, a senior ministry in the State Parliament to go into the Federal Parliament and Christian Porter is someone who has put the Australian back into Western Australia and I really congratulate him and thank him.
I congratulate Linda Reynolds, Senator Elect Linda Reynolds and whatever happens, Linda, whatever the High Court might determine in the weeks and months to come, we are determined that you will be a Senator for this party and this state in Canberra.
But you know, every election is a bittersweet occasion. There are winners and sadly there are losers and even in this great state of Western Australia, even in the ranks of Liberals from this great state of Western Australia, even amidst the triumph of getting close to 50 per cent of the primary vote, there are some of us who just fell short. I congratulate everyone who ran for our party but did not succeed in being elected.
I want to particularly congratulate and thank Donna Gordi, for the work she did. No one could have worked harder and more tirelessly to represent the seat of Brand than Donna Gordin. I calculated that I went into that seat on eight occasions over the last term of Parliament and I was thinking to myself, if only I’d only gone four times maybe Donna would have got up.  But Donna, look, you did do an extraordinary job and we are extremely grateful.
But friends, I don’t just want to thank the Liberals of Western Australia for your contribution to our Government and to our country. I want to thank the people of Western Australia more generally for everything this state does for our country. It might be two or three hours away across the Nullarbor Plain from our principle population centres, but the wealth, the strength and the dynamism of our country critically depends upon this state, Western Australia. You’ve got just 10 per cent of our people but you produce some 16 per cent of our Gross Domestic Product and you give us almost 50 per cent of our exports.  On behalf of the people of Australia, I say thank you to the people of Western Australia for the extraordinary contribution you make to our national strength and our national unity.
Whenever I come to this great city in this beautiful state and I see the extraordinary things that are happening, when I sense the palpable dynamism of the West Australian people, the extraordinary can-do optimism of the people of this state and this city and I think, wouldn’t it be good if this was more general across our country? And I think the people of Australia want to resemble more closely the people of Western Australia. I believe that one of the reasons why there was a change of government was because the people of Australia want to say yes to jobs, yes to development, yes to prosperity and yes to having a go and they know that none of that was happening under the former government.
The former government left us a terrible mess. It left us a terrible mess but I want to say to you, my fellow Liberals of Western Australia, and to the people of Western Australia, that we have made a good start, that the adults are back in charge and that strong, stable, methodical and purposeful government is once more the rule in our national capital.
Yes, over the course of the former government, unemployment went up by some 200,000. Yes, under the former government, our gross commonwealth debt was skyrocketing past $400 billion and, most shamefully of all, under the former government we had more than 50,000 illegal arrivals by boat as the former government totally lost control of our borders. We even had the extraordinary situation of an illegal boat turning up in the middle of Geraldton Harbour one sunny weekday.
But things are changing and they are changing for the better. I think all of you have noticed there is a new tone and a new style in Canberra. I think all of you have noticed that there is now in government and in the ministries people who know that it’s more important to make the right decisions than it is to make the big announcements that so often turn out to mean not what they seemed. It’s more important to be bending the public servants to the policies and directions of the new government than it is to be out there trying to manipulate the media. It’s more important to be involved in governing our country than it is simply to be giving endless interviews which are all about glorifying politicians rather than about doing the right thing by the people of Australia.
Yes, we will speak when we need to speak. We will act when we need to act. But we won’t speak for the sake of speaking and we won’t bung on things just for the purposes of a PR gesture because that’s not good government. That’s a form of political exhibitionism and we saw far too much of that over the last six years and the time for that has long passed.
So ladies and gentlemen, we are calmly, purposefully, methodically getting on with doing exactly what we said we would do in the campaign. We said we would abolish the carbon tax and the mining tax and legislation to do just that would be introduced into the Parliament this week. We said we would get the Budget back under control and individual ministers and portfolios are doing just that and the Commission of Audit, this once in a generation chance to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of government is now doing its work.
We said we would build the infrastructure of the 21st Century and preparations are surging forward to ensure that the Swan Valley Bypass is built and the Perth Gateway gets cracking. We will do the right thing by the people of our great cities and our important, booming regions and we will give them the economic muscle and sinew that they need.
We said that we’d stop the boats and while they have not yet stopped, they are slowing and they are stopping and we will have setbacks and we will have disappointments but we will succeed because the test of a sovereign country and a sovereign government is its ability to control its borders and we will never again tolerate a situation where an important part of our immigration programme has been subcontracted out to people smugglers.
This is an issue of sovereignty for us and that’s very important. When I was up in Jakarta a few weeks ago I was able to tell President Yudhoyono, a very good friend of our country, an outstanding President of Indonesia, I was able to tell him that we utterly, totally, completely respected Indonesian sovereignty and if any boat ever set out from Australia to Indonesia to enter that country illegally we would do our damndest to stop it. We would do our damndest to stop it and I think he understood that our sovereignty is just as important to us as their sovereignty is to them. We have good relations with Indonesia, good and improving relations with Indonesia but we will stop these boats. We will stop these boats. In any test of will between the Australian Government and the people smugglers, we will and we must prevail.
But friends, I said that my first trip as Prime Minister would be to Jakarta, and it was, and our foreign policy now has a Jakarta, not a Geneva focus, as it should. I said that we would lower the tax burden, and there are some 92 announced but un-enacted tax increases which the former government had in store for us and as Joe Hockey announced during this week, very few of them will proceed.
I said we would lower the regulatory burden and future Cabinet submissions that for good and necessary reasons, do increase regulation, will be required to absolutely quantify the cost of that regulation to the people who will be exposed to them and will be required to identify offsetting savings in the regulatory burden so that we can deliver $1 billion in red tape savings to the people and the businesses of Australia every single year.
We said we would reduce the size of government and I was able to announce yesterday some 20 unnecessary committees and non-statutory bodies that would be abolished as a down payment on this commitment.
I said we would revitalise our free trade negotiations and that’s exactly what we have done.
But we haven’t just made strong decisions over the last few weeks, we have restored due process to the governmental system in Canberra. The ten day rule applies for Cabinet decisions. Cabinet submissions have to go into the Cabinet Secretariat ten days before they are discussed. Now, you might think that’s just a paper work rule but if you don’t get these things right, you don’t get the decisions right because if people don’t have time to reflect on the submission, to reflect on the decision, if the various experts don’t have time to chew over all the consequences of these proposed decisions, invariably you end up getting important details wrong.
If you want to get the decisions right, you’ve got to get the process right and we are determined to ensure that Cabinet government in the Westminster tradition once more operates in Canberra. Cabinet government and the Westminster tradition has stood us in good stead for 112 years and I believe that it will stand us in good stead for the future and certainly that is what will always be maintained under my prime ministership.
Friends, this week the Parliament is coming back. The new Parliament is assembling and I am confident that after just a few weeks of the new parliament, that parliament that diminished our polity and embarrassed our citizens over the last three years will soon seem like just a bad memory. It will soon seem like just a bad memory. Rob Oakeshott, who’s he? Tony Windsor, he was part of our system once but not anymore.
It will be a respectful Parliament. It will be a Parliament which discusses the issues rather than abuses individuals. It will be a Parliament of passion, of course. It will be a Parliament where the big issues are debated with conviction. But it will be a Parliament that respects the fact that just about every single member of that Parliament, all sides of the political fence, is there for the right reason. We will not impugn the motives of our political opponents. We will not trash the reputations of Members of Parliament and if any of us are tempted to go a little bit over the top, we’ll have the most formidable parliamentarian of her era, Bronwyn Bishop, sitting in the Chair to keep us honest and fair and if there’s one person in the Parliament who can speak without fear or favour it’s Bronwyn Bishop. I see her colleagues past and present nodding in the front row.
But it will be a Parliament, friends, which I expect to respect the mandate that the new Government was given at this election. If there is one issue that dominated the last three years it has been the carbon tax and if there is one point that my colleagues and I have been making over and over and over again, since February of 2011, it is that we will repeal this toxic tax.  This Parliament has one duty first and foremost and that is to repeal that tax. I understand that. Julie Bishop understands that. All of my assembled parliamentary colleagues understand that. The Australian people absolutely understand that the last election was a referendum on the carbon tax and they have spoken about as decisively as the people can at an election.
The only people who are in denial about the result of the last election, well, we know who they are. It’s good old ‘Electricity’ Bill Shorten, good old ‘Electricity Bill’ Shorten and his Green colleagues. Now, I say respectfully to the Leader of the Opposition, you are better than this. You are better than this. We all know that you didn’t support the carbon tax. We all know that you thought the former prime minister was making a terrible mistake. Well, just for once, just for once, stand up and do what you think in your heart is right rather than simply engaging in a crass political calculation. Otherwise, you will be in every respect but a carbon copy, a carbon copy of Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd and why would you want three Labor leaders in a row to be carbon copies of each other?
The Labor Party went to the last election claiming that the carbon tax had somehow been terminated. Well, that was wrong. That was wrong. The public knew it was wrong. The public knew that the only way to terminate the carbon tax was to change the government so I say to Bill Shorten and I say to all of his parliamentary colleagues, make honest MPs of yourselves, and actually vote to terminate this toxic tax.
Friends, there is no greater honour that any Member of Parliament can have than to lead his Party and to lead our country. I am so conscious of the honour that my Party has done me and of the honour that the country has entrusted to me. I am so conscious of that and I pledge to you and to the citizens of Australia, I will not let you down. I pledge to my fellow Liberals and to the citizens of our country, my colleagues and I will not let you down. We will do what we said we would do to the very best of our ability, with all of our energy, with every fibre of our being.
And I am convinced that this result will be good for our country because I am confident that our values do resonate with the people of Australia. We are a Party which trusts the community. We don’t mistrust government but we look to the community for solutions before we look to the state. We are a Party which trust individuals. We don’t mistrust officials but we look to individuals before we say ‘Let’s call in the officials’. We are Party which instinctively believes that the good sense of the Australian people is most likely to produce the best outcomes and wherever people can make things happen on their own, government should be there to encourage it rather than to control it. That’s what we stand for. That’s what we believe in the marrow of our bones, and that, I am confident is what resonates most strongly with our people.
We are a great country. We are a great people. I believe that we now have a better government, a better government which can deliver the people of Australia the better country that we all yearn for and that we all deserve.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


This Parliament always has great work to do: to secure our borders, to balance our budget, to strengthen our economy, to the relief of families and for the protection of jobs.
But if we are to do great things, we must begin them well. We must begin them well.
We must acknowledge the extended family of the Australian nation.
We must acknowledge and celebrate the essential unity of the Australian people.
It’s Noel Pearson, a great indigenous leader and a prophet for our times, who has observed that Australia is the product of a British and an indigenous heritage. This Parliament is redolent of our British heritage. But only recently has this Parliament acknowledged our indigenous heritage.
The first Parliament to meet here in this city 86 years ago was opened by the Duke of York. There was one indigenous person present that day. Matilda has already recalled the presence on that day of a local man, Jimmy Clements. And that man on the side of the ceremony was every bit as much a symbol of unity as the representative of the Crown, because Jimmy Clements, although unacknowledged that day, carried with him an Australian flag.
Haven’t we changed over 86 years? Haven't we come a long way? This city has come a long way. Our country has come a long way. And this Parliament has come a very long way indeed.
We have had indigenous members of this Parliament.
We have in Ken Wyatt, the first indigenous member of the House of Representatives.
In this term of Parliament we have in Nova Peris the first female indigenous member of this Parliament.
Two indigenous members of this Parliament, in this, the 44th Parliament of our country.
May that number increase. May we one day, not too far off, have an indigenous Prime Minister.
Who would have thought that the Northern Territory would have an indigenous Chief Minister?
But if we can have our first female Senator, indigenous Senator, our first indigenous Member of the House of Representatives, if we can have an indigenous Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, we certainly can have an indigenous Prime Minister of this country and we certainly can have in this Parliament, or the next, full recognition of indigenous people in the Constitution of our country.
There is much that I dispute with my predecessor as Prime Minister, Mr Kevin Rudd, but I honour him for the historic apology to indigenous people that took place at the opening of this Parliament in 2008 and I honour him for including this indigenous element in the rituals of our Parliament, which is so fittingly now a part of the opening of a new parliamentary term.
[ends]


I introduce the Clean Energy Legislation (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013.
The Australian people have already voted upon this Bill.
Now, the Parliament gets its chance.
Madam Speaker, the election was a referendum on the Carbon Tax.
The people have spoken.
Now, it’s up to this Parliament to show that it’s listened.
The Australian people have pronounced their judgment against the Carbon Tax: they want it gone and this bill delivers.
It delivers on the Coalition’s commitment to the Australian people to scrap this toxic tax.
It is also, Madam Speaker, a cornerstone of the Government’s plan for a stronger economy built on lower taxes, less regulation and stronger businesses.
Madam Speaker, repealing the carbon tax should be the first economic reform of this Parliament and it will be followed by further economic reforms: bills to repeal the mining tax, to restore the Australian Building and Construction Commission and to deal with Labor’s debt legacy.
Madam Speaker, the first impact of this bill will be on households whose overall costs will fall $550 a year on average.
Thanks to this bill, household electricity bills will be $200 lower next financial year without the Carbon Tax.
Household gas bills will be $70 lower next financial year without the Carbon Tax.
Prices for groceries, for household items and for services will also fall because the price of power is embedded in every price in our economy.
This is our bill to reduce your bills, to reduce the bills of the people of Australia.
When the price of power comes down, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission will be ready to ensure these price reductions are passed on to households and businesses.
But families and pensioners will keep the tax cuts and benefit increases already provided.
The Carbon Tax will go, but the carbon tax compensation will stay so that every Australian should be better off.
Repealing the Carbon Tax will reduce costs for all Australian businesses, every single one of them.
Madam Speaker the previous Government said and argued that only big business paid the Carbon Tax.
That simply wasn’t true.  Every small business paid the Carbon Tax through higher electricity and gas bills and higher costs for supplies.
As well, Madam Speaker, the Carbon Tax acts as a reverse tariff.
Not only does the Carbon Tax make it more difficult for Australian businesses to compete abroad, it makes it more difficult for domestic businesses to compete at home – because there is no Carbon Tax on imports.
Madam Speaker, repealing the Carbon Tax removes over 1,000 pages of primary and subordinate legislation.
Repealing the Carbon Tax cuts the size of the climate change bureaucracy.
So, repealing the Carbon Tax will reduce the cost of living, make jobs more secure and improve the competitive position of our country.
That’s what it does: it reduces the cost of living, it makes jobs more secure and improves the competitive position of our country.
Why would anyone be against that, particularly when it’s what the Australian people have just voted for?
Madam Speaker, repealing the Carbon Tax is what the employers and what the jobs providers of our country want now.
The Business Council of Australia “supports the wind-up of the current carbon pricing mechanism because it places excessive costs on business and households and because (our) carbon charge…is now one of the highest in the world”.
The carbon tax has ripped through the economy, hitting schools, hospitals, nursing homes, charities, churches, council swimming pools and community centres.
It has hit each and every group and each and every individual that uses power – and that was always its goal: to make electricity more expensive.
That was the intention of the previous government, to put power prices up because that was their way of reducing carbon emissions.
The intention of the new government is to put power prices down by axing this toxic tax and by using other means to reduce emissions.
By reducing the cost of electricity and gas, we will help to make households better off, workers more secure and our economy stronger.
No one should be in any doubt – the Government is repealing the Carbon Tax in full.
We are not playing word games.
We are not playing tactical political games.
We are doing what we were elected to do.
Others have said they would terminate the Carbon Tax, but they were only renaming it.
Well, Madam Speaker, we are not renaming it.
We are not floating it.
We are not keeping the machinery in place so we can dust it off in the future.
We are abolishing the Carbon Tax in full.
We have said what we mean and we will do what we say – the Carbon Tax goes. It goes.
Madam Speaker, repealing the Carbon Tax at the end of the financial year provides certainty for business and it simplifies the transition.
It means that this Government will not be proceeding with the previous Government’s legislated Carbon Tax increase that would have taken effect from the 1st of July next year.
As well, Labor’s Carbon Tax changes for the on-road fuel costs of heavy vehicles that were going to commence on the 1st of July 2014 will not happen.
That saves consumers the previous Government’s planned increase in the price of everything that had to be trucked around the country.
Madam Speaker, unfortunately, the new Government cannot undo the past, we can only make the future better – and that is what we intend to do.
Madam Speaker, under this Government, the Carbon Tax will not apply from 1 July so there will be no need for further compensation packages.
We will end the merry-go-round of Carbon Tax industry assistance that takes from one pocket and puts less back in the other.
Madam Speaker, we will ensure that the benefits of repealing the Carbon Tax are passed on to consumers.
The ACCC will have further powers to take action against any business that engages in price exploitation in relation to the Carbon Tax repeal.
Penalties of up to $1.1 million for corporations and $220,000 for individuals will apply.
Madam Speaker, the Government is repealing the Carbon Tax because there is a less complicated and less costly way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions – a way that will actually reduce emissions and won’t damage the economy.
The Government will scrap the Carbon Tax and then proceed with its Direct Action Plan.
The centrepiece of the Direct Action Plan will be the Emissions Reduction Fund – a market-based mechanism for reducing carbon dioxide emissions; a Fund which provides a powerful and direct additional incentive for businesses to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.
The Fund will use positive incentives to reduce Australia’s emissions.
Direct Action through the Fund means more trees, better soils and smarter technology and this is the right way to get emissions down.
Madam Speaker, the Carbon Tax is a $9 billion hit on the economy this year alone.
It is a $9 billion burden on jobs, a $9 billion burden on investment and a $9 billion burden on Australia that we just don’t need.
So, Madam Speaker, this bill gets rid of it.
This bill is the Government’s Bill to reduce people’s bills and I so commend this bill to the House.
[ends]


Bapak Vice President, Professors, Excellencies.
It is an honour for me to be here in the presence of the Vice President to formally launch this important venture.
As all of us know, not least the Vice President, there have been many Indonesians come to Australia to study over the years.
I am determined to ensure that there are more Australians going to Indonesia to study.
As time goes by, I would like to see more Indonesian tourists in Australia and more Australian students in Indonesia.
I would like to see more complementarity in our relationship as time goes by.
This new centre is an important way to deepen the academic and cultural exchange between our two countries.
It is an important way to deepen the mutual understanding between our two countries.
This is vitally important for the future of our two countries. Certainly, it is vitally important for Australia.
Indonesia is a very, very important relationship – in the broad, probably Australia’s single most important relationship by virtue of Indonesia’s size, proximity and massive potential to be not just a superpower of Asia, but a democratic superpower of Asia.
So, I think this is an important development for both our countries.
I am very honoured to be involved in this with my friend, Bapak Vice President, who has had such a deep personal experience of education here in Australia.
[ends]


Thank you Madam Speaker. This is a special occasion. The former Prime Minister, the Member for Griffith who has just addressed us has been a very significant part of this Parliament for the best part of two decades and whether we are on his side of the Parliament or the other side of the Parliament, whether we have been his friends or his foes or at times both, this is a significant moment in the life of this Parliament. To lose someone who has been one of the big figures in this Parliament and one of the big figures in the life, the public life of our country over the best part of two decades.
So, as a political opponent, but as someone who has known the Member for Griffith quite well for a long time, I salute him and I wish him and his family all the best for the future and I express my confidence that one way or another, he will continue to serve our country, his party. He will continue to support the causes that he believes in, many of which are causes which all of us right around this chamber, right around our country support as well.
The Member for Griffith has just said rightly that we are an extraordinary country. We are an extraordinary country and I hope Madam Speaker you will forgive me if I say in reference to the Member for Griffith that it does take an extraordinary person to lead an extraordinary country and the Member for Griffith won an election which pitted him against the person whom I believe to have been the most successful Prime Minister in modern Australian times and it takes extraordinary ability, insight, guts and focus to win such a contest; and he didn’t just win that contest in 2007, he triumphed, he absolutely triumphed in that contest and we must pay tribute to someone of such stature who was able to vanquish in fair political fight, someone of at least equal stature.
So I pay tribute to the Member for Griffith tonight for his capacity, for his achievements, for his ability and for his commitment. Because a man of his ability, a person of his ability could do many, many things in this life, but he chose to serve our country as a public servant in Queensland, as a Member of this Parliament, as a frontbencher, eventually as a Party leader and as a Prime Minister and we salute that service, we salute that service.
Sooner or later, everyone outlives their usefulness. It doesn’t matter how well they’ve done, it doesn’t matter how important the cause is that they are serving, sooner or later, everyone outlives his or her usefulness. It will come to every single member of this house at some point in time that we will have outlived our usefulness and the wisdom is to know, yes and fair enough I suppose I invited that observation, but it is the essence of wisdom to know when the time has come to serve one’s country and to serve one’s ideals in a different capacity and, again I salute the Member for Griffith for appreciating that there are good things that he could have continued to do in this Parliament, for his Party, for our people, for his constituents, but he has decided that he can do better things for all of those important causes elsewhere.
It remains only to observe that whatever disagreements the Member for Griffith and people on this side of the chamber have had, there were many things to celebrate in his Prime Ministership, but certainly that which I celebrate most of all and which I’m sure every single member of this House celebrates is that extraordinary apology on the first day of the Parliamentary sitting in 2008. Ancient wrongs were addressed. Ancient injustices were at least in part atoned for and our country had a unifying and healing moment, the likes of which we very, very rarely see. It was a great moment in our history and to the credit of the Member for Griffith, it happened because of him.
As much as I admire and appreciate and put on a huge pedestal his immediate predecessor, in this respect at least his immediate predecessor had lacked the imagination to grasp that opportunity and the Member for Griffith, Kevin, he had the decency to see that here was something that needed to be done, he did it with aplomb, with courage, with decency, compassion and magnanimity; that alone is an extraordinary achievement. That alone is something to crown an amazing public life.
So we thank you and we salute you.
[ends]


Your Royal Highnesses, Mr President, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
The Commonwealth spans 53 countries with 30 per cent of the world’s population, 20 per cent of the world's land mass but just 15 per cent of the world's GDP and it's our job to improve that.
The Commonwealth is not a community of power, wealth, geography, religion or language, so much as a community of values.
We believe in democracy based on the rule of law.
We acknowledge Queen Elizabeth as head of the Commonwealth.
We share a legacy of British institutions and influence which all of us have adapted and improved in our own ways.
We are convinced that you don't make new friends by losing old ones. We remain members of the Commonwealth because we believe that this dialogue helps us to come closer to being our best selves.
In Perth two years ago, Commonwealth members collectively agreed to important and timely reforms. We resolved to champion our central values more effectively and we boosted cooperation on important global issues such as food security and sustainable development.
The key achievement, though, was leaders' agreement to develop a Commonwealth Charter. This Charter has since been tabled in many of the parliaments of the Commonwealth including the Australian Parliament.
The Charter expresses our principles and aspirations refined over 60 years of collaboration and development. It gives us a standard to judge our actions.
We also agreed that when the Commonwealth's values are challenged, we should engage earlier and in a spirit of inclusion not isolation.
It's a credit to the leaders and to the delegations present in Perth two years ago that this has been achieved.
Australia is proud to have played its part in the development of the Commonwealth Charter.
During the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth, we also considered how we could make the Commonwealth more effective as an organisation. Our Perth declaration on food security principles recognises that half of the world's one billion hungry live in Commonwealth nations.
They are our people and they deserve better.
This will mean improving agricultural productivity and reducing barriers between food producers and markets. It means allowing markets to develop freely and naturally.
Also in Perth, the Queen's Diamond Jubilee Trust was launched, honouring Her Majesty's lifetime of duty and service.
This trust has already raised more than £100 million from across the Commonwealth. This will be deployed in the fight against avoidable blindness across the Commonwealth and to support our young leaders.
As the outgoing chair, Australia looks back on the work of the past two years with satisfaction but not complacency, because each achievement sets up the need for the next one.
Australia thanks its Commonwealth friends for their support and help during our term as Chair in Office.
Finally, I acknowledge Sri Lanka as our host and as Commonwealth Chair for the next two years. This country has emerged from many troubles. But with peace has come more freedom and more prosperity - so we are here to praise, as much as to judge.
There are examples in the Commonwealth, in South Africa and Ireland, for instance, where intractable problems have finally responded to the better angels of our nature.
Sri Lanka's willingness to host this Commonwealth shows its commitment to democratic pluralism and freedom based on law and ought to reassure all its citizens that just as today is better than yesterday, tomorrow will be better than today.
My friends, this Commonwealth can make a difference in many corners of the world, for example encouragement and the instinct to find common ground wherever possible, based on shared values.
May these days of discussion foster all our best instincts.
[ends]


In the past 24 hours there have been calls for Australia to detail our intelligence operations and to apologise for them.
Madam Speaker, the first duty of every government is to protect the country and to advance its national interests.
That’s why every government gathers information and why every government knows that every other government gathers information.
Madam Speaker, there is no greater responsibility for a prime minister than ensuring the safety of Australian citizens and the security our borders and that, indeed, is why we do collect intelligence.
National security, Madam Speaker, requires a consistent determination to do what’s best for Australia and that’s why this government will support the national security decisions of previous ones as we will expect future governments to respect ours.
Madam Speaker, Australia should not be expected to apologise for the steps we take to protect our country now or in the past, any more than other governments should be expected to apologise for the similar steps that they have taken.
Importantly, in Australia’s case, we use all our resources, including information, to help our friends and allies, not to harm them.
Similarly, Madam Speaker, Australia shouldn’t be expected to detail what we do to protect our country any more than other governments should be expected to detail what they do to protect theirs.
Others should ask of us no more than they are prepared to do themselves.
Madam Speaker, I want to make it absolutely crystal clear that Australia has deep respect for Indonesia, for its government and for its people.
I regard President Yudhoyono as a good friend of Australia, indeed as one of the very best friends that we have anywhere in the world.

That’s why, Madam Speaker, I sincerely regret any embarrassment that recent media reports have caused him.
But Madam Speaker, it is in everyone’s interests – Indonesia’s no less than Australia’s – that cool heads prevail and that our relationship grows closer, not more distant.
I pledge myself to build the strongest possible relationship with Indonesia.
After all, due to its size, proximity and potential to be an emerging democratic superpower of Asia, it is the most important single relationship that we have.
[ends]


Thanks very much, Ken. Madam Speaker, Opposition Leader, Senator Milne, Parliamentary colleagues.
I am pleased to be here today on the 10th anniversary of White Ribbon’s formation in Australia.
I wish I could say that violence against women was no longer a problem in our country but I can’t, because if I tried to say that, it simply wouldn’t be true.
It is still a problem.
As that powerful advertisement makes clear, every week a woman is a victim, a fatality of domestic violence, and sadly, one in three women have experienced physical violence in their lives, invariably at the hands of men.
So, there is a very long journey that we as a nation and as a culture have yet to make.
All of us need to do what we can.
Many of us here are White Ribbon ambassadors. There’s much that each of us can do individually.
I’ve done some work in my own area with the Manly Womens Shelter. My wife is a patron of the Manly Womens Shelter. I’ve raised some money for the Manly Womens Shelter.
All of us can do more to get the message out there that strong men are not violent.
Truly strong men do whatever they can to stop violence, particularly violence against the most vulnerable.
I’m pleased to say that the Government will commit an extra $1 million to the White Ribbon campaign over the next four years – particularly to try to ensure that the message goes out to communities where perhaps it has not yet been heard as strongly as it should.
I am the father of three daughters and I am determined to do whatever I can do individually and as a leader in our society to ensure that everyone – particularly the most vulnerable – enjoys the peace, the tranquillity, and the freedom that should be every Australian’s birth right.
So, I am pleased to be here.
I am pleased to be here today amidst so many of my parliamentary colleagues making the strongest possible statement that the women of Australia, that the women of the world, should be able to live their lives in peace and enjoying the respect of their menfolk.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, a short time ago, President Yudhoyono made a statement in Jakarta.
I have to say that I was encouraged by the President’s remarks about the strength of the relationship between Australia and Indonesia, although obviously there are very serious issues which do need to be worked through in the near future between us.
Again, Madam Speaker, I want to express here in this Chamber my deep and sincere regret about the embarrassment to the President and to Indonesia that’s been caused by recent media reporting.
The President indicated that he would shortly be writing to me.
I’d like to reassure the House that I will be responding to the President’s letter swiftly, fully and courteously.
As always, I am absolutely committed to building the closest possible relationship with Indonesia because that is overwhelmingly in the interests of both our countries.
[ends]


When I said on election night that Australia was under new management and, once more, open for business, I was acknowledging an iron law of public policy.
You cannot have strong communities without strong economies to sustain them and you can’t have a strong economy without profitable private businesses.
Making it easier for businesses to start, to grow, to employ and to invest is at the heart of this Government’s policy to build a stronger and better Australia.
Without successful businesses, invariably private businesses, no goods can be produced, no services can be delivered, no wealth can be created and – ultimately – no other fine ideals can be realised.
That’s why I salute the businesses of Australia: those who start them, those who work in them, those who invest in them, and those who run them.
I salute not only those who run them but also those who represent them, such as this Chamber and, especially, your retiring Executive Director and my former senior workplace relations adviser, Peter Anderson.
I particularly salute the small businesses of Australia and everyone who puts his or her house on the line to start a small business: to serve our community and to employ our fellow Australians.
The people who start businesses and who keep them going are the largely unsung heroes of our society – especially as the obstacles they must overcome and the burdens they must carry have become harder and harder.
There’s the notorious case of the major resource development project in Gladstone that required 4,000 meetings and 12,000 pages of environmental reporting before it was finally approved – only with 1,200 state and 300 Commonwealth conditions, plus 8,000 sub-conditions.
Now, delay and expense on such a scale ill becomes even a $15 billion project, lest those investing such astronomical sums choose to go where their money is more welcome and their good intentions less suspect.
But it’s not just massive new projects that are subject to regulatory strangulation.
Opening and running a child care centre should hardly be a bureaucratic ordeal.
Yet the national childcare law introduced by the previous government is almost 180 pages long and is accompanied by 345 pages of regulation and several hundred more pages of guidelines.
No one could reasonably be expected to keep abreast of this.
So what’s the point of such prescription other than to give officials a permanent stick with which to beat entrepreneurs or, to put it bluntly, to give wealth consumers a permanent upper hand over wealth creators?
So, the job of the new government is to ensure that Australia really is open for business because that is the only way that Australians can have the jobs, the services, the prosperity and the financial freedom that is at the heart of a good life.
That means getting taxes down, getting regulation down, and getting productivity up.
It means ensuring that government lives within its means so that there is scope for sensible tax reform.
Above all, it means a preference for smaller government over bigger government and for freer citizens over more regulated ones.
And, yes, it means keeping our commitments: the tough ones like ending the schoolkids bonus as well as the easier ones like abolishing the carbon tax.
The new government, I believe, has made a good start.
We’ve saved the car industry from Labor’s $1.8 billion fringe benefits tax hit.
We’ve saved teachers, nurses and salespeople from Labor’s tax on self-education expenses.
We’ve declared that most of the nearly 100 announced-but-not-enacted tax changes won’t go ahead.
We’ve established a once-in-a-generation Commission of Audit to consider the size, scope and efficiency of government and we have the chairman of that Commission, Tony Shepherd of the BCA, with us tonight. It’s good to see you looking so enthusiastic for your many tasks!
And we are passing legislation to abolish the carbon tax and to abolish the mining tax.
As things stand, the mining tax forces 145 miners to keep books for a tax that only 20 of them actually pay and forces the ATO to spend $100 million to collect a tax that’s raised just $400 million!
But there’s good news because tonight, the mining tax repeal bill is passing the House of Representatives.
Tomorrow, the House of Representatives is likely to pass the carbon tax repeal legislation, thus forcing the Labor Party in the Senate to decide whether it really does, like the Greens, want electricity bills to be $200 a year higher than they should be.
We are fully restoring the Australian Building and Construction Commission to be a strong cop-on-the-beat in a tough industry.
We’ve closed some 21 non-statutory boards and committees as a down payment on the substantial reduction in the size of government that is yet to come.
We’ve signed Memoranda of Understanding with New South Wales and Queensland to establish one-stop shops for environmental approvals.
More importantly and crucially, in the eight weeks since the Government was sworn in, Environment Minister Greg Hunt has given the environmental go ahead for projects worth $160 billion.
This is a very, very substantial down payment on cutting businesses’ red and green tape costs by $1 billion a year, every year.
And tonight, I announce that the former Commonwealth Bank boss and Future Fund chairman David Murray will chair our financial sector inquiry.
This is designed to make financial services more competitive and ultimately more fair – with lower costs, lesser fees and greater efficiency in the use of capital.
Almost everything this government does is directed towards making doing business easier – because that leads to more jobs, higher wages and greater prosperity.
Abolishing the carbon tax will remove a $9 billion a year hit on the economy.
Abolishing the mining tax will not only remove the sovereign risk cloud over resources investment but will also remove $13 billion in unfunded expenditure from the budget.
These are just the first big steps towards reforming our economy.
Tax reform, for instance, begins with abolishing the carbon tax and the mining tax, but it doesn’t end there.
The White Paper on tax reform, due within two years, will canvass all of the credible options for lower, simpler, fairer taxes and will shape the further tax mandate that the Government will seek at the next election.
The Productivity Commission inquiry into workplace relations will consider how Australia can have the world’s best paid workers by also having the world’s most productive workers; and, again, will inform the further workplace relations mandate that the government will seek at the next election.
Our objective is to maximise productivity and to maximise participation so that we can maximise pay and maximise the number of jobs.
Because, especially with an ageing population, we just can’t afford to lose 200,000 people from our workforce – as we have over the past three years.
That’s why we are introducing a fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme so that women can better combine having a family with maintaining a career.
That’s why we’re establishing a Productivity Commission inquiry into childcare so that parents can maximise their participation in a 24/7 economy.
One of the issues we will have to tackle is the steady build-up of working age people on the disability pension, most of whom only leave it to go onto the old aged pension.
So early in the New Year, the Government will be considering proposals to get back into the workforce people with conditions which are not always long-term: such as many types of mental illness; or not always incapacitating, such as muscular skeletal deterioration.
Another issue that an infrastructure prime minister will have to tackle is the extraordinarily long lead times for vital infrastructure projects.
The official advice, for instance, is that normal planning for the Gateway Motorway upgrade in Brisbane could take up to two years – even though this is simply widening an existing road!
So, one of the issues I will be asking premiers to consider at the Council of Australian Government meeting in December is special legislation for vital projects: so that WestConnex in Sydney and the East West Link in Melbourne are not indefinitely delayed by professional objectors.
I am determined to ensure that we are a country that builds things.
The argument about Sydney’s second airport that’s raged since Gough Whitlam first proposed Galston, should fully and finally be resolved well within this term of government.
Of course, this will require new habits of mind from everyone.
It will be necessary to reconsider the need for 130-plus national regulators and some 350 state and territory regulators that tend to justify their existence by finding ways to say “no” or “maybe” rather than “yes”.
With such a regulatory superstructure, it’s hardly surprising that Australia’s ranking in the World Economic Forum’s global competitiveness index has fallen from 12th to 21st; and that Australia’s ranking for government regulation has fallen, would you believe it, from 68th to 128th – that’s 128th in the world – over the past six years.
No one wants to see corners being cut in environmental best practice or anywhere else.
Still, we need to remember that projects’ proponents are citizens as well as builders who normally have to live in the communities they want to develop.
They would hardly imperil their own futures or trash their own reputations.
We need to remember that eliminating risk normally means eliminating initiative, too, and to resist the urge to regulate every time something goes wrong.
Freedom can never be untrammelled but the urge to create, to build and to innovate should never be suppressed if our people are to enjoy the prosperity that we all want and deserve.
If Australia really is to be open for business, people have to be trusted to get on with their own jobs.
People have to be trusted to get on with doing what only they can do.
Looking at business, indeed looking at the people here tonight, the new government not for a second sees people who are naturally inclined to rip off customers, to persecute workers or to despoil the environment.
That, I’m afraid, is how the former government tended to look at people in this room.
The new government looks at this room and we see people whose intention is to serve the community, to employ millions of Australians and to build a better and more beautiful world.
We see people like you – who deserve to be encouraged and admired.
So, ladies and gentlemen, I am thrilled to be here. I did feel when I listened to Tim’s lovely speech at the beginning of tonight, that he was stealing a little bit of my own thunder; making many of the points that I was going to make myself.
But these points are worth making again and again and again.
Without productive businesses, particularly without productive, innovative and creative small businesses, nothing else that we value is possible and all of the recognition and rewards that we are so rightly ready to give to people who we see as philanthropists, would be very difficult if we didn’t have people in our midst who are not seen as philanthropists and who don’t see themselves as philanthropists, who are every bit as important to the functioning of a good society.
You are the building blocks of a good society and I want to make sure that your morale is high, that your reputation is high, and that your ability to do best what you want to do is not hampered by the folly of government.
[ends]


It’s terrific to be here with the Leader of the Opposition, with the Leader of the Greens, with Minister Kevin Andrews, with Guy Russo from Kmart and with the senior leadership of the Salvation Army, for the launch of the Kmart Wishing Tree this Christmas.
This is a marvellous initiative of Kmart and the Salvation Army. It’s been going for a quarter of a century. In that time, some five million presents have been donated to Australians in need.
Last year, over 400,000 gifts were presented as part of the Wishing Tree initiative, and this year, we’re hoping that there’ll be half a million gifts made available to Australians in need this Christmas, as part of this initiative. There is something innate in all of us that want to help those less fortunate than ourselves.
Christmas is a marvellous time of togetherness. It’s a marvellous time of giving, and yet, not everyone is together with their loved ones, and not every family can afford to give every member gifts. That’s why this is such a significant initiative; that’s why this is such an important manifestation of the better angels of our nature.
I’m very pleased to be with Bill Shorten and Christine Milne this morning, because this desire – to do the right thing by everyone in our country – is a universal desire; it’s not limited to either side of politics; it’s something, which as I say, is innate in all of us, and I’m very pleased to join the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Greens this morning. Warren Truss, the Leader of the National Party, would have liked to have been here, but unfortunately he is detained by urgent Government business. But he is here in spirit.
As you can imagine, the Prime Minister’s office is one of the most visited parts of the Parliament, and I will be letting everyone visiting this office over the next month or so know that the Wishing Tree is here and I will be urging everyone who visits this office – including my Parliamentary colleagues, including members of the diplomatic corps, including the various lobbyists who like to beat a path to the Prime Minister’s door – I’ll be letting them know that this tree is here, and I hope that many of them will be able to bring a gift, because it is a sign of the goodwill that should animate all of us at this time of the year, and it is a very practical way for people to help those less fortunate than themselves.
I’m going to ask Guy Russo, followed by Commissioner Tidd to speak, then I’ll ask Bill Shorten and Christine Milne to support the event, and then there’ll be an opportunity for all of us to place gifts under the Wishing Tree.
[ends]


Thanks very much Peter, thanks Brett, thanks Chaplain Monu, it is a real honour for me to be here this morning to be associated with the naming of Spirit of Mateship and to be associated with Mates 4 Mates.
This is an important cause and it is a significant occasion.
Our country needs armed forces and our armed forces go abroad to defend our interests, to protect our citizens, and perhaps above all else, to uphold our values.
Our armed forces have gone abroad on numerous occasions over the last century, usually with our fine allies and we have done good work.
But members of the armed forces pay a high price.
The most recent engagement of our armed forces has been in Afghanistan and as we all know 40 have died, 161 have been seriously wounded, countless have suffered the unseen wounds of combat, and it’s vital that a grateful and appreciative nation stands by our veterans when they return. Particularly stands by our veterans as they come to grips with the consequences of serving our country in the armed forces.
This is where Mates 4 Mates, along with so many other organisations, does such great work.
The insight of Mates 4 Mates, if I may say so, is that whenever we're in trouble it is so often the best medicine of all to be active, to be mentally active, to be physically active, and it's great to see under the auspices of Mates 4 Mates, our war veterans, the veterans of service in our armed forces are doing something like sailing to Hobart in one of our great sporting challenges.
So, I am very, very proud and honoured to be associated with this event. I am thrilled to be in the company of members of our armed forces and former members of our armed forces.
I want to thank Peter Davies for everything he has done. I want to thank the Queensland RSL for what they have done and I want to congratulate all of the crew of the Spirit of Mateship, the members and former members of our armed forces and the more regular sailors.
I look at you all, you are a tough crew, you are a good crew and I'm sure that when you get to Hobart the town will know you've arrived.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
This is a very important meeting because as you all know on 1 December Australia assumes the chairmanship of the G20 and it is very important that we make the most of our year in the Chair to showcase Australia and provide economic leadership to the wider world.
We need to see more economic growth right around the world and what we want to do is to provide good example here in Australia because a good example is contagious and we want people to be able to learn from what we do, not simply to listen to what we say.
So, we need to get taxes down, we need to get regulation down and we need to improve investment in economic infrastructure.
This is where our domestic agenda and our G20 agenda have got to be so much in sync.
What I would like to be able to say to countries in our year of G20 chairmanship is that we are getting taxes down, we are reforming the tax system and as we know tax reform starts with abolishing the carbon tax and abolishing the mining tax.
That is why it is so important that we pursue this agenda vigorously over the next couple of weeks and months as needed.
It is important that we stress the message that if we want economic growth it is not going to be so much driven by government as facilitated by government.
This is where a smaller, more efficient government message is going to be so important for us, not just to preach but to practice.
I am pleased that we have made a good start by getting some of our legislation through the House of Representatives in the last fortnight.
I am pleased that we have made a good start on deregulation, with things like our one-stop shops for environmental approvals and abolishing some unnecessary Government bodies.
Obviously, there’s a lot more to do over the next few weeks and months as we move into our G20 year.
Joe, you might like to add something.
TREASURER: 
Well, thanks Prime Minister.
It is a big year next year, this year and next year for the G20.
The G20 Finance Ministers will meet on at least five occasions next year; in Sydney and Cairns in particular, twice in Washington and of course with the Leaders in Brisbane.
Everyone is expecting a simple and deliverable agenda, much like our domestic plan, that focuses on growing the economy, on ensuring that anyone involved in tax minimisation through transfer pricing and so on is caught and in ensuring where the money is earned that the tax is paid.
It is also the case that we want to land simplicity, with the global regulation of the financial system.
The third area is to focus on infrastructure, as you have said.
One of the key drivers of growth across the globe and here in Australia is going to be infrastructure investment and I think we’re well placed to take a lead in it.
PRIME MINISTER:
And the impression I very much have from talking to people over the last few weeks, at various international gatherings, is that our national priorities and the world’s priorities, are very much in alignment…
TREASURER: 
Absolutely, absolutely.
PRIME MINISTER:
…and that gives us considerable potential to do well over this coming year.
[ends]


Last week, I attended the Austrade export awards. It was an honour to meet all of the finalists – who were all conquering overseas markets in fields as diverse as high-tech microphones, organic meat, and private sector ship certification.
RODE microphones, for instance, now has a network of 76 distributors and 2,000 retailers in 108 locations worldwide. Last year, it achieved export sales of $33 million – 10 per cent up on the previous year, despite the high dollar.
Unlike many in this room, it’s not a big company but it’s having a go and succeeding – and building a stronger Australia along the way.
Tasmanian Quality Meats has gone from nothing to $12 million a year in export sales to new markets in the Middle East. Along the way, it’s tripled its workforce, bringing prosperity and economic activity to a small town in Tasmania.
Then there was Rightship, originally a small joint venture between BHP and Rio, that now manages a quality assurance system for about 15 per cent of the world’s international shipping.
When businesses succeed, when they “have a go” as these businesses have done, more Australians enjoy that “fair go” that we pride ourselves on as a nation.
Australian business people developing an idea, having a go, and winning markets that no one had thought possible before – these success stories are a reminder that good people aren’t daunted by tough times.
Resources investment may have peaked, our GDP growth may be well below trend with terms of trade down 18 per cent in the past two years, and global growth does seem to be slowing.
Regardless of conditions, the challenge is always the same: to build the strongest possible economy with lower taxes and less red tape leading to higher productivity and stronger economic growth.
In the marrow of its bones, the new Government understands that you can’t have strong communities without strong economies to sustain them and you can’t have strong economies without profitable private businesses.
That’s why on election night, not quite three months ago, I declared that Australia is under new management and once more open for business. My business – the business of government – should be making it easier for you to do your business because government doesn’t create prosperity, business does.
Governments’ job is to make it easier for good businesses to do their best.
And when I look at a business audience, any business audience, I don’t see people who exploit workers, who rip off customers or who damage the environment.
I see people who have taken risks, often enough have put their own homes on the line, to give Australians jobs, to provide the goods and services that all of us need and to build the prosperity that makes our country such a great place to live.
As far as the new Government is concerned, profit is not a dirty word and success in business is something to be proud of.
That’s why almost everything we’ve done over the past three months has been to make it easier for Australians to do business.
On day one, we saved the car industry from Labor’s $1.8 billion FBT hit. We saved nurses, teachers and tradies from an attack on their self-education expenses.
Most of the former government’s nearly 100 announced-but-not-enacted tax changes won’t go ahead because that means lower taxes and less paperwork.
We’ve closed 21 non-statutory bodies as a down-payment on our commitment to reduce business red tape costs by $1 billion a year.
The carbon tax repeal legislation has passed the House of Representatives.
The mining tax repeal legislation has passed the House of Representatives.
There are bills before the Parliament to re-establish the Australian Building and Construction Commission, a strong cop on the beat in a tough industry; and to impose the same penalties on dodgy union officials as on dishonest company directors.
The Commission of Audit, a once-in-generation review of the size, scope and efficiency of government is well under way, chaired by the BCA’s own Tony Shepherd, who originally called for this important measure some two years ago. He has promised me that he will make practical recommendations not simply present an aspirational wish list.
Another once-in-generation review, the “Son of Wallis” inquiry into financial services, is about to start, chaired by the former Commonwealth Bank and Future Fund head, David Murray.
Tonight, I can announce that the Commonwealth has provided to the states and territories draft terms of reference for the first big review of competition policy since the Hilmer review two decades back.
Handled properly, better competition policy is a big micro-economic reform with the Hilmer changes, for instance, adding an estimated 2.5 per cent to Australia’s overall GDP.
This new review is designed to ensure that businesses big and small are competing on a genuinely level playing field because fierce but fair competition will give every business the best chance to succeed and give every customer the best chance of a good price.
Also tonight I announce that the Prime Minister’s Business Advisory Council will be chaired by Maurice Newman and will include:
Jac Nasser, the chairman of BHP and the former global head of Ford;
Michael Chaney, the chairman of the National Australia Bank and a University Chancellor;
Catherine Livingstone, the chairman of Telstra;
Solly Lew, one of our foremost retailers;
Peter Fox, who runs fleets of heavy trucks here and in much of Asia;
Daniel Grollo, head of one of our most successful and innovative construction companies;
Graham Kraehe, chairman of BlueScope and Brambles;
Jane Wilson, a medical specialist and director of public companies;
Gary Banks, former head of the Productivity Commission;
Barry Irvin, head of Bega Cheese; and
John Hart, who heads Catering Australia, and will bring a small business perspective to the Council’s deliberations.
I thank everyone who expressed interest in joining the Council. Along with the BCA, this Council should be more than capable of guiding, encouraging and, where necessary, warning the new Government, officials, as well as ministers, as we put in place the building blocks of the stronger economy that people voted for.
Big new infrastructure projects like WestConnex in Sydney, the East West Link in Melbourne, the Gateway upgrade in Brisbane, the Perth Gateway, the North South Rd in Adelaide, and the Pacific and Bruce Highway upgrades are being accelerated.
We’re dealing with debt that was spiralling way beyond $400 billion by not continuing payments like the schoolkids bonus that was just a cash splash with borrowed money.
We’re fixing the NBN which was billions over budget and years behind schedule.
We’re playing our part to improve schools which have gone backwards academically even though real Commonwealth spending increased 10 per cent between 2008 and last year.
This is not an occasion for making party political points but I do want to say to you very frankly that we are cleaning up the mess that we inherited and we are keeping our commitments.
Meanwhile, others in the Parliament remain focussed on what they think is smart politics rather than good government.
I think they have much to learn; I think the BCA has much to teach them.
The Coalition in opposition tried to stop a government from breaking its election commitments. The current Opposition is trying to stop a government from keeping its election commitments.
Yes, the Coalition has knocked back one – just one – foreign investment application, out of more than 130 received, but I do want to stress that foreign investment applications will always be considered on their merits and approved where it is in the national interest to do so.
If I may say so, only from the outside, does government mostly seem a matter of choosing right from wrong. On the inside, it much more often involves choosing the greater good or the lesser evil; getting the best possible outcome, not necessarily the perfect one.
Since the election, environmental approval has been given to new projects worth $160 billion and one stop shop approvals processes are already underway in Queensland and in New South Wales.
Free trade negotiations with South Korea, Japan and China, our three biggest trading partners, have been accelerated with the aim of concluding them within a year.
On the weekend, Australia assumed the presidency of the G20, the world’s most important economic body and will use it to promote freer trade, economic infrastructure and private-sector-led growth with less tax leakage through enshrining the principle that tax should be paid in the country where income is actually earned.
Much has been achieved in less than 100 days.
It’s happened because ministers have been immersed in the business of government rather than holding daily press conferences making announcements that turn out to mean much less than they seem.
Governments do have to lead opinion but should never confuse merely making an announcement with actually implementing a policy.
In government, actions speak louder than words and competent government rather than clever media management is what’s likely to earn voter respect in three years time.
Requiring Cabinet submissions to be lodged 10 days before consideration so they can be properly digested by departments and probed for unintended consequences is the tried and true Westminster way of running an effective government.
Normally, it’s better to get things right than to rush them through.
So, tax reform starts with abolishing the carbon tax and the mining tax but it doesn’t end there. The coming tax reform white paper will inform the mandate for lower, simpler, fairer taxes that the Government will seek at the next election.
Workplace relations reform starts with enforcing the rule of law but it doesn’t end there.  The coming Productivity Commission review will inform the mandate for higher wages based on higher productivity that the Government will seek at the next election.
Reform of government starts with the Commission of Audit but it doesn’t end there. The coming white paper on the federation will inform the mandate for less overlap and duplication that the Government will seek at the next election.
Make no mistake, this Government is determined to be a reforming one, in the tradition of the Hawke and Howard governments, but we will be pragmatic reformers rather than ideological ones.
Good government does what it can today so that it can get what it wants tomorrow.
Out of all organisations, the Business Council of Australia should understand this.
Your members employ over a million people and pay $30 billion a year in company tax.
Each one of you makes a big contribution to our country and has too much at stake to make even the right decisions at the wrong time.
The careful, detailed analysis and proper consideration of consequences that’s required in the management of a large company is no less necessary in matters of state.
Australia will be quite different in a few years’ time because a Coalition, rather than a Labor government, has been calling the shots and calling them with a preference for freedom.
Still, in a stable, peaceful, pluralist democracy few things change dramatically overnight, nor should they.
The BCA’s blueprint for reform published earlier this year acknowledged this with its timetable of what could realistically be achieved in the first term of a new government.
Few organisations aspire more strongly than the BCA to lower taxes, to greater freedom and smaller government and that makes the BCA, if I may say so, a Coalition government’s natural partner in reform.
In the 1990s, the Howard government implemented the reforms that the BCA had championed in the 1980s and that helped to produce higher wages, more jobs and greater wealth.
In our own way and in our own time, we too will be a reforming government and our country will be much the better for it.
I am confident that the BCA will continue to tell the Government what it should do: to repeal the carbon tax, to repeal the mining tax, to cut red tape and to get the Budget back under control.
Even more importantly, I hope the BCA will tell others what to do particularly everyone who is trying to stop the Government from putting the BCA’s very good advice into practice.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a real honour to be here on this the BCA’s night of nights.
The BCA in a way which is rare amongst the lobby groups and organisations of our country understands that the business of running this country is not about any one of us it is about all of us. The BCA understands that the public good is the national interest not the sectional interest.
You have seen that, perceived it and pursued it in a way that very, very few other organisations in our society have.
There has been an intellectual rigour, may I say it, a practical idealism to the work of the BCA over the last 30 years.
And let’s face it at least 25 years of the last 30 have been very good hears for our country, very good years for public policy in this country thanks in no small measure to the work that you have done.
[ends]


It is an honour to deliver this Sir Edward “Weary” Dunlop Asia Link Lecture. “Weary”, apparently was an ironic nickname. People called him “Weary” because he never was.
There is nothing ironic, though, in naming the Asialink lecture after “Weary” Dunlop.
As a prisoner on the Burma Railway, he could hardly have had a worse introduction to Asia. Yet, as a medical specialist, he returned repeatedly to Asia to help train surgeons under the post-war Colombo Plan.
Weary Dunlop was a surgeon, prisoner of war, philanthropist and Victoria’s first ever rugby union international. He could inspire hope when all seemed lost and he could forgive those who had been his implacable enemies.
Instead of disappearing into the prosperity of comfortable, post-war Australia, he reached back into Asia. On trip after trip, he helped to hone the skills of his medical colleagues across our region and helped to forge some of the connections that have transformed the way we see our neighbours and the way they see us.
Weary Dunlop wasn’t the only Australian of the war time generation to transcend magnificently any bitterness towards the Japanese.
My former constituent and local Liberal Party branch president, the late Captain Norman White, another POW, was the much loved convenor of a monthly Japanese business lunch in Sydney.
The suggestion that Australians of that era regarded Asia as a place to fly over (or to sail past) on the way to England is just dead wrong.
Our society has not been entirely free of misunderstanding, prejudice, and perhaps even racism in its darker corners. It’s also marked by curiosity about the wider world, impatience with received truth, and a willingness to give almost anything and anyone the benefit of the doubt. The easy going disposition of most Australians plus the beginning of backpacker tourism in the 1950s and the rise of the global village has made Asia an exhilarating place for us to visit and to make friends more than somewhere exotic and sometimes strange.
The parties I lead have long been more alive to Asia’s opportunities than its challenges. It was, after all, Sir Robert Menzies who first called the “far east” the “near north”.
It was Sir Percy Spender who established the Colombo Plan which educated the leaders of our region here in Australia – perhaps our greatest ever exercise in soft power.
It was Menzies and Sir John McEwen who negotiated the 1957 trade treaty with Japan.
Japan’s then-prime minister Kishi, the grandfather of today’s prime minister Abe, observed that the trade treaty and the Colombo Plan were proof of Australia’s “awakened Asia-mindedness”.
It was Harold Holt who ended the White Australia policy.
It was Malcolm Fraser who began large scale Asian immigration.
And it was John Howard who signed the deals which led to China becoming our largest trading partner.
As John Howard observed in his 1997 Weary Dunlop Lecture, “history that is written with a chip on the shoulder tends to be very poorly balanced”.
Like Prime Minister Howard, I acknowledge the achievements of all previous governments, not just Liberal ones.
Australia’s deepening relationship with Asia started with Menzies and has continued without substantial interruption ever since.
Under my leadership, the Coalition has emphasised the need for our foreign policy to have a “Jakarta not Geneva” focus.
At some level, Australia is engaged wherever there is a citizen to protect, a value to uphold, or an interest to advance. Australia does have global interests, so developments in America, Europe and the Middle East often concern us.
That said, we need to focus our efforts where we can make the most difference.
For some years now, the centre of world economic power has been shifting decisively and dramatically to Asia and to our part of the world.
Today, seven of Australia’s top ten trading partners are in Asia. Together, they account for just over 50 per cent of our trade.
On current trends, China is on track to become the world’s largest economy within a couple of decades.
There is much to welcome in this. As with Japan, Australia has played a part in the rise of China. Our iron ore furnishes much of the steel that’s building its cities; our coal and gas powers much of its booming industry; and our universities and colleges have opened their doors to many of its people.
Yes, our friendship with China is more recent than that with Japan and less developed than that with the United States. Nevertheless, it is more and more important to us.
Our relationship with China has come further in the past 40 years than that with any other country: from a country with which we did not even have diplomatic relations to our biggest trading partner and largest source of immigrants.
China’s rising economic power has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. Indeed, the emergence of the Chinese middle class in little more than a generation may qualify as the most remarkable transformation in human history.
Inevitably, economic success means more integration with other countries as well as more competition with them.
We accept the modernisation of China’s armed forces because that is what all countries want for their military. Of course, the more successful the country is, the more capacity it has to throw its weight around; but it also has less reason to do so and more to lose from the attempt. Growing power is accompanied by increased responsibility.
In Australia’s experience so far, a stronger and more confident China has been a better friend and there is no reason why this shouldn’t be the experience of other countries too. We already have a strong relationship with China based on shared interests and I would hope that, over time, it might be based more on shared values.
The rise of China, of course, is just one part of the more general rise of Asia.
Within 50 years, another Asian giant – India – is likely to be among the three largest economies in the world.
With India, Australia has democracy, the rule of law and the English language in common – not to mention cricket! India is also a source of our migrants to rival China and the United Kingdom.
Partly because of India’s long preoccupation with the non-aligned movement and statist economics; and partly because of Australia’s historical amnesia and fascination with China, this relationship has been neglected.
There was the Rudd-Gillard Government’s off-again/on-again attitude to uranium sales on our side; and on theirs, the fact that no Indian Prime Minister has visited – even for a Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting – since Rajiv Gandhi.
Still, no one should underestimate India now; nor its potential to be a global superpower in this century.
Although Japan has hardly grown economically in the past three decades, it remains the world’s third largest economy, a mature liberal democracy, Australia’s second largest trading partner, and an important military ally.
Japan is understandably anxious about China’s ambitions in the China Sea. Australia, for its part, takes no sides in territorial disputes but insists that they be addressed peacefully and in accordance with international law. Whatever the historical rights and wrongs, no one’s current best interests would be advanced by threats of force, let alone use of it.
Then there’s Indonesia, Australia’s nearest large neighbour, a country whose size, proximity and potential makes it our most important overall relationship.
Although one hundred million Indonesians still earn less than $2 a day, its GDP already matches ours (at least in purchasing power terms) and, most likely, will be several times ours in a few decades.
With India, Indonesia is the emerging, democratic superpower of Asia.
Being Indonesia’s “trusted partner” is easier said than done, given the media’s tendency to play to stereotypes and past disagreements over East Timor.
Still, there is already a very wide range of military and academic interaction plus the affinity born from hundreds of thousands of Australian tourists in Indonesia each year and tens of thousands of Indonesian students here in Australia.
Over time, I hope to see more Australian students in Indonesia and more Indonesian tourists in Australia as Indonesia’s economy grows and our mutual understanding expands.
In the meantime, the new government is working on structures that can absorb the passions unleashed when Australia could be made to seem oblivious to Indonesia’s good will or when Indonesia could seem hard on an Australian citizen.
Challenged over whether he was pro-Asia or pro-America, John Howard famously observed that Australia did not have to choose between its history and its geography - particularly as America remains deeply engaged in the Asia-Pacific region.
Almost uniquely for a great power, America has used its strength not to weaken others but to strengthen them. That’s why a strong America is good for Australia and for our friends and neighbours in the region.
More or less openly, almost every Asian country wants to retain a strong American presence. Even China understands how much it has benefited from the global stability and economic freedom that US power has largely brought about. Any significant decline in the United States’ influence and interest in our region would be significantly destabilising and therefore bad for everyone.
The growing economic strength in our region gives Australia more opportunities but, if not matched by commensurate strengthening of our own economy, it also makes us more vulnerable.
A stronger economy is the foundation of successful foreign policy as well as of successful domestic policy. Cutting taxes and reducing red tape to boost productivity is ultimately as relevant to our international standing as it is to our domestic prosperity. The Coalition’s economic reforms are not at odds with any aspect of our foreign policy but are necessary to make all our policies work to their best.
Redirecting flagged future increases in spending from foreign aid to domestic infrastructure should actually boost our influence in the region when it helps to bring about the stronger economy on which our international standing rests.
After all, Australia’s international clout does not rest on the size of our aid budget but on the size of our economy and the weight it gives us in the wider world.
Regardless of the relative size of the aid budget, during disasters and emergencies Australia will always be there to lend a helping hand.
John Howard’s swift gift of $1 billion to help Indonesia recover from the Indian Ocean tsunami was an important element in the growing rapport between our countries.
Indonesia is Australia’s largest recipient of foreign aid. At some point, Indonesia’s overall economic strength will make further Australian aid unnecessary – as has already become the case with China and India.
As far as possible, Australian aid should be designed to enable other countries to stand on their own two feet as quickly as possible. It is good that Australian citizens contribute to a range of charities dedicated to improving the individual lives of poor families in poor countries. The Australian Government’s aid, however, should be directed towards improving other countries’ governance and strengthening their economies.
Reducing the rate of increase in the aid budget over the next few years will enable the new government to ensure that our aid really is best targeted and most effective.
Aid must mean doing good for donees rather than merely feeling good for donors. The government retains the Millennium Development Goal aspiration of spending 0.5 per cent of gross national income on aid but is concerned that it not reinforce stereotypes of a rich first-world and a poor third-world that are already rapidly being overtaken by events.
In any event, trade rather than aid is the best way to sustainably boost poor countries’ prosperity – as the extraordinary success of Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, Thailand, Malaysia, and more recently, China and India demonstrate.
The more quickly countries can integrate with global markets, the better for their citizens.
Australia generally allows the products of our Pacific island neighbours freely to enter our markets. We support freer trade on a multilateral, plurilateral and bilateral basis.
We already have free trade agreements with New Zealand, the United States, Singapore, Thailand, Chile and Malaysia, and are working on them with Japan, China, India and Indonesia. Then there’s the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade negotiation that’s making good progress.
Tonight, I can confirm that a free trade deal has been negotiated with South Korea, subject to detailed consideration by the Cabinet and by the Parliament.
This is a significant breakthrough towards a deal that started in 2009 but has been stalled for eighteen months. Better access to Korea for Australian agricultural produce will help Australian farmers and Korean consumers; while better access to Australia for Korean manufactured products will help Korean workers and Australian consumers.
As the history of the world abundantly demonstrates, wealth can’t be enjoyed without being shared.
In this way, the desire for a better life can drive the kind of interactions which ultimately change human hearts and build a better world as well as a richer one.
The universal dream of a more peaceful, harmonious world will only be achieved if people everywhere are more aware that what unites us all is more important than anything that divides us. It means encouraging people to put themselves in others’ shoes so that everyone is more drawn to the golden rule of ethics: to treat others as you would yourself be treated.
In our own region, this means more Australians who can speak Asian languages, catch cultural meanings and navigate local networks.
It means starting with children at school. The decline in the study of foreign languages is a worrying erosion of Australia’s broader international literacy.
In 1960, for instance, 40 per cent of year 12 students studied a second language compared to just 12 per cent today. Asian language take-up has been steadily declining over the past decade such that barely 1000 year 12 students across our country are enrolled to study Indonesian.
The new Government will work with the states to reverse this trend.
Last year in Bali, I was part of a high-level meeting between Indonesia and Australia. Of the seven people in the room, six had been educated in Australian universities.
Over the past couple of decades, Australian universities have built a $15 billion a year export industry around fee-paying students. The number of Asian students in Australian educational institutions has grown from 170,000 a decade ago to 320,000 now. Of the two and a half million international students in Australia over the past decade, 1.9 million have been from Asia.
It is a largely market-based version of the old Colombo Plan.
The new government wants international education to be a two way street. Our New Colombo Plan will be different and better than the original, adding an outward bound component to the original inward one. Yes, our region has much to learn from us, but we also have much to learn from our region.
So, under the New Colombo Plan, thousands of Australian undergraduates will study at the universities of Asia and the Pacific, complementing the thousands who come to Australia to study each year. We will return the compliment that the region has paid to us by learning as much in their countries as they have learnt in ours.
Over time, a period of study in the Asia Pacific should become a “rite of passage” for Australian undergraduates.
Over the next five years, the Government will invest $100 million in the New Colombo Plan. A pilot scheme involving Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan and Singapore will operate in the coming academic year with a full roll-out in 2015.
Another important element of the New Colombo Plan will be an internship programme involving the business community.
It’s all part of restoring our focus and reinforcing our mindset to reflect our geographic reality and our economic future by deepening our links with our neighbours.
This is hardly news to the supporters of Asialink. You have worked for many years to deepen relationship with our region.
I thank you and congratulate for all you have done; and hope that the work of the new government might complement yours.
This is always the challenge: to keep faith with the best values of our forebears, and to build on them to face the challenges of today and tomorrow. Weary Dunlop was a great teacher for his time and an inspiration for ours and would, I’m sure, be pleased with what we have in mind.
[ends]


Thank you Madam Speaker.
I don’t want to mince my words and I don’t want to pretend to the Parliament that this is anything other than a dark day for manufacturing in this country.
We have today received the very bad news, not entirely unexpected news, but very bad news, that Holden is to cease manufacturing in this country in 2017. 2,900 jobs will be gone by 2017 and thousands of jobs are at risk in up to 150 suppliers.
This follows on the withdrawal from motor manufacturing in our country of Mitsubishi some years ago and Ford’s announced 2016 close-down.
This was part of a world-wide restructure that amongst other things involved the closure of General Motors plants in Korea and the withdrawal of Chevrolet from Europe.
So, we shouldn’t think that motor manufacturing in this country has alone suffered bad news this day.
As the Managing Director of Holden has said and I thank him for his sober statement today on what must have been a sad and bitter day for him, Holden has been hit by a perfect storm; high costs, the high dollar and low volumes and that explains the decision that they have made.
Madam Speaker, now is the time for a strategic response to the difficulties in manufacturing and particularly to the difficulties in our motor industry.
It is not the time to play politics. It is not the time to indulge in the blame game. It is not the time to peddle false hope.
It is a time for a candid and constructive conversation with the Australian people and it is time for a considered and a constructive response from Government. That is exactly what this Government will be providing in coming days.
That strategic response starts with a review of the fundamental strengths of our country.
It starts with a review of the fundamental strengths of the areas which will be most impacted by the Holden close down in three years’ time.
We do have strengths in component manufacturing, we do have strengths in manufacturing, particularly for the mining sector, we have enormous strengths in research and development, in higher education and in biomedical science.
The Government will be announcing measures, in coming days that will build on the strengths that we have, and which will offer hope for the people of the regions impacted.
It will be a considered package of measures designed to rebuild confidence in the long-term economic future of those regions, in the long term future of manufacturing in this country.
As part of that, Madam Speaker, we will be talking to Toyota. They have long been the strongest motor manufacturer in this country and I want to say, Madam Speaker, that it is the Government’s strong wish that Toyota continue to manufacture in this country. It is the Government’s strong wish that Toyota continue to export from this country. We will be talking to them about the best ways of ensuring that that happens.
I accept, Madam Speaker, this is a sad bad day for everyone involved in the motor industry.
It is particularly a sad bad day for the workers of Holden, for the families of the workers of Holden and for the communities which are home to Holden’s major facilities in this country. There is no way that I can gloss over that; there is no way that I should gloss over that.
But Madam Speaker, the people of this country, the people of our industrial centres, have been through hard times before and they have come through hard times. They have flourished through hard times.
When BHP withdrew from steel-making in Newcastle, many people thought that this was the end of an era and yes Madam Speaker, it was the end of one era, it was the end of a grimy industrial era for Newcastle, but it certainly wasn’t the end of economic dynamism for Newcastle which has gone from strength to strength in the decade or so since that announcement.
While I accept that the economy of South Australia is fragile, while I accept that Adelaide in particular has suffered a series of knocks, it lost Mitsubishi just a few years ago and it did come through and there is much that we can be hopeful and optimistic about in the resilience of the South Australian economy particularly if government can do all that is necessary to ensure that the Olympic Dam mine expansion goes ahead.
So, Madam Speaker, this is a dark day, but there will be better days ahead.
There will be better days ahead and it is my determination – it is the determination of everyone in the government to work with the people of Australia, to work with the creative people of this country to ensure that the strengths, the great strengths of our society, the great strengths of our economy continue to be built on in the days and weeks and months ahead.
[ends]


I acknowledge Bill Shorten – this is a bipartisan occasion. I acknowledge all of my parliamentary colleagues. I acknowledge the distinguished representatives of our friends and allies from those times, and indeed from these times, but I particularly acknowledge our friends from Turkey. Yes, we fought a ferocious struggle on the Gallipoli peninsula, but since that time, Turkey has been a good friend of Australia and at all times after that struggle was ended, Turkey has been the soul of magnanimity towards Australia – those immortal words of Ataturk that ‘your sons are now at peace’. We remember, and we are very grateful to have your presence here with us today.
I particularly acknowledge Angus Houston, Chair of the Centenary of Anzac Advisory Council and our fundraiser in chief, the legendary, the extraordinary, hopefully the immortal Lindsay Fox.
My friends, World War I was the most traumatic event our nation has ever experienced. A population of less than five million people, almost 10 per cent, almost 400,000 volunteered for service overseas.  Sixty thousand – over one per cent of our population – didn’t come back. An extraordinary trauma for our nation, an extraordinary blight on our nation, and you look at the global figures; they’re horrifying, they’re daunting; you think of the casualties that were sustained in individual actions – some 5,000 killed and wounded on the first day of the Battle of Fromelles – it’s almost unimaginable and yet that was what our nation endured in that searing, extraordinary, torturous time.
So it’s something that did form us and shape us, the fact that we came through that, as did other nations, but the fact that we came through that as a young nation, it did help to make us and this is why Gallipoli has always loomed so large in our national psyche. This is why the First World War was in a sense the crucible that forged our nation. We had the legal beginnings a decade or so earlier, but in a significant way, we had the emotional beginnings forged in the crucible of World War I. And while even then there were so many voices that asked: ‘Was this all in vain? – we did make a difference.
Australia, one of the smaller significant combatants was a very significant military force in World War I. We think of Gallipoli as being very special and it was. The Australian forces at Gallipoli were but a part of much larger forces – British, French, Indian – also engaged. And then of course the forces withdrawn from Gallipoli were transferred to the Western Front where they performed magnificently. Not only did they perform magnificently, but at key parts of that struggle, they were the difference, perhaps the most significant difference, between victory and continuing stalemate.
Under the brilliant leadership of Sir John Monash – perhaps the finest allied General of World War I – the Australian corps perfected all arms techniques which were first deployed at the Battle of Le Hamel and which helped to bring on the black day of the German Army a couple of months later.
So while it was a terrible and traumatic episode for our country, it was a significant, extraordinary episode in which perhaps more than at any time in our history, Australia impacted on the world. So we should remember these days. Certainly over the next four years, we should remember these days and we should honour those who served. We should mourn those who died and we should celebrate the country which shaped them, and we should celebrate what they gave to our country – the virtues, the ethos which inspires us to this day.
I am thrilled to be launching this Centenary of Anzac Public Fund today and I want to commend and congratulate and thank the businesses which have already pledged large amounts of money towards this fund: BHP Billiton, Woodside, the National Australia Bank, the Commonwealth Bank, the ANZ, Telstra, the AFL, Crown, Aurizon, Newscorp, Leightons, James Packer and LinFox. Lindsay, you have deployed your charisma in your own inimitable way to ensure that the Centenary of Anzac is not just supported by government to the tune of $150 million, but is supported by those big businesses which are the pillars of our economy.
The beauty of this fund is that it enables everyone to contribute. It enables every Australian to make a contribution which everyone will be pleased to note is fully tax deductible. We want this to be not just a celebration by government. We want this to be a peoples’ celebration. We want the Australian people to own this in every sense. We want them to feel that they can make a contribution and as of today, they can. And thanks to the efforts of Lindsay Fox, there is already a substantial quantum of money there which will help to ensure that we do learn the right lessons over these next four years and the extraordinary sacrifice those amazing times are properly remembered now and far, far, far into the future.
[ends]


Colleagues, welcome to Canberra.
It’s good to be together here for my first Council of Australian Governments meeting.
I want to stress to all of you that as far as I am concerned this is a meeting of equals. This is a meeting of sovereign governments. It is not an opportunity for the Commonwealth to lecture the states. I hope it won’t be an opportunity for the states to fight with the Commonwealth.  I certainly don’t want us to be Liberal versus Labor because, let’s face it; all of us have our own issues to wrestle with.
As far as is humanly possible I want all of us to get on with the issues of government in our own jurisdictions but where there is overlap, where there is the necessity of cooperation it should be constructive, it should be collegial and it should be motivated by a concern for the overall best interests of our states and our country, and that is what I intend to do as the COAG Chairman today. As far as is humanly possible bring us together on the issues that we have in common.
As I dare say many of you know from your conversations with me over the years, I was a philosophical federalist, I became as a Minister in the Howard Government a pragmatic nationalist, and since I have become party leader I have become a pragmatic federalist.
I think pragmatic federalism is what we need in modern Australia and that is what we will do our best to implement in the hours ahead today.
So, thanks very much colleagues and I’m looking forward to a good meeting.
[ends]


To Sarah Henderson, to the Mayors, to everyone from the local area who has gathered together for this event, thank you for making me so welcome. It is an honour to be here, to be associated with what is obviously such a special thing for the RACV, such a special thing for the Surf Coast and the greater Geelong area, and really such a great even for Victoria more generally because this is as I understand it, the first truly five star development outside of Melbourne and what an appropriate thing that it’s here at the Surf Coast.
Ross, you were kind enough to mention that today is the 100th day of the new government and it’s nice to have had a hundred days to do what we can to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia. But government is not all about the government. The government is all about the people of Australia, and what I want to do today is pay tribute to the vision and the drive and the community mindedness of our country- and in particular associated with this splendid development today.
The RACV has a very, very long history. The RACV happened because the motorists of Victoria loved their cars and occasionally they needed help on the road and so people clubbed together in self-help and self-interest and in a mutually shared enthusiasm. As time went by, the services offered by the RACV grew and grew and the leadership of the RACV saw more and more opportunities to do the right thing by their members.
Decades and decades ago, no-one associated with the RACV would ever have envisaged that it would be sponsoring and running something like this and yet it is, because that’s how human ingenuity and creativity builds and develops over the years. And it doesn’t matter where you look, everywhere in our society, you see more and more examples of how people have thought and dreamt and acted and produced a better life for themselves, for their families, for their neighbours, for their communities and the job of government is to foster that- knowing that government can never substitute for the creative and dynamism of our citizens and our communities.
The job of government is to foster all of that, not to try to control it all because if we do we end up suffocating it. I mean, just imagine if the government had said “Aha! We need a five star resort somewhere”.  It would have been in the wrong place, it would have been behind schedule and it would have been massively over budget, but in fact this resort produced by the creativity and dynamism of the RACV and local people was produced on time, on budget and in the right place.
So I want to assure you, I want to assure you that as far as the new government is concerned, as far as I’m concerned, as far as Sarah Henderson is concerned, as far as everyone in the new government is concerned, it is all about you, the people – individually and collectively. It’s about trying to make your life easier. It’s about trying to ensure that you have the right conditions to flourish and to create, and to innovate and to build a better life for yourself, for your children and for your friends. That’s what it’s all about and everything that we try to do; to abolish the carbon tax, to abolish the mining tax, to get red tape down, to boost economic growth, to intelligently respond to the developments of the day, it’s all about trying to help the people of Australia to make the most of their lives, to make the most of our country.
This is a gorgeous part of Australia. Number One, Great Ocean Road. What better address could you get?
Sarah Henderson and myself have just been in Anglesea talking about a project that will start early in the new year to upgrade that bit of the Great Ocean Road from the Anglesea river to Took Street. This is the third significant upgrade of the Great Ocean Road that has been announced since the new government in partnership with the Victorian government announced a $50 million Great Ocean Road upgrade in the recent election campaign.
So we will do our bit. We will do our bit to ensure that the people using this splendid new facility will be able to get here safely and comfortably, but aren’t all of us so lucky to have this marvellous new development and aren’t we all so indebted Ross, to you and your team for giving the people of this part of Victoria, for giving members of the RACV something so splendid to enjoy, to savour and to appreciate for many, many decades to come.
I have great pleasure in officially declaring this marvellous new facility open.
[ends]


I welcome you all to Kirribilli House on this absolutely sparking Sydney day.
As I often say - as many people have often remarked - to be born in Australia is to win the lottery of life, and we would like to see more people winning the lottery of life by becoming Australians and that’s why, amongst many other reasons, what we are doing today is so important.
I’m really thrilled to be here with Barry O’Farrell, the Premier, with Pru Goward, the Minister, to talk about doing more to ensure that it is easier for Australians to adopt both locally and overseas.
Adoption is all about giving children a better a life.
There are too many children who have no parents, or no effective parents, and they deserve a better life and adoption is a way of giving it to them.
For too long, adoption has been in the too-hard basket. For too long it has been too hard to adopt and for too long this has been a policy no-go zone - and that must change. And as far as I’m concerned, as far as the New South Wales Government is concerned, as far as Barry O’Farrell and Pru Goward is concerned, it must change and it will change.
And just because we have made mistakes in the past, is no reason to conclude that we can’t do it better in the future. Just because we have made mistakes in the past, is no reason to go from one extreme to another.
So, I am absolutely determined to change and we will change and we will change within twelve months.
There are many foster parents in this country who would like to adopt. There are many foster children in this country who would like to be adopted. There are millions of children in orphanages overseas who would love to have parents and thousands of those, maybe even tens of thousands of those, could come to Australia and we need to make it easier for that to happen.
So, the Council of Australian Governments – at the initiative largely of Premier O’Farrell - did discuss this matter on a preliminary basis last week and we are determined to have a full discussion of this at our next meeting in April.
At least some of the states are determined to make it easier to adopt and as far as the Federal Government is concerned, we are determined to ensure that overseas adoptions are much, much easier than they currently are.
To that end, to prepare me for the discussion at the Council of Australian Governments in April, I have asked a taskforce of senior officials to come together to provide urgent advice on everything we need to do to make this process easier; what are the current impediments to adoption; what are ways that we can usefully adapt that will make it easier to adopt; what new countries can we partner with to make it possible for more children to have a better life and for there to be more good families here in this country of ours.
As I said, this has been a no-go zone for far too long. I am determined the change will happen and within 12 months, things will be different and they will be better.
It is a co-operative exercise when it comes to adoption. The Commonwealth can do little on its own. In partnership with co-operative states, we can make a very great deal of difference.
[ends]


Thank you so much. It is an extraordinary honour on behalf of the Government and I’m confident, all the people of our country to congratulate this champion team and this team of champions.
In our country summer means cricket. A good summer is Australia versus England and a great summer is one where Australia beats England and didn’t we whip them in this particular series?
The Ashes are the world’s oldest, continuous sporting contest. They are proof that the greatest of friendships can coexist with the fiercest of competitions and I just want to say to all of our players – thank you for making every one of us so proud this summer, and thank you for showing the grit and the character which you displayed this summer. 
I want to pay tribute to every one of you, but I’ve got to mention Mitchell Johnson – the Man of the Series, Brad Haddin and Chris Rogers – the batsmen who never let us down, Michael Clarke – the Captain courageous and of course Darren Lehmann and Craig McDermott – the coaches who had faith in the players
You made the improbable achievable.  You were the Improbables because no one expected you to win. You’ve been the Unchangeables – the first team in a hundred years to be unchanged through a whole series – and we want you to become the Invincibles by going on to beat South Africa. 
That’s your challenge and as it’s pretty obvious we are all willing you to succeed. Congratulations, thank you and go from strength to strength.  
[ends] 


Welcome to the Prime Minister’s Courtyard for this reception to honour the Prime Minister’s XI captained by Brett Lee and the England XI captained by Alastair Cook.
This is the 44th time a Prime Minister’s XI has taken to Manuka Oval to play a visiting international side.
I am the seventh prime minister to have the honour since 1951 to be associated with this game.
I want to thank Brett and the Prime Minister’s XI and I want to thank Alastair and the English XI for the pleasure that you will give so many Canberrans tomorrow.
I know it has been a long and – at times, for our visitors – frustrating summer of cricket.
I should remind our English visitors that in the Prime Minister’s sitting room just over there, is a bust of Sir Winston Churchill.
Winston Churchill belongs not just to England but to the world. Winston Churchill said many remarkable things but one of the remarkable things he said was that “in war you can be killed but once, in politics you can die many times.”
Sport is like that as well.
I dare say there must have been some occasions when England has felt flat and low this summer, but every time you have recommitted yourself to your  craft and you have gone out and given the best possible account of yourselves and I know you will do it again tomorrow.
It may be of some consolation to know that the English Women’s XI triumphed today in Perth.
Then again, it may not.
I am reminded of Evelyn Waugh’s biography of the famous cleric Ronald Knox who lay dying and one of his fellow clerics said to him, “would it be any consolation if I were to read to you some passages of sacred scripture?”
“No,” he said, “it wouldn’t. Thanks awfully, though, for making the suggestion.”
I know we will have a good game of cricket tomorrow and I want to say that Brett and the Prime Minister’s XI that beware of an opponent with a point to prove and I suspect that Alastair, you and your men will have a point to prove tomorrow.
Again, I want to thank everyone involved in this fixture.
I want to particularly thank my friend and guru in all things cricket, Cate McGregor, for the guidance that she has given me through this summer of cricket.
Cate and I go back a long way.
Cate has been a friend and a counsellor through all of the vicissitudes of both our lives for almost 30 years and it is great to have had your help in my involvement with this game.
Brett, you have dispatched one pesky English editor this summer. Let’s see what you can do with the English team tomorrow.
Alastair, good luck. I know it will be a great game of cricket.
Thank you.
[ends]


Ian, thank you so very, very much indeed. Thank you so much Ladies and Gentlemen, Parliamentary colleagues, Ambassadors, High Commissioners, everyone here who is a friend of cricket and particularly a friend of ACT cricket.
Look, Ian, I too would love a long innings, and I’d like to have quite a few fixtures underneath my portrait there, but, that can only happen if my skill at politics turns out to be far greater than my competence on the cricket field!
But look, it is a real thrill to be here tonight. It is great to be associated with this annual event. 
It’s an honour to be seventh prime minister associated with this event and of course, as usual, anything to do with politics is controversial and Ian says there’s been 38 of these prime minister’s fixtures; I say there’s been 44. 
But, I did come across something today which I believe is absolutely factual and this is a letter that Sir Donald Bradman wrote to Prime Minister Menzies, prior to the 1963 game. Sir Donald said, “My dear Mr Menzies, I have been thinking about your suggestion that I might captain your team at Canberra on the 6th of February. You know it is 15 years, this year, since I played a first class match, and several years now since I played a social game. It is quite impossible of me to be of any value as a player and my question of making 10 or 20 runs would be purely one of the charity of the opposition. Would it be fair to all concerned that the image of Bradman playing should be dangled before the eyes of the public, when it could at best be a mirage? Still, if you think these factors unimportant and reflecting on them, decide to invite me, I shall of course be delighted to accept and will leave it entirely to your judgment”. 
Well, history records that on that day in 1963 Sir Donald came out onto this oval and was bowled for four by the English quick Brian Statham. Brian Statham did his best to get the umpire to “no ball” the delivery, but to no avail, Sir Donald had departed for the grandstand.
This game has, as I understand it, been a difficult one for old legends. In fact, the very inaugural game, that other legend Jack Fingleton, was bowled first ball of the first over for zero. 
But, it has been the making of some future legends – Richie Benaud,  David Boon and of course, the young Brett Lee, who not only made a mark here many years ago, but he bowled devastatingly today and I thought it was good of him not only to perform on the field, but to come and perform off the field for us just a few moments ago and given that I think 250 plus will be quite a target to chase on this oval, I hope interviewing him has not distracted him from his main job, which is to win this game.
But look, we have seen some excellent performances out there today, from young Muirhead. I hope that Jackson Bird - an old boy of Saint Ignatius College and also an old boy from Our Lady of Good Counsel of Forestville - might be recalled to the squad for South Africa. Let us hope, let us hope, that that is the result of today.
Now, Ladies and Gentlemen, I can’t say too much about cricket because at the age of 13 I was put briefly in the nets to bat and to bowl and was told by the sports master that I was a rower, not a cricketer! 
Nevertheless, I think I can say something about sport. 
The great thing about sport – all team sports – is that you’ve got to have a go and you’ve got to join the team. And it’s extraordinary isn’t it, reading that 1962 letter from Sir Donald Bradman, how the then 55 year old, world’s greatest cricketer was prepared to have a go and to join the team at need. 
This is the essence of sportsmanship. It’s the reason why so many people think that sport does build character. I certainly believe that sport is an important part of the personal formation of anyone who plays any serious sport, certainly anyone who plays seriously any team game. 
May today’s game, whatever the result, add to the rich tapestry of Australian and international sport.
Thank you so much. 
[ends] 


Richard, Robert, Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you so much for making me so welcome and thank you so much for the contribution that you are all making to the welfare of the wider world.
I’ve often said back home and let me say it again, that without business people striving mightily every day to invest, to employ, to produce, to create, we simply could not live and it’s very easy for people in public life, people in the media to forget the absolute centrality of successful private business to the prosperity, to the life, to the decency, to the fairness and to the justice of the societies that we live in.
I just want to make it very clear that as far as I am concerned, people in private business are not just a part of our community, they are the very foundation of our community, because without an economy to sustain it, you cannot have a society, you cannot have communities and you can’t have an economy without successful private businesses.
So, I want to just very briefly talk about what we are doing in Australia as a new government and then very briefly talk about some of our objectives for the G20 year of Australia’s presidency.
As a new government, we are determined to do everything we humanly can to strengthen economic growth and that means getting taxes down, getting regulation down, getting productivity up, because if we can do all of those things, we’ll get greater growth; that means more jobs and more prosperity. So that, in a nutshell is the ‘raison d’etre’, it is the whole mission of the new government in Australia.
As far as the G20 is concerned, we want to do everything we can to promote good economic policy and to ensure that all of the world’s major economies are not just ‘talking the talk’ but are ‘walking the walk’ when it comes to promoting private sector led investment and growth.
This is where the B20 is so critically important, because if the policies that governments are pursuing don’t actually work for you – the businesses of the world – they don’t work at all. They do not work at all if the economic policies of our countries do not successfully promote and foster profitable private businesses, they simply do not work. And, it’s very easy for government to get so wrapped-up in its own activities; it’s so easy for government to think that economic activity happens by accident, that wealth is something that we can just take for granted. Well, none of this happens unless people like yourself are out there every day, investing, employing, creating, producing.
What we want to see in our G20 year are individual national economies that are dedicated to growth, but are pursuing growth in sensible ways and I think this is something that should come to fruition this year arising from the good work that happened in St. Petersburg a few months ago. These individual national growth plans will be discussed in a candid and I suspect fairly robust way by finance ministers, by officials and ultimately by national leaders in Brisbane in November.
We also want – Richard, you’ll be pleased to hear this – to rigorously promote a freer trade mindset, multilaterally, plurilaterally, bilaterally. We want everyone working in reality and not just in theory, for freer trade.
Yes, it’s important to try and repair the leaky tax bases that we all suffer from in government, but we can’t do it in ways which overregulate the people who we rely upon to produce the wealth that we all need.
Yes, we need to get more investment into infrastructure to address the $800 billion infrastructure deficit that Australia alone has, let alone the $50 trillion infrastructure deficit that the OECD estimates the world has.
And of course, we have to ensure that our financial system is safe and secure, but we also have to accept that it can’t be so safe and secure that it never takes a risk and this is one of the big challenges we’ve got; trying to ensure that we balance risk and reward, that we balance safety against opportunity, because what we can’t do is wrap the world up in cotton wool, what we can’t do is so regulate things ourselves that no one out there in the creative and producing world feels that they have the ability to take the initiatives that they need.
So, it’s quite a challenge, but it’s great to be here at Davos to take the pulse of the people in this room, to I guess hear your views as to what governments – individually and collectively – can best do to make your life easier.
This is my first visit to Davos. For many of you I suspect you’ve been here multiple times and I’m looking forward, in the course of the next few days, to becoming a ‘Davos man’, not just in the sense that I ‘talk the talk’, but in the sense that having come to this place and benefited from it, I can make a difference because that’s what it’s all about. It is about making a difference for the people who we are duty bound, all in our separate ways, to serve.
Obviously, in the course of the G20 year, many of you will have a lot to do with my distinguished friend and colleague, Treasurer Joe Hockey. Some of you will get the chance later on in this Davos meeting to catch up with my distinguished friend and colleague, Andrew Robb, the Minister for Trade and Investment.
I’ll finish on this note. When I asked Andrew to do the trade job, very deliberately we added investment to the title. It’s probably the only minister who has an additional handle, because I am against, as a general rule, title inflation, but investment is so important an element in trade. The point I want to make in closing to all of you is that Australia is under new management. Australia is open for business and we want the world, as far as is humanly possible, also to be open for business.
Thank you.
[ends]


THIS YEAR’S G20: GETTING THE FUNDAMENTALS RIGHT
For more than 40 years, this World Economic Forum at Davos has been an important contributor to global progress.
It has brought together some of the best thinkers and most important decision-makers: not to dwell on problems but to focus on opportunities.
As 2014 begins, it’s easier to be optimistic.
In the United States, economic growth is set to rise from under two per cent to almost 3 per cent, with a million jobs created in the last year.
China’s growth is moderating but likely to remain over 7 per cent.
Even the Eurozone is finally growing again.
Of course, the recovery remains fragile.
The US taper will need deft management.
Around the world, over 300 million young people are neither working nor studying and the global economy needs 30 million more jobs just to restore employment levels from before the Global Financial Crisis.
The challenge, everywhere, is to promote sustainable, private sector-led growth and employment – and to avoid government-knows-best action for action’s sake.
It’s worth noting – if only to remind ourselves of the good that can be done – that in the past few decades, more has been achieved to reduce poverty than in any other period in history.
In countries such as China, India and Indonesia many hundreds of millions have been lifted from subsistence to the middle class.
Despite the Crisis, worldwide, income per person is still up by over 60 per cent in the past decade.
The global middle class is growing from 1.8 billion now to over 3 billion in 10 years’ time.
This progress is partly due to better science and technology; and partly to the constant aspiration to do better.
Mostly, though, it’s been driven by the intellectual and philosophical conviction that freer trade and smaller government will strengthen prosperity; the instinct that empowered citizens can do more for themselves than government will ever do for them.
Essentially, officialdom has begun to grasp that human freedom is less a threat than an opportunity.
As soon as people have economic freedom, they create markets.
Markets are the proven answer to the problem of scarcity.
They rest, as Roger Scruton has recently observed, “upon the kind of moral order that arises from below as people take responsibility for their lives, learn to honour their agreements, and live in justice and charity with their neighbours”.
Even though the Crisis was the gravest economic challenge the world has faced since the 1930s, it was not a crisis of markets but one of governance.
It was the G20 which helped to coordinate the actions which prevented another great depression.
The challenge, as we continue to work through the weaknesses that brought on the Crisis, is to strengthen governance without suppressing the vitality of capitalism.
The Crisis, after all, has not changed any of the basic laws of economics.
The lesson of recent history, whether it’s the collapse of Soviet-style communism, the phenomenal growth of Asian economies, or the slow and painful recovery from the Crisis of 2008 and 2009 is that real progress is always built on clear fundamentals.
You can’t spend what you haven’t got.
No country has ever taxed or subsidised its way to prosperity.
You don’t address debt and deficit with yet more debt and deficit.
And profit is not a dirty word because success in business is something to be proud of.
After all, you can’t have strong communities without strong economies to sustain them and you can’t have strong economies without profitable private businesses.
Above all else, policy-makers need to understand that every dollar government spends comes from the people, either through taxes and borrowings; or, over the past few years, through the process known as quantitative easing which is not indefinitely sustainable.
A certain level of government spending is necessary and good.
In Lincoln’s words, government should do for people what they can’t do for themselves – and no more.
Richer people, stronger countries and a better world all depend upon policy-makers’ grasp of these fundamentals and there’s no better place to reiterate them than the World Economic Forum – creator of the global competitiveness index as well as this conference.
As always, stronger economic growth is the key to addressing almost every global problem.
Stronger growth requires lower, simpler and fairer taxes that don’t stifle business creativity.
And stronger growth requires getting government spending under control so that taxes can come down; and reducing regulation so that productivity can rise.
In the decade prior to the Crisis, consistent surpluses and a preference for business helped my country, Australia, to become one of the world’s best-performing economies.
Then, a subsequent government decided that the Crisis had changed the rules and that we should spend our way to prosperity.
The reason for spending soon passed but the spending didn’t stop because, when it comes to spending, governments can be like addicts in search of a fix.
But after the recent election, Australia is under new management and open for business.
To boost private sector growth and employment, the new Government is cutting red tape and reducing the tax burden by scrapping the carbon tax and the mining tax.
We’ve established a once-in-a-generation Commission of Audit to re-consider the size, scope and efficiency of government.
We’re streamlining environmental approvals and have already ticked off new projects worth over $400 billion.
We’ve successfully concluded negotiations for a Free Trade Agreement with South Korea and are working on agreements with Japan, China, India and Indonesia as well as wider ones such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
With an ageing population, we’re implementing measures to get more people into work: like a ‘fair dinkum’ (as we say in Australia) paid parental leave scheme to give mothers in the workforce their full wage for six months.
We’re investigating childcare changes that will respond to modern families participating in a round-the-clock economy.
We’re determined that fit working age people will work, preferably for a wage but, if not, as a condition of receiving unemployment benefits.
We’ll do more to keep people with temporary health conditions in the workforce, rather than on a pension.
And we’re accelerating the construction of major infrastructure, especially roads, because time spent in traffic jams is time lost from work and family.
Every country’s circumstances are different but this is what we are doing in Australia to boost growth, participation and productivity.
Some countries might find our example instructive, just as we have learned from others’ experiences.
Growth, however, is the result of global conditions as well as domestic policies.
And this year, Australia is in a unique position to promote global growth as chair of the G20.
If the largest economies can individually achieve higher growth and can cooperate to achieve higher global growth, obviously, every country benefits.
At St Petersburg last year, each G20 country agreed to prepare its own comprehensive growth strategy to feed into a G20-wide action plan.
I’m looking forward to respectful but robust discussion of each country’s national plan.
Each of us can learn from canvassing the problems that we all face; and even more importantly, the problems that can only be solved by countries working cooperatively together.
This year’s Brisbane summit will focus on a few key subjects because progress usually comes one step at a time.
Australia’s aim is a communiqué just three pages long explaining precisely how good intentions are being put into practice.
Like last year, this year’s G20 must be more than a talkfest.
As always, trade comes first.
People trade with each other because it’s in their interest to do so.
Every time one person freely trades with another, wealth increases.
Just as trade within countries increases wealth, trade between countries increases wealth – that’s why we should all be missionaries for freer trade.
At the very least, the G20 should renew its commitment against protectionism and in favour of freer markets.
Each country should renew its resolve to undo any protectionist measures put in place since the Crisis.
Better still, each country should commit to open up trade through unilateral, bi-lateral, plurilateral and multi-lateral actions and through domestic reforms to help businesses engage more fully in global commerce.
As a trading nation, Australia will make the most of its G20 presidency to promote free trade.
Over time, everyone benefits because, in a global economy, countries end up focussing on what they do best.
A more global economy with stronger cross-border investment eventually helps everyone because it generates more wealth and ultimately creates more jobs.
Of course, money’s tendency to flow to where taxes are lowest is a powerful incentive for all countries to keep taxes down.
One of the side effects of globalisation is more ability to take advantage of different country’s tax regimes.
Different national tax arrangements have not always kept up with the rise of services and the pervasiveness of digital technologies.
So, the G20 will continue to tackle businesses artificially generating profits to chase tax opportunities rather than market ones.
The essential principle is that you should normally pay tax in the country where you’ve earned the revenue.
My hope is to have a really frank leaders-only discussion in Brisbane about the biggest issues we face, including digitalisation and its implications for tax, trade and global integration.
Because taxes need to be fair, as well as low, in order to preserve the legitimacy of free markets.
For the leaders of the countries generating 85 per cent of the world’s GDP merely to agree on the principles needed for taxation to be fair in a globalised economy would be a big step forward.
Then, there’s the worldwide “infrastructure deficit”, with the OECD estimating that over 50 trillion dollars in infrastructure investment is needed by 2030.
Developing countries need new infrastructure, developed countries need rebuilt infrastructure and almost every country is struggling to finance the infrastructure it needs.
It should be easier to get big new road, rail, port and dam infrastructure off the ground – and we can do that through attracting more private capital through sensible pricing policies and better regulatory practices.
As an “infrastructure prime minister”, my hope as G20 host, is to bring policy-makers, financiers and builders together to identify practical ways of increasing long-term infrastructure financing.
What investors really need is greater confidence that governments won’t change the rules after the investment has been made.
The G20 assumed its current form in response to the Crisis triggered by bad banking practices.
So at the heart of the G20’s work is building the resilience of the financial sector: helping to prevent and manage the failure of globally important financial institutions; making derivatives markets safer; and improving the oversight of the shadow banking sector.
Financial regulation is always a work-in-progress but these reforms now need to be finalised in ways that promote confidence without eliminating risk.
The challenge for authorities is to keep abreast of developments, not to lag behind them as they did pre-Crisis, and to maintain the public’s trust.
On trade, tax, infrastructure, employment and banking, we owe it to our citizens, on whose behalf we attend international conferences, to maximise the specific outcomes from this year’s G20.
Finally, governments must always remember that an economy is far more like an organism than a machine.
A strong economy is far less likely to be one responding to central control than one spontaneously generating its own growth.
After all, government doesn’t create wealth; people do, when they run profitable businesses.
Government’s role is always to nurture its citizens rather than to promote itself.
At the start of Australia’s G20 presidency, the government and the people of Australia look forward to welcoming national leaders and international opinion formers to our country.
I promise you: we will make your trip worthwhile.
Australia is determined, as a responsible and committed G20 chair, to promote better global governance.
We will strive to build on the good work of Russia’s presidency and lay the foundations for further progress under Turkey in 2015.
Better governance, though, is not the same as more government.
Ultimately, the G20 is not about us in government; it’s about the people, our masters.
[ends]


This is a very fitting location for this ceremony this evening.
In sight are the pillars of our democracy.
There is the War Memorial - the ever present reminder of the sacrifice made for our freedom.
There is the Old Parliament House, which is a reminder of our history.
There is this Parliament House behind us, the home of our democracy.
And here, in this forecourt, are the people whom all our institutions strive to serve.
There is no better place to honour our finest citizens.
This Australia Day weekend we celebrate our history, our land, our people and our unity.
Two traits are characteristic of our country: the instinct to “have a go” and that passion for a “fair go”.
Tonight, we honour those who have “had a go” so that others might have a “fair go”.
We are a country that salutes those whose talents, gifts and hard work have made Australia a better place.
Now, I know from meeting many of our finalists earlier today, that some of you don’t feel entirely at ease with being singled out.
Well, we have singled you out – because you reflect the very best of our country.
You are what the rest of us might be – if only we kept our new year’s resolutions and heeded our best instincts.
You are a living embodiment of our country at its best.
As we look back over a half century of Australian of the Year Awards – we see Nobel laureates, academy award winners, scientists, doctors, writers, sportspeople, artists, soldiers, and carers – a good mix of larrikins and stirrers, saints and sinners.
This year’s finalists, like their predecessors, are as diverse as the country we are – but each has a remarkable story and each is rightly honoured.
So, tonight I congratulate and thank you for reminding us of our potential for good and renewing our pride in Australia.
Thank you.
[ends]


Thanks very much Frank and welcome ladies and gentlemen to the Prime Minister’s Courtyard at this morning tea to mark the beginning of our Australia Day weekend celebrations.
I want to say to everyone who is a finalist in the various Australian of the Year categories - welcome and congratulations.
I should say that the Australian of the Year Award has become really a very important feature of our national life, but the Australian of the Year Awards weren’t always as well organised as they are today.
Back in 1979, Harry Butler the conservationist, was Australian of the Year and I am told that Harry was called at his home in Perth told to be in Melbourne later in the week where he would be named Australian of the Year.
He was told by the official who called “all the arrangements were made” and he was sworn to secrecy. 
It was to be his wife’s first trip to Melbourne. 
So, Mr and Mrs Butler arrived at the designated hotel in Melbourne only to be told there was no booking for them.
“Look,” said the receptionist, “you should have booked. Really, it’s the long weekend, the Australia Day weekend. In fact the only room we had in the house last night was for the Australian of the Year and he didn’t bloody well turn up.”
You have all turned up and I want to thank you and I want to congratulate every one of you for the extraordinary work that you have done for our country. 
We have an amazing range of extraordinary, dedicated, committed, passionate, achieving people here in this courtyard this morning. 
Where else could you find an award where finalists include footballers, ballet dancers, cancer researchers, singers and song writers? The genius and the wonder of our country is found in our people, in every part of our country, in every part of our life and you collectively reflect the very best of our country.
I also want to thank the family members who are here today because good work comes at a price. 
All of you who are finalists in the various Australian of the year categories have spent a large part of your life working for the community. 
If you are working for the community inevitably you are not at home with your spouses, with your partners, with your children. To have partners, spouses and children here today is our way of saying thank you to you too, because people can only do their good works if they are supported by those who love them. It is a joint effort, it is a joint effort and it is important to remember that.
So, ladies and gentleman again welcome to the Prime Minister’s Courtyard. Under different circumstances we would have been at The Lodge, The Lodge is under repair but it is nice to have good people in this courtyard. Until very recently the only people who ever came into this courtyard where members of the parliamentary press gallery and I have got to say it is much more pleasant to be facing you than to be facing them.
Could I finally say to Ita Buttrose the 2013 Australian of the Year, Professor Ian Maddocks the Senior Australian of the Year, Akram Azimi the Young Australian of the Year and Shane Phillips the Local Hero of the Year, last year, thank you for everything you have done. 
I have just been hearing some amazing stories from some of you and I have had a number of meetings with all of you in the course of the year.
You have done extraordinarily well for the causes that you believe in and that is the great thing about this award - Australians of the Year in every category can make a difference.
We do not give these awards lightly. We honour people in these categories because you are truly outstanding and know that you can make a difference.
You have made a difference in the various fields that you work in and you will make a difference because of the awards that you have won.
Thank you so much.
[ends] 


Your Excellency, General Hurley and other military chiefs, Adam Goodes and other Australians of the Year, Adam Gilchrist the Chair of the National Australia Day Council and Aunty Agnes and other indigenous elders.
Today, across our country, we celebrate one of the greatest gifts imaginable – to be Australian.
While Australia Day formally marks the anniversary of the arrival of the First Fleet, today celebrates something richer and deeper.
We celebrate the nation and the people we have become.
We are the grateful inheritors of two rich strands of history: a British heritage and an Aboriginal one.
The First Australians - along with the millions from around the world who have made their home here since 1788 – have become one people, sharing one land.
We are fulfilling the aspiration in the opening words of our Constitution: ‘that we the people….have agreed to unite in one indissoluble Federal Commonwealth’.
Twenty three million of us have found unity in our diversity, respect in our differences and have built a modern nation on the idea that all of us can get ahead provided we are prepared to “have a go”.
This Australia Day, we welcome the thousands of new Australian citizens who have chosen to “join our team”.
It is a fitting day to celebrate new citizens as it was on 26 January 1788 that Australia’s first modern migrants arrived.
Today, as Stephanie has already mentioned, is a significant milestone as it is the 65th anniversary of the Australian Citizenship Act.
Since that time, more than 4.5 million people from all around the globe have chosen our country as their home.
I am proud to say that one of those families was my own.
On 7 September 1960, along with my father, mother and sister, I left Tilbury in England for Australia.
My parents had great hope in Australia.
My wife had great hope in Australia when she came here from New Zealand in 1983.
Australia has not disappointed them.
My hope is that it won’t disappoint anyone.
My duty, as your Prime Minister, is to ensure that, as far as possible, in this great land of ours, no one is left behind.
To the men and women taking the Citizenship Pledge here today – and to the almost 18,000 taking the Pledge around Australia, I say “welcome to the team”.
You - our newest citizens - will play your part in building our country and making it your home.
Today we celebrate the history that has made us who we are; the country that we love and the values and institutions that underpin it.
May God bless you and may God bless our country on this special day.
[ends]


Colleagues, if I could welcome everyone back for the start of what is going to be a pretty big and important year.
I sense that confidence is returning to our country and my conviction is that 2014 is going to be a year of opportunity for Australia.
Our job as a Government is to build on the fundamental strengths of our nation because we do have strengths. They were obscured somewhat over the last few years, but we do have strengths and our job is to deliver on them.
I am very pleased with the start that we’ve made and I think the public are giving us credit for having made a good start, even though we did inherit a mess.
We now know because of the MYEFO statement late last year that under Labor debt is going to max out at 667 billion dollars, 667 billion dollars.
We know that under Labor unemployment increased by 200,000.
We know that under Labor we had 50,000 illegal arrivals by boat, but we have made a strong start in sorting this out.
I’m particularly encouraged by the fact that we’ve now gone more than 40 days without an illegal boat arriving on our shores. That’s very much to the credit of the policies which the Government had put in place, the resolution and the determination which the Government has shown in saying to the people smugglers ‘the game is up’.
As well, we’ve got very substantial savings before the Parliament; $20 billion worth of savings before the Parliament and while we know that our opponents are relentlessly negative, the public know that we have a plan to get the Budget back under control, because in the end governments – like households, like businesses – have got to live within their means.
It is always important though to focus on exactly why we are doing this and we are doing this for the betterment of the Australian people.
We are getting spending down, so that we can get taxes down.
We are getting taxes down, so that we can make businesses more secure because that means more jobs and in the long run higher wages for the Australian people.
That’s what this is all about.
It is not an exercise in philosophy. It is not an exercise in textbook management. It is an exercise in doing the right thing by the people of Australia who look to their government, who look to their government for calm, measured, purposeful action that will improve their lives.
Obviously over the next year there is going to be a lot of noise but we as a government know what we are doing and we are going to get it done. We know what we are doing and we are going to get it done.
It is, I can’t stress too much, all about the people; their benefit, their life, their jobs, their incomes.
That is our duty to respond appropriately to the people – our masters – and that is what we are doing this year.
I can’t think of a better team to get it done.
So, down to work, a lot to be done but some great things that we can do for our country.
[ends]


Thank you so much.
Well it’s so good to be here in this beautiful part of Brisbane amongst so many enthusiastic Queenslanders. It is a great honour to be the Prime Minister of this country and as the Prime Minister of this country one of the most marvellous things is to meet some absolutely outstanding people.
We had the Australia Day weekend last weekend and as part of that weekend I met with all of the finalists in the various categories for Australian of the Year. I met with Adam Goodes – a sporting legend, a hero to the indigenous people of this country, someone who is doing everything he can to lift Australians from poverty to opportunity.
I met with Fred Chaney – a former colleague, many of you would know him, similarly a man who after a half a lifetime in the Parliament capped off with a stint as Minister for Aboriginal Affairs in the Fraser government, spent the next 30 years working for the first Australians.
I’ve met some terrific Australians since I’ve been Prime Minister, but I tell you what, you go a long way to find a better person than Bill Glasson.
Today, Bill is a candidate, but he is so much more than simply a candidate for the Parliament of our country. Bill has 30 odd years as a doctor behind him, not just as a medical specialist in the city of Brisbane, but as someone who every year has trekked out to western Queensland to spend weeks of his time working pro bono for people who otherwise may well have been blind.
He’s served in the Army Reserve, he’s represented his profession at the highest levels including as President of the Australian Medical Association. He’s not going into the Parliament to promote his career, or to build his ego, he’s going into the Parliament to serve our country. I have never met a man with better or purer motives for going into the Parliament of this country. I’ve almost never met a man who is turning his back on so much to go into the Parliament of this country. An income, let’s face it, a reputation because Members of Parliament don’t always have great reputations unlike medical specialists and I tell you, if he comes into the Parliament he will lift the reputation of Members of Parliament.
This is a man who is prepared to sacrifice to serve the people of Griffith and that’s one of the many reasons why I’m so pleased and proud to be here today.
And so many others are here in this room who are led by the Premier of Queensland Campbell Newman, including the President of the Party Bruce McIver, including my old friend Dr Sue Page – formally of the Rural Doctors Association. So many people who know this man and love this man are here to support him, not just in the routine sense that if you are on the conservative side of politics you support our candidates, but we are here because we know this man, we love this man and we want to give this man an opportunity to serve our country, the people of Griffith in the Parliament of Australia.
I first met Bill under very difficult circumstances. I’d been asked by John Howard to take on the job of Health Minister at a time when doctors were walking out of public hospitals right around our country because they weren’t confident that they could perform their duties and be looked after in the event that there was a legal problem and they faced the courts. Obstetricians were not delivering babies; orthopaedic surgeons were worried about doing their procedures; intensivists were thinking ‘can I go into my emergency ward, my intensive care unit’?  It was a real crisis as opposed to the confected crises which we often see reported and talked about. This was a real crisis and suddenly I was called upon to resolve it.
Well luckily, there leading the medical profession at that time was an outstanding Australian in Bill Glasson and what Bill did was he persuaded the doctors of Australia that the national interest was at least as important as their own. He persuaded the doctors of Australia, something that they all believe in their hearts, but just at that moment some of them were inclined to forget, that patients come first.  And yes, I had to do some things as well, I had to persuade the government that the government had to get a lot more involved in the insurance market than we’d ever been before, but nevertheless this man, Bill Glasson, got the hospitals of our country working again.
And he didn’t just work with me, he didn’t just work with his fellow doctors right around our country, he worked with all of the state health ministers to bring that about and at the time every single one of them was a member of the other political party. So this is someone who has the capacity, not just to believe in things passionately, not just to have values and principles and ideals and aspirations, but he’s also got the capacity to reach out to everyone in our community and work for the national good and that’s precisely what we want in a Member of the national Parliament.
You know, I was so thrilled when Bill decided that he would put his hand up for Griffith and it wasn’t the kind of seat that a candidate of this calibre would normally run for because at that stage the margin was something like eight per cent. It was occupied by a former prime minister, then foreign minister. It was the safest Labor seat in Queensland no less, but Bill said, ‘if I’m going to run for Parliament, I want to represent where I live. I don’t want to be one of those political mercenaries; I don’t want to be one of those people who goes in search of a big handle. I just want to represent the place where I live’. And he agreed to go forward and he was indeed selected and I was incredibly thrilled when I heard the news that Bill Glasson had been selected by the LNP to go for the seat of Griffith in Queensland.
And the following Monday I rang him to say ‘Bill I’m coming up to Queensland in the next few days, let’s go and do a little bit of campaigning somewhere in your seat’. ‘I’m sorry, Dr Glasson isn’t here’ and I thought, ‘gee whiz, he’s just been preselected’. You know where he was? He was in East Timor – that’s where he was because he had a longstanding commitment to go and do ophthalmology for free, for the people of East Timor, many of whom would be in dire problems, in dire straits without his services. Was that in the newspapers? No, of course it wasn’t, of course it wasn’t. Now, the former member for Griffith wouldn’t roll up the leg of his trousers without calling in the cameras!
And I say to the good people of Griffith, I say to the good people of Queensland – who do you want to represent you? Who do you think is best placed to do the kind of job that a local member is required to do? If you’ve got a problem, who would you rather talk to? Someone who has spent 30 years addressing the practical difficulties of people in their lives, or someone who’s spent most of their life up till now plotting and machinating and conspiring to get into the Parliament? Who do you want to represent you? Someone whose focus is on you, or someone whose focus is on the faction, whose focus is on the caucus? Do you want someone who’s going to talk to you of what’s in his heart, or do you want someone who is going to give you the party line? The answer could not be clearer.
You want a decent Australian, a decent human being.  A person who has served this country from his earliest years, to represent you in Griffith and I tell you, I hope, I hope that I have as one of my colleagues someone of that calibre. I love my colleagues and I am incredibly lucky. I am blessed to have such good friends and strong and supportive colleagues in Canberra, but I tell you what, we’re not so good that we wouldn’t be improved by having Bill Glasson amongst us.
So finally, this is not my day, this is Bill’s day, but above all else I want this to be Griffith’s day. That’s what this is all about. It’s not about me, it’s not even in the end about Bill, it’s about the people of Griffith and who can serve them best.
[ends]


Thank you so much ladies and gentlemen. Thank you so much for the warm welcome. It is a real honour for me to be sharing the podium today with my friend and brother Prime Minister, John Key.
John Key has done mighty things in New Zealand. He has done mighty things in New Zealand. I am happy to bask in his reflective glory today and I salute him as someone who, with yet I hope many years to go in New Zealand’s top job, has already marked himself out as one of New Zealand’s most accomplished prime ministers.
Ladies and gentlemen, Parliamentary colleagues, Australian and New Zealand Ministers, particularly Joe Hockey, Malcolm Turnbull and Ian Macfarlane, Arthur Sinodinos,  I see Michael Ronaldson as well here in the room.
The size and the enthusiasm of this gathering testifies to an economic relationship which is strong and getting stronger.
New Zealand is our sixth largest export destination. It’s our ninth largest source of imports. It’s our third largest destination for exports and 16,500 Australian businesses also call New Zealand home.
It isn’t just an economic relationship. We were blood brothers, beginning on the battlefields of Gallipoli and France, we have served together in so many theatres of conflict ever since, and most recently Afghanistan.
We are not two foreign countries; we are two somewhat different countries, but we are two countries united by an abundance of family ties. We are family. We are brother countries. We are sibling countries.
My wife – as many of you would know – was born in New Zealand and in fact, Prime Minister Key was one of my constituents for several years. He couldn’t vote for me, but nevertheless, he was a constituent for several years and this testifies to the depth and the strength and the affection in the relationship.
Our challenge is to turn the personal bonds, the cultural bonds, the historic bonds into ever stronger economic bonds.
Our challenge is to try to ensure that while we remain two countries, increasingly, we are one seamless market economy.
I really am thrilled that Australia has been able to invite New Zealand to participate in the full range of this year’s G20 activities.
This year, thanks to New Zealand’s presence, it will be not so much the G20 as the G21.
This G20 year will be the most significant international gathering ever held in this country. It kicks off with Finance Ministers coming here in a couple of weeks’ time. It culminates with the Heads of Government of the world’s 20 largest and most representative economies coming to Brisbane in November.
There are many countries that we could have invited but we decided that the country that we must invite was our brother country, our sibling country across the Tasman – New Zealand.
It’s an opportunity to showcase not just Australia but to showcase Australasia.
In the week leading up to the B20 – or as now I prefer to say the B21 gathering in mid-July – we will have an Australasian business week which will be an opportunity to showcase the capacities and the capabilities of the businesses of both our two countries.
We are both countries which need investment. We are both countries that are dedicated to exports and this will be our opportunity to show to the leaders of the world’s largest businesses just what we can do for them.
When I look at New Zealand I see a country which at this point in its history has much to teach us.
There was a period in the 1980s – the era of Rogernomics – when we rightly looked across the Tasman for lessons.
Just over the last five years we have rightly looked across the Tasman for lessons, lessons that perhaps weren’t very well learnt until recently on this side of the Tasman but nevertheless important lessons.
When I said on election night last year that Australia was under new management and open for business I have to say that I did have New Zealand in mind and I did have in mind many of the policies and programmes which have been pursued by the Key Government.
Thanks to the fiscal discipline of the Key Government the size of government as a percentage of New Zealand’s economy will drop from 35 per cent to 30 per cent.
As government gets smaller, citizens get bigger and that is what this government wants to achieve in this country – empowered citizens.
New Zealand is on track for a surplus next year and strong sustainable surpluses in the years ahead.
I was delighted to hear the New Zealand Health Minister explain to me and my colleagues this morning that health spending in New Zealand has grown by just three per cent over the last five years and yet by all reasonable indicators the quality of health services and health outcomes have actually expanded.
But the policies of the New Zealand Government under John Key are not just about fiscal rigor; they are about providing a better life for citizens. The point of being economically responsible is not to keep the 300 smartest economists in the country happy. The point of being economically responsible is to provide a better life for the people of our country and in New Zealand, inflation is down, mortgage interest rates are down very substantially from over five per cent to under two per cent. These are good results for the people of New Zealand. Real wages are up 13 per cent; there’s been 53,000 new jobs in just the last 12 months and this is why the New Zealand lessons have such resonance for us on this side of the Tasman. Not for nothing has Forbes Magazine recently described New Zealand as the world’s number one place to do business.
I do welcome Prime Minister Key, not just as a brother, but as soul mate. I do welcome him as someone, not just as a friend, but in very significant ways already a political mentor.
As the Australians in this audience know only too well, this new Government here in Australia is determined to get taxes down, to get red tape down and to get productivity up because that means you get prosperity up. This is not just textbook learning because across the Tasman in New Zealand we have seen precisely that happen, precisely that happen.
So I want to say in welcoming John Key to the microphone that he has been a truly exemplary leader of his country, he has been a fine leader for New Zealand, but his inspiration and his example is very, very welcome on this side of the Tasman and I am very grateful indeed to be in the company of my brother Prime Minister John Key.
[ends]


When Prime Minister Keating made his famous Redfern speech in 1992, I was an opposition staffer.
My job was to disagree with everything he said.
While I could quibble with aspects of that speech, I couldn’t disagree with its central point: that our failures towards Australia’s first people were a stain on our soul.
That was a watershed moment for me, as for others.
Many of us have been on a long journey.
I can’t say that I have always been where I am now.
The further this journey has gone, the more, for me, Aboriginal policy has become personal rather than just political.
It has become a personal mission to help my fellow Australians to open their hearts, as much as to change their minds, on Aboriginal policy.
We are a great country – I firmly believe the best on Earth.
But we will never be all that we should be until we do better in this.
There is no country on Earth where people are made more welcome.
There is no country on Earth whose people have more innate generosity to others.
Yet for two centuries – with fragrant exceptions, of course – Australians had collectively failed to show to Aboriginal people the personal generosity and warmth of welcome that we have habitually extended to the stranger in our midst.
Even as things began to change, a generation or two back, our tendency was to work “for” Aboriginal people rather than “with” them.
We objectified Aboriginal issues rather than personalised them.
We saw problems to be solved rather than people to be engaged with.
If that hardness of heart was ever really to melt, I thought, that change had to include me.
Because you can’t expect of others what you won’t demand of yourself.
So as a backbencher, I spent a few days every year in central Australia and always included a dinner with Charlie Perkins.
As a minister, I tried to spend a few days every year in remote Aboriginal communities – especially in Cape York and later in the APY lands for which my portfolios had particular responsibilities.
Yet after 14 years in the parliament, I found that I had visited dozens of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander places and not spent more than 12 hours in any one of them.
As shadow minister for Aboriginal Affairs, I asked Noel Pearson if he would help me to spend some serious time in individual communities where I could be useful – rather than just another seagull, as Aboriginal people so often called officious visitors.
So I spent three weeks in 2008 as a teacher’s aide in Coen; 10 days in 2009 as a truancy helper in Aurukun; four days in 2011 doing bush carpentry near Hopevale; and another four days in 2012 helping to renovate the Aurukun school library.
Later this year, as Prime Minister, I will spend a week in East Arnhem Land along with enough officials to make it, if only for a few days, the focus of our national government.
After 226 years of intermittent interest at most, why shouldn’t Aboriginal people finally have the Prime Minister’s undivided attention for seven days!
None of this makes me more worthy or less fallible than any of my predecessors – but it does demonstrate that this Government is serious about Aboriginal policy.
No less serious than it is about stopping the boats, fixing the budget, and building the roads of the 21st century.
I pay tribute to former prime minister John Howard for first proposing to recognise indigenous people in the constitution.
I pay tribute to former prime minister Kevin Rudd for the national apology.
I commend former prime minister Julia Gillard for continuing these annual Closing the Gap statements to focus the parliament’s attention on problems that might otherwise be neglected or glossed over.
I thank Kirstie Parker and Mick Gooda and members of the Closing the Gap steering committee.
I welcome the presence today of Warren Mundine and other members of the Prime Minister’s advisory council.
I welcome the presence of Andrew Forrest and others working on indigenous employment.
I especially welcome Fred Chaney, a former minister for Aboriginal affairs and mentor to me, whom I have often described as a distinguished elder – and who is now officially recognised as Senior Australian of the Year.
And I acknowledge the Australian of the Year, Adam Goodes, who has personally demonstrated, when bitter offence could have been taken, the “better angels of our natures”.
I welcome the first indigenous Member of the House of Representatives, Ken Wyatt, and the first indigenous woman member of this parliament, Senator Nova Peris – and I look forward to the day when the parliamentary representation gap is finally closed.
Most of all I welcome everyone the length and breadth of this great land who wants tomorrow to be better than today.
I can report that our country is on track to achieve some of the Closing the Gap targets.
The target to halve the gap in child mortality within a decade is on track to be met.
We are already close to meeting the target to have 95 per cent of remote children enrolled for pre-school – and should soon know what percentage are actually attending as well as just enrolled.
And the target to halve the gap in Year 12 attainment by 2020 is also on track to be met.
That’s the good news.
The bad news is that there’s almost no progress in closing the life expectancy gap between Aboriginal and other Australians – which is still about a decade.
There’s been very little improvement towards halving the gap in reading, writing and numeracy.
And indigenous employment has, if anything, slipped backwards over the past few years.
We are not on track to achieve the more important and meaningful targets.
Because it’s hard to be literate and numerate without attending school; it’s hard to find work without a basic education; and it’s hard to live well without a job.
We are all passionate to Close the Gap.
We may be doomed to fail – I fear – until we achieve the most basic target of all: the expectation that every child will attend school every day.
Generally speaking, the more remote the school, the more excuses are made for poor attendance.
Last year, in metropolitan areas, only 81 per cent of indigenous Year 9 students met the National Minimum Standards for reading.
In very remote areas, just 31 per cent of indigenous students reached the same minimum standard.
Yet it’s being demonstrated in places like Aurukun that a strong education in traditional culture is actually helped by a good education in English.
Right around our country, it should be possible to be proudly Aboriginal and a full participant in modern Australia.
That doesn’t just mean access to a good education in cities, towns and remote settlements – it means actually going to school.
So I propose to add a new target to our existing Closing the Gap targets: namely to end the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous school attendance within five years.
I hope I am here long enough to be judged on its achievement.
We will know that this gap has been all-but-closed when schools achieve 90 per cent plus attendance regardless of their percentage of Aboriginal students.
This was the strong consensus of my indigenous advisory council’s first meeting: that no one ever received a good education by not going to school.
Every day, in every school, the roll is taken.
Every school knows its attendance rates.
Every education department knows the attendance rate for every school.
The lower the attendance rate, the more likely it is that a school has problems.
The lower the attendance rate, the more likely it is that a school is failing its students.
It’s the duty of every teacher and every education department to try to ensure that every child attends school unless there’s a very good reason.
One of the worst forms of neglect is failing to give children the education they need for a decent life.
That’s why every state and territory has anti-truancy laws.
That’s why the former government, to its credit, tried to quarantine welfare payments for families whose children weren’t at school.
That’s why, at my first COAG meeting, every state and territory agreed with the Commonwealth on the need to publish attendance data from every school.
And that’s why, at 40 remote schools, the Commonwealth is already funding new anti-truancy measures that, on day one of the 2014 school year, in some communities, seem to have boosted attendance from under 60 per cent to over 90 per cent.
Our job is to break the tyranny of low expectations.
That’s why indigenous school attendance data will be part of the next Closing the Gap report and all subsequent reports under this Government.
The parliament will be brought up-to-date on the relative success or failure of Aboriginal education because a good education is fundamental to a good start in life.
Future Closing the Gap reports should also include data on work programme participation and data on communities without a police presence.
These reports, after all, should be less about what government is doing and more about how people are living.
We will know that Aboriginal people are living better when children go to school, adults go to work and the ordinary law of the land is respected and enforced.
The first Aboriginal member of this parliament, Senator Neville Bonner, once warned his colleagues that history would judge us all.
We shouldn’t have to wait for the judgment of history and, thanks to these Closing the Gap statements, we don’t have to.
A fair go for Aboriginal people is far too important to be put off to the judgment of history.
We have to provide it now – or as soon as we reasonably can.
I am confident of this: amidst all the mistakes, disappointment and uncertain starts, the one failure that has mostly been avoided is lack of goodwill.
Australians are now as proud of our indigenous heritage as we are of all our other traditions.
The challenge is to turn good intentions into better outcomes.
I am confident that, these days at least, for every one step backwards we are also taking two steps forward.
To give just one example: on every ministerial visit to the APY lands, I used to complain that there were just eight police for 3000 people spread over an area the size of Scotland – and that none of them lived in any of the places where they were needed.
Six years later, these are hardly model communities, but every substantial settlement has a permanent police presence – thanks to the good work of the South Australian Labor government – because this was an objective beyond politics.
As Fred Chaney has just said, reflecting on a lifetime of work with Aboriginal people: there is so much left to do but – in this area – these really are the very best of times.
There is probably no aspect of public policy on which there is more unity of purpose and readiness to give others the benefit of the doubt.
On this subject, at least, our parliament is at its best.
Our duty is to make the most of this precious moment.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, I rise to solemnly inform the House, in the presence of family and our military chiefs that the one hundredth Victoria Cross has been awarded to an Australian.
This award is to the late Corporal Cameron Baird, already an iconic figure in our army, who had earlier received the Medal of Gallantry.
As the citation reads, his Victoria Cross is for most conspicuous acts of valour, extreme devotion to duty, an ultimate self-sacrifice at Ghawchak Village in Uruzgan Province, Afghanistan, as a Commando team leader.
Madam Speaker, Corporal Baird was born in Burnie, Tasmania. As a youngster he captained the Victorian Primary School AFL team.
He joined the Army aged 18 and was posted to what’s now the 2nd Commando Regiment.
He served in East Timor, Iraq and Afghanistan.
He was on his fifth Special Forces tour when he was killed in the action for which he was awarded the Victoria Cross.
On the 22nd of June last year, in the first phase of the engagement, Corporal Baird and his team came under heavy fire on three separate occasions from well prepared enemy positions.
In the initial encounter six enemy combatants were killed and weapons caches were captured.
In subsequent encounters Corporal Baird charged enemy positions and neutralised them with grenade and rifle fire.
By drawing fire on himself, repeatedly, he enabled other members of his team to regain the initiative.
In the second phase of the engagement Corporal Baird then lead an assault on an enemy held compound.
On three separate occasions, under heavy fire, he forced the door off a building. Twice he was forced to withdraw, to reload and then to clear his rifle.
For the third time he entered the building drawing again fire away from his comrades who were able to secure the objective.
Tragically, he was killed in this final assault.
Madam Speaker words can hardly do justice to the chaos, confusion and courage that were evident that day.
A comrade who was with him testifies, “I have witnessed many acts of leadership and courage under enemy fire during my operational service. Corporal Baird’s initiative, fearless tenacity and dedication to duty in the face of the enemy were exemplary; an absolute inspiration to the entire team. I was witness to the ultimate sacrifice.”
Another comrade, also with him that day testifies, “I have no doubt that by absolutely disregarding his own safety numerous times in order to assault a heavily armed and fortified enemy position, Corporal Baird’s courage and resolve proved the tipping point. His repeated attempts to attack that room with six insurgents inside was the bravest event that I have ever seen, in my experience, on two tours as a commando.”
Madam Speaker, others must now speak for him because he can no longer speak for himself.
Corporal Baird was the 40th Australian soldier killed in Afghanistan and please God, the last.
We mourn them all.  We grieve with their families.
Today, we grieve with Cameron Baird’s parents Doug and Kaye, his brother Brendan and his nephews Riley and Max. You have lost a son, a brother, an uncle and a country has lost a citizen, a soldier, a hero.
We are all the poorer for his passing, but the richer for his living.
For all of us, this is a bittersweet day.  Bitter because a fine man is gone and cannot be brought back. Sweet because he died for his mates doing what he lived for.
Madam Speaker, what makes some men warriors and others peacemakers is a mystery. A fragrant few can be both. It’s good to have them because warriors and peacemakers will be needed in Afghanistan and wherever else our armed forces might go in the years to come.
Madam Speaker, I salute Corporal Cameron Baird VC MG.
We all salute him and his almost equally remarkable comrades. In this place we don’t face danger so we can hardly claim him as our brother, but we do acclaim him as our hero.
We can hardly imagine what the likes of Corporal Baird and his comrades go through, but we stand in awe of their extraordinary courage, the extraordinary courage of these amazing men that serve our country and keep us safe.
[ends]


Thank you to John and Kym for making myself, Sussan, Barnaby and our team so welcome, and thanks everyone for coming along to talk to us about the impact of drought on you and your communities. 
Now, I accept that this is a very serious problem for country Australia and it doesn’t just affect the farmers; it affects everyone living in the areas which clearly depend upon farming for their whole life and there are so many places in this part of Australia that are absolutely utterly dependant on farming. 
So, this is a matter which Barnaby has been thinking about for several months now. We are going to come up with a decent package to help, probably in the first half of next week. 
We’re going to address two things: first of all, the immediate income problems of people who aren’t making any money because their crops have died and their cattle aren’t saleable, or their sheep aren’t saleable at the moment and if you’re in a drought-stricken property, you can’t leave, you can’t sell, you can’t borrow and you’ve got a real problem so we’re going to deal with that; the other thing we’re going to deal with is the issue of people who have been through very serious drought, more akin to a natural disaster than to an ordinary cyclical event, and their needs to reconstruct. So, they’re the two issues that we are going to deal with and in the first half of next week you can expect some significant announcements from the Government. 
The main point I want to make, though, is that as far as I’m concerned and as far as this Government is concerned, agriculture is at the heart of our country. Agriculture is at the heart of a strong and dynamic Australia. 
We all know that Broken Hill has been going for about 130 years. I ran up to the top of the mound this morning and I looked at the Miners’ Memorial and I thought there’s 800 people who have died in that mine and what an extraordinary sacrifice they’ve made and how important, over the years, Broken Hill has been to the story of our country. But, for all the wealth that’s come out of the Broken Hill Mine, sooner or later that mine will be gone, but the land will be here forever. 
So, the long-term future of our country is every bit as dependent upon agriculture as it is on anything else. 
As long as people live on this planet, there’ll be a need to feed them and the richer we are, the better we will want to eat and live and the more important it will be that we’ve got a dynamic agricultural sector here in Australia. 
When the mines are gone, the coal, the gas and the iron ore, not nearly as important as it is now, our land and our farms will be absolutely vital to our prosperity and the prosperity of the wider world.
So agriculture, one way or another, has a massive future as far as I’m concerned and when I look at you, I don’t see people who are holding on to the past, I see people who are the mainstays of our future. 
So, thanks for everything you do. 
Whenever I come to country Australia, I am uplifted and exhilarated by the spirit that I see and when I talk to country Australians, I don’t see victims, I see fighters; people who are fighting for their families, for their businesses, for their communities, for their future. 
So, thanks so much, John and Kym. I really appreciate the chance to be here. 
[ends] 


Her Excellency, Military Chiefs, Parliamentary colleagues, members of the Baird family, ladies and gentlemen. Last Thursday our Parliament honoured the late Corporal Cameron Baird VC MG and today our nation does.
Victoria Cross has been described as a golden thread linking acts of extraordinary courage and selflessness.
For us, it starts in 1900 with the very first Australian recipient, Captain Neville Howse, who under very heavy crossfire picked up a wounded man and carried him to a place of shelter.
Corporal Cameron Baird, Australia’s 100th Victoria Cross holder, is the latest to join this comradeship of courage.
We will always draw strength from his actions for we are a nation of memory, not just of memorials.
His name will live forever.
For those of us who’ve never worn the Queen’s uniform, the courage and the selflessness of all those who have, is both a challenge and a wonder.
What inspires an 18 year old to leave his friends and family to serve the country in East Timor, Iraq and Afghanistan?
What propels him, under heavy fire, to recover a wounded team member, as Cameron Baird did in 2007 in winning the Medal for Gallantry?
What drives him repeatedly to draw fire on himself to protect his comrades as he did on the 22nd June last year?
What can we say but this? Greater love hath no man than to lay down his life for his friend.
To Doug and Kaye and the Baird family, I say you must be so proud as well as so sad. You helped to make him what he was. You helped him to do what he did. As we are grateful to him, so we are also grateful to you.
[ends]


It is great to be here. I acknowledge Warren, my Indigenous Advisory Council Chairman, Alan Tudge, the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister, Mick Gooda, Social Justice Commissioner and everyone here from Melinda Cilento from Reconciliation Australia. Michael, thank you for the welcome to country, Danny Gilbert, Co-Chair of the Indigenous Advisory Council. Where do we stop? Because this is a terrific cause that we are here to acknowledge and to advance today.
A better deal for indigenous Australians is at the heart of the priorities of my Government just as much as securing our borders, fixing the Budget and building a future for all.
A fair go for Aboriginal people is at the heart of what this Government wants to achieve for our country.
And a fair go for Aboriginal people means a country where kids go to school, where adults go to work, the ordinary law of the land is respected and observed, because these are the indicators of good people, happy people living in tranquil communities.
Going to work is so important. It is so important. Nearly all of us derive a substantial sense of who we are, nearly all of us derive a big part of our identity by what we do every day and this is why it’s important to have meaningful work as a central part of one’s life.
And we’ve still got a long way to go when it comes to ensuring that Indigenous people have comparable employment outcomes to Australians more generally.
We had the Closing the Gap statement in Canberra – in Parliament – last week and a lot of progress has been made in closing some of the gaps. The Indigenous child mortality gap is close to closed, the Indigenous education gap is closing, but unfortunately the life expectancy gap is as great as ever and if anything, the employment gap has possibly gone backwards a little bit.
So things like reconciliation action plans in our great businesses like this bank are very important if we are to do the right thing by all Australians in the years ahead.
Congratulations Cameron on what’s been achieved here at the bank. You have had a Reconciliation Action Plan for just about as long as any business in Australia.
Your plan is acknowledged to be as high a quality a plan as any business’ in Australia and it’s great you’ve gone from under a dozen Indigenous employees back in 2008 to close to two hundred now, but I know you’re not going to stop there.
Two hundred is a lot, but in a bank like this there’s a lot more that can be done, as there is in so many other fields of life, so many other businesses. The Commonwealth Government itself has a long way to go to achieving real justice in this area.
And it is so important that we have more indigenous people working in banks because a bank should not be foreign country to Indigenous people. And as long as it is an alien place to Indigenous people that means that their participation in the economic life of our country is diminished. Their involvement in the real economy of our country is less than it should be.
It’s good that the bank is not only doing what it can to employ more Indigenous people to promote greater Indigenous awareness amongst its own staff. It’s particularly good that the NAB is reaching out to Indigenous people as customers because financial literacy is almost as important as literacy itself in a country such as ours.
Yes, we do not measure our real wealth just in dollar terms. Our real wealth is in our hearts, as well as in our wallets, but nevertheless, nevertheless, it is very important if the real wealth of this country is to grow that Indigenous people are absolutely a part of it.
Finally, could I say thank you to Reconciliation Australia. Reconciliation Australia does great work. Reconciliation is about moving away from them and us; them and us is not the right way to think of this country in any way, shape or form. It’s about us and building a bigger, braver, richer us that’s what reconciliation is all about and it’s great to see it so well and truly aspired to here at the National Australia Bank.
Thank you, Cameron. Thanks everyone.
[ends]


Your Excellency, Consul General, Parliamentary and Council colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. What a marvellous day, what marvellous speeches we’ve heard. I am delighted to be here to officially open this 32nd Greek Festival of Sydney and to pay tribute, not just to the hundreds of thousands of people who have come from Greece to Australia, proud of their heritage and proud of being Australian, but to pay tribute to this country of ours which is almost unimaginable without the life, the times, the passion and the love of the people who have come here from all four corners of the earth and made this country what it is today.
I’m particularly pleased to be here and I’m particularly pleased to acknowledge some of my own colleagues Nick Varvaris – the Member for Barton, Arthur Sinodinos – the Assistant Treasurer. I’m very pleased also to acknowledge today representing His Grace The Archbishop, but my former deputy mayor Jack Passaris once of Marrickville Council; a man who helped me greatly when I was a humble citizen campaigning to get my street upgraded and uplifted. Thank you so much for that, Jack. But isn’t it so typical of the people who’ve come to this country from Greece and around the world that they have mucked in and made the most of their life in this country. They have joined the team, you have joined the team and that’s what makes Australia the country that it is.
While there’s a few hundred thousand of us who have Greek blood in our veins, every single Australia is the inheritor of the glory of Greece. The Consul General reminded us that western civilisation was unimaginable without the great cities of Athens, Rome and Jerusalem and I should add the great names Plato, Aristotle and St Paul – a Hellenised Greek who did so much to spread the values upon which western civilisation is based throughout the world. It was in Athens that the torch of democracy was first held high and that light still illuminates the world. So Australia and every democratic country owes a tremendous debt to the Greek people, the Greek spirit, the Greek ethos. Greek people have been coming to this country for 180 odd years. Australians have been part of the Greek story Thessalonica, at Lemnos; wounded soldiers from Gallipoli were on Lemnos. Then of course the men of the 2nd AIF fought across the mountains of Greece and the mountains of Crete and there’s been successive waves of Greek people coming to this country since that time.
We shouldn’t think that it’s all in the past. Every day we are reminded of the good that decent people do for each other. I was particularly touched, Vic Alhadeff, by your marvellous story which shows that the bonds of love and friendship between people extend all around the world, shows how an act of kindness and magnanimity can reverberate through the ages and bear fruit in the unlikeliest of places.
So ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for the honour and privilege of being here today. I may be the first Prime Minister to have been at the Greek Festival of Sydney in 32 years – I’m sure I won’t be the last.
[ends]


Thanks very much indeed, Heather. It’s great to be here. It really is very good to be here and it is good to be amongst so many very distinguished Australians and amongst so many distinguished Canadians.
I thank you for making the long trip across the Pacific and I thank all of my Australian colleagues for travelling from all parts of our country to be here in Melbourne this evening.
I want to stress that Australia is taking this dialogue extremely seriously.
I am here. The Treasurer, Joe Hockey, is here. Julie Bishop will be an integral part of this dialogue in the next day or so. The Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet is here. The Secretary of the Treasury is here. Various ambassadors and high commissioners are here and captains of industry are here.
We should be here because obviously Canada is taking this extremely seriously as well, because to have the Foreign Minister, the Finance Minister and to have the largest delegation of officials that has ever travelled from Canada to Australia accompanied by so many senior business leaders shows that people on both sides of the Pacific want this relationship to be taken very, very seriously indeed.
I want particularly to acknowledge the Conservative Party of Canada’s President John Walsh and I probably should observe in passing how much we in this country have learnt from you, sir, and how much distinguished leaders in my own Party have appreciated your advice, your council and your friendship over the years.
Given that this is the G20 year for us I want to particularly acknowledge Canada’s Sherpa, Simon Kennedy, and to assure you, Simon, that Heather Smith, our Sherpa, is looking forward to your discussions tomorrow.
So, this is an important gathering. We are taking it very, very seriously indeed.
On a wall in my offices, hangs a painting of a World War One battlefield near Vimy Ridge where Canadian and Australian soldiers had been comrades-in-arms.
In those days, it would have been taken for granted that Canadians and Australians should have gone into action together, as part of the British Empire’s armies in France.
These days, despite a language in common, a shared Westminster parliamentary tradition, and a Queen of Canada who is also the Queen of Australia, we are not so often in each other’s thoughts.
That should change.
With two way investment at over $70 billion – and with Australian companies such as BHP playing an active role in Canada – the commercial relationship is in reasonable shape; but there should be more to our friendship than money.
Although John Howard perceptively described Australians and Canadians as kindred spirits, we haven’t talked to each other as often as we should.
The relationship is strong but under-developed even though we are as like-minded as any two countries can be.
So, I want to make more of this friendship: for our own good and for the good of the wider world.
As the world’s tenth and twelfth largest economies, our two countries carry considerable clout but normally prefer, in Teddy Roosevelt’s words, to talk softly rather than carry a big stick.
That’s why, as nations, we tend to have more friends than critics.
But despite inhabiting a very similar intellectual and cultural space, we are rarely as conscious as we should be of each other’s presence.
In part, this is because Australia and Canada are amongst the happiest and the most tranquil societies on earth.
We have our issues, of course – many of them issues in common:
how do we ensure that our first peoples are not second class citizens in their own country;
how do we best promote sophisticated manufacturing in economies dominated by resources and agriculture;
how much stress, as immigrant societies, should we place on diversity and how much on unity;
how in federation, do you ensure that particular problems can be sheeted properly home to particular levels of government;
and how do we best manage vast wilderness areas consistent with creating jobs and prosperity?
Canada and Australia don’t often figure in each other’s news bulletins because, to give due credit, none of these issues have been disastrously mismanaged.
Our comparative success at managing comparable problems means that we have more to learn from each other, not less.
Australians and Canadians should be more conscious not only of all that we have in common but of all the good that we might do together.
So, my intention is to broaden and deepen the relationship between our two kindred countries.
Just as my office rescued the Vimy Ridge painting from a public service storeroom where it had been languishing until just a couple of months ago!
Later this year, I hope to visit Canada as prime minister.
Scarcely less than Washington or London, Ottawa should be a destination for Australian officials because there are few big issues where we don’t have a similar outlook.
And there are few economic issues here in Australia that Canada hasn’t grappled with too.
Like its distinguished counterparts in the United Kingdom and New Zealand, the Harper Government has cut taxes, fought against cheque-book government, de-regulated the economy and brought a robust common sense to the consideration of international problems.
Like New Zealand, Canada is on track to balance the budget in the coming financial year.
Like the UK, Canada’s economic growth is strengthening.
Unlike those governments, though, but like Australia’s, the Canadian government won an election campaigning against a carbon tax that would kill jobs without helping the environment.
So Australia has much to learn from Canada, especially as this new government prepares its first Budget and begins its year chairing the world’s most important international economic forum.
In Canada, it’s worth noting, the deficit has been all-but-eliminated as much through restraining the growth of spending programmes and through cutting government itself – than through big cuts to existing government programmes.
New Zealand has followed an almost identical path back to surplus.
Like our counterparts in these comparable countries, the Australian government is determined to get the economic fundamentals right.
Because you can’t give what you haven’t got; no country has ever taxed or subsidised its way to prosperity; you don’t solve a problem of debt and deficit with yet more debt and deficit; and profit is not a dirty word because profitable private businesses create jobs and prosperity.
In the marrow of our bones, we understand that you can’t have strong communities without a strong economy to sustain them; and you can’t have a strong economy without profitable private businesses.
Lower taxes, less red tape and higher productivity mean higher economic growth, more jobs, more prosperity and, ultimately, more ability to pay for government services.
But you can’t spend money until you’ve earned it or until you’ve created the means to pay it back.
Governments, no less than families and businesses, have to live within their means.
So, repairing the budget, is an essential element to building a stronger economy.
It is in fact part of keeping faith with the public.
As this Government said pre-election, within three years, Australia will be on track for a sustainable surplus.
As we said pre-election, within a decade – hopefully well within a decade – Australia will again enjoy sustainable surpluses in the order of one per cent of GDP.
That way, debt will be falling and interest repayments can instead be directed to lower taxes, better services and stronger infrastructure.
But we have to get there – and this year’s budget will put us back on the right track.
It will start the process needed to avoid the $123 billion of prospective deficits and the $667 billion of gross debt that this Government inherited.
We will abolish the carbon tax and the mining tax and make the sustainable savings that we committed to before the election.
We will build the infrastructure that we committed to before the election and invest the proceeds of further privatisations in more economic infrastructure that passes cost-benefit tests.
The public sector will be trimmed and new bureaucracies abolished because more government doesn’t create more wealth.
The growth of overseas aid will be substantially reduced because largesse with borrowed money loads up our children with debts they don’t need.
We will keep our pre-election commitments to maintain health spending and school spending but we must reduce the rate of spending growth in the longer term if debt is to be paid off and good schools and hospitals are to be sustainable.
Across every area of government, our duty is to reduce less productive spending in favour of more productive spending so that taxpayers are always receiving the best possible value for their money.
After all, government does not spend a single dollar that it doesn’t take from you in taxes or borrowings.
Governments’ duty to you is to spend your money as responsibly as you would.
Government’s duty is to do all we reasonably can to help all our people to be their best selves; and to maximise everyone’s potential to be economic as well as social and cultural contributors to the life of our country.
That’s why all new spending in this budget will be fully funded, invariably from savings, and will be directed to making our economy more productive and our people more fulfilled through more engagement in the economy.
Let’s face it, the best form of welfare is a job; and keeping people on welfare who could otherwise be active is no lasting favour.
This year, as most of you would know, the world is especially watching Australia because of our role with the G20.
Our objective is to do what we can to promote higher growth, freer trade, better infrastructure, resilient-but-not-entirely-risk-averse financial institutions and less leaky tax systems.
I want to thank Joe Hockey for the magnificent way in which he chaired the Finance Ministers’ meeting in Sydney.
Australia has made a good start to its G20 presidency.
Joe has made crystal clear our focus on a few key areas where each country can make change for the better for its own people and for the wider world.
Soon, each G20 member will submit its national plan for higher economic growth.
We all know that each country is entirely free to choose the plan that suits it best.
But this does amount to a kind of peer-review process for each government’s economic policies.
I’m confident that Australia and Canada will bring a shared perspective to the G20’s talks and we’ll both do what we can to persuade other governments to get taxes down, regulation down and productivity and participation up.
If the G20 is to be more than a talk-fest, at least some countries will need to show that their actions match their words.
As G20 chair, Australia will lead by example.
By the time of the G20 leaders’ meeting in November in Brisbane, the carbon and mining taxes should be gone, the company tax cut should be legislated, the parliament will have dedicated time to repeal and deregulate, and the annual infrastructure statement will have been made.
It’s likely that at least two of the three major free trade agreements that are Australia’s priority would be concluded and that some of the $400 billion in projects that have received environmental approval since the election will be underway.
Australia will be well and truly open for business because the new management team will have well and truly taken charge.
At home and abroad, the Australian Government will say what we mean and do what we say.
We mean to put in place the lower taxes and the smaller government that makes our citizens strong and self-reliant and makes our country more prosperous.
Without over-stating our importance, or exaggerating our success, our aim is to show the world that there is a better way: a clear alternative to the government-knows-best mentality that’s persisted right around the world since the Global Financial Crisis.
In all this, Canada has been a reassuring exemplar of how to improve an economy while also strengthening a society.
Canada and Australia have a history of supporting each other in times of need.
So, we look forward to the support and the solidarity of our Canadian friends as we face the challenges of these times.
My friends it is very good to be here. It was great to be welcomed to these magnificent premises by the Premier of Victoria, my friend Denis Napthine.
It’s good that so many of you are here to deliberate on the problems we have in common, on the opportunities we have in common, on the challenges facing the wider world that would be so better met if we faced them together as comrades.
[ends]


Thanks very much Jeff. Thanks very much Kate Carnell. It is an honour to be here. I acknowledge the presence of very many parliamentary colleagues led by the Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, the Shadow Minister.
I should particularly acknowledge Dr Andrew Southcott who has had a long interest in this area. Dr David Gillespie who has also dealt with this issue as a medical practitioner, as well as more recently as a Member of Parliament.
Yes Jeff, in 2005 as health minister I helped to launch the Rotary Winnebago. We’ve moved up to a bus because the issue has just got bigger as the years have gone by.
At some point in our lives one in five of us will suffer a significant mental health issue. At any one time some 1 million Australians are suffering from depression and in any one year tragically some 2000 Australians will take their lives.
This is a very serious issue and as Jeff said as much as we do, it’s never enough. We are doing more than ever before. I was pleased as health minister to preside over the $2 billion better outcomes in mental health programme initiative taken by the Howard government. I have to say that was largely in response to a lot pressure in our party room, led at the time by Warren Entsch who’s continued to have a very significant interest in this area.
So this really is a community campaign, it is a community campaign to reach out to our fellow Australian in need, to reach out to our fellow human being in trouble and to try to do what we can – as friends, as family, as citizens, as professionals – to do everything we reasonably can to help people through the dark moments in their life.
Dark moments will come – for some, very dark indeed. We need to be aware of them; we need to reach out to them.
Mental health has been the hidden epidemic for so long, but thanks to people like Jeff and Kate and everyone associated with beyondblue, and I notice a couple of board members over there – Professor Michael Kidd and Paul Howes. Thanks to the efforts of beyondblue we are doing better, but we are never going to do enough and the challenge always is to do more and to do better.
So, thank you so much Jeff and it’s my honour – my challenge – to declare this blue bus officially launched.
[ends]


Thank you so much and it is great to see so many people here, early, on a Parliamentary sitting day to demonstrate their concern and to do their bit for awareness of ovarian cancer.
This is a very, very serious disease. It is a very serious killer of women. Let’s not mince our words – this is a cancer that afflicts many, many people.
In any one day about four women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Tragically, far too many of them lose that fight.
All of us must do what we can to try to ensure that we do better in the battle against ovarian cancer.
Government must do more. I am pleased to say that the Government is investing some $80 million in infusions for people with ovarian cancer.
So many Australians have been at ovarian cancer awareness events over this month.
It is great that the month was kicked off with a teal coloured Old Parliament House. It is great that so many people right around our country have been at ovarian cancer awareness breakfasts, morning teas and other events.
My own daughters will be doing something for ovarian cancer this week.
And of course, we are all here today in very significant numbers.
It is good to have the Leader of the Opposition here, Bill Shorten. It’s good to see so many other Parliamentary colleagues here this morning.
Some years ago, Pat Farmer and I walked up and down a very, very tall building to raise money for ovarian cancer. Pat did 100,000 steps up and down Centrepoint Tower. I was only able to manage 50,000 steps myself but every time any one of us does something like attending an event such as this; we are taking a step towards greater awareness, better care and ultimately a cure.
So, I am very pleased to be here this morning, but I am particularly pleased to see so many people from all sides of the Parliament here.
The struggle against disease, the struggle for a healthier society is a bipartisan effort. It unites all of us.
Cancer is no respecter of persons. Cancer doesn’t acknowledge an ideology. Cancer is a killer and we must do everything we can to raise awareness, to help those with it and to find a cure.
[ends]


Julie, thank you so much. It is lovely to be here. It is good to be with so many of my parliamentary colleagues led of course by the Opposition Leader, Bill Shorten, and my Deputy Leader, the Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop.
It is really good to see such a representative cross-section of the Parliament – every Party. Really, this shows that we are all totally committed to trying to ensure genuine and complete equality between men and women.
I have to say that, once upon a time, I may not have felt quite so comfortable addressing a breakfast like this as I do now. As my wife, Margie, quipped some time ago, “what is it that turns an un-reconstructed bloke into a feminist? Three daughters.”
And it is true that my views on policy towards women have changed and evolved in response to watching friends of mine, watching colleagues of mine and in particular looking at my daughters grow up and thinking what would I want for them?
What would I want for these beautiful, intelligent, sensitive girls who have so much going for them and who deserve a world which recognises all of their talents and wants to give them every possible opportunity.
Now, they are growing up in Australia and, regardless of your circumstances, Australia is the best country in the world for everything.
Anyone who is in Australian has won the lottery of life and if you look at our country and the deal that it gives to women; it is obviously pretty good. It wasn’t so long ago as a Sydney-sider that there was a female Lord Mayor, a female Premier, a female Prime Minister, a female Head of State in our Governor General, a female Monarch, obviously, and indeed the richest person in our country was female.
So, this is a nation which has smashed just about every glass ceiling, but we need to do more – we need to do more.
Now, I am not here to give a party-political broadcast this morning but I do want to say to you that I believe a fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme is an idea whose time has come.
I pay tribute to the former government for beginning the process of giving us a fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme.
As you know, the Howard Government, of which I was proudly a minister, introduced the baby bonus. The baby bonus was what you did when you didn’t want to have a paid parental leave scheme and back in my un-reconstructed days I was a strong supporter of the baby bonus. I still am for people who are not in the workforce – for parents who are not in the workforce.
The former government, to its credit, converted the baby bonus into the beginnings of a decent paid parental leave scheme and I think now we need to go further.
Now, it’s always a bit disconcerting when something happens that you don’t expect. It is a little disconcerting when a conservative, when a traditionalist such as myself, comes up with something which is not regarded as a conservative and a traditional position.
It is a bit like when Nixon went to China, conservatives thought, “my God, has he suddenly abandoned the faith?” Progressives thought, “my God, is China no longer a progressive country?” The truth is this was a historic breakthrough. This was one of those moments when people from all sides of politics needed to realise that a watershed had been reached.
So, it is, I like to think, with the Coalition support for a fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme.
Just imagine if a progressive had come up with this idea. The usual suspects would have been cheering and saying about time. But because a conservative has come up with this idea so many people are saying there must be something wrong with it.
Well, I say, don’t oppose it – embrace it. Don’t oppose it – embrace it.
Let’s drop this silly guilt by association and let’s get on with something which is unambiguously good for the women of our country, for the families of our country and for the economy of our country.
The more we can ensure that women are economic as well as social and cultural contributors, the better for everyone.
I celebrate International Women’s Day. I celebrate this month of March which is a month to focus on women and their achievements.
And I say let’s turn good intentions into real action. Let’s get on with a fair dinkum paid parental leave scheme.
Let’s give every woman a chance to combine family and career.
It is good for all of us.
Thank you.
[ends]


It's lovely to be in Adelaide and it's lovely to have such a wonderful South Australian welcome.
It's great to be in the presence of my friend and former colleague, and mentor, Alexander Downer, who has been such a lion of this state and such a lion of our Party for so long.
It's great to see so many of my federal colleagues here today, led by the Leader of the House of Representatives, the Honourable Christopher Pyne, and of course, somewhere in this audience is my favourite South Australian Liberal, the new member for Hindmarsh, Matt Williams.
What enthuses me most of all is to see our Liberal family – to see the broad church, or the big tent of the Liberal Party – here together working for the election of a Liberal Government in the great state of South Australia.
I acknowledge Dean Brown, John Olsen, Steele Hall from different wings of our Party, but all united to give South Australia the government that it so desperately needs.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, my friends, six months ago we had a change of government in Canberra. What we need next weekend is a change of government here in Adelaide.
My friends, what you've seen in Canberra over the last six months, is a Government that understands that our role is to work for the people of Australia.
Our role is to get on with the job of governing and that's what we are doing, we are stopping the boats, we are fixing the Budget, we are building the future where every Australian can expect a fair go and every Australian is encouraged to have a go.
That's what I want to see here in South Australia, a government that is once more encouraging the people of South Australia to be everything that you can be, to achieve everything that you can achieve, and to slip off the shackles of regulation and pessimism and defeatism which have held this great state back for far too long.
My friends, six months ago in Sydney I said that Australia was under new management and open for business, and since then we have had a dramatic change in the way our country is working.
You know, there's been not a single illegal boat arriving on our shores this year.
Since September, we have provided environmental approval for new projects worth some $400 billion.
Since September, we have finally concluded negotiations for a free-trade agreement with South Korea, which will do so much for our agricultural industries in the years and the decades ahead.
Not flashy, not grandiloquent, not boastful, but honest, straight forward, decent Government.
We have been a Government which says what it means and does what it says.
In fact, we have done exactly what we said we would do, and that's what the people of Australia want.
That's what the people of South Australia want - they want a government which is focused on them and not focused on itself.
Ladies and gentlemen, someone said to me as I was on my way down here that for the last four years the South Australian Government had been out to lunch.
I thought that was being rather too kind. I think they have been out to a very long lunch with quite a long dinner and all sorts of things afterwards.
The fact is, it's time for the people of South Australia to have a government they can trust.
It's time, after 12 long years, to make a change.
We all know that four years ago, when Labor had been in power for eight years that the people of South Australia wanted to change.
In fact, they voted to change – 52 per cent of the two-party preferred vote was for a change of government, and it was just some dirty tricks in a few marginal seats and the kind of policy deceit which we have become so familiar with, which kept them in government.
Four years ago, the South Australian Labor Premier stood up and promised 100,000 new jobs.
Well, employment in this state has gone backwards since then.
Do you really want to give this Party, this Party which has so badly let down the people of South Australia, four more years?
Is the current South Australian government so good that it deserves 16 years in office?
Do you really want, as Premier of South Australia, someone who thinks that the carbon tax is a fact of life that just has to be accepted?
Do you really want, as Premier of South Australia, someone who is looking forward to what he calls a carbon constrained future?
Well, I want no restraints on the future of South Australia.
I want the future of South Australia to be unconstrained, or at least to be unconstrained by a very bad State Labor Government.
Now, over the last couple of years I have got to know Steven Marshall pretty well.
I want to say three things about Steven Marshall today.
The first is that he is ready to be the Premier of this great state. I know something about being Opposition Leader, I know something about being a Party Leader and the real test of a successful political leader is keeping the team together. I have got to say, Steven Marshall has done a magnificent job at leading a strong, united and cohesive team.
The second thing I want to say about Steven Marshall is that he has a plan, and let me say that the Marshall plan will do at least as much for this state of South Australia as a different Marshall plan did for post-war Europe.
The final thing I want to say about Steven Marshall is that he and I want to work together for the betterment of this great state.
The people of South Australia don't want a Premier who fights with Canberra, the people of South Australia want a Premier that works with Canberra.
The people of South Australia do not want to see yet another unseemly spectacle of a public brawl between the Premier and the Prime Minister. They want to see adults in government working together to do the right thing by the people of this great state.
I am so looking forward to working with Steven in the months and years ahead, should the people of South Australia give him and us that opportunity.
We have committed already $500 million to the Darlington Upgrade of the North-South Road.
When we did that, the current Premier said, "Oh, don't build that, let's build the Torrens section of the North-South Road."
Well, Steven Marshall, being the sensible, constructive person that he is, said, “let's do both.”
That's exactly right. Let's get this whole road build to freeway standard as quickly as we can and my commitment to you is to work with Steven Marshall to upgrade the North-South Road within a decade.
It's been far too long since we have had a Premier and a Prime Minister ready and willing to work together to give the people of South Australia the infrastructure that they need.
Now, that's what I want to do across the board with Steven Marshall.
I want to unleash the creativity and the productivity and the ingenuity of the people of South Australia, so that once more this can be not the unemployment capital of the mainland states, but the go ahead, dynamic economy capital of mainland states.
I want to make it possible with Steven Marshall to get a new port in our west, to get that great Olympic Dam development once more back on track.
I don't say it can happen overnight, I don't say it is necessarily going to be easy, but it will never happen unless you've got people in government who want it to happen.
That's been the problem.
For the best part of the last 12 years, there has been a government here in Adelaide that could think of a million reasons to say no, but could never think of a reason to say, enthusiastically and unambiguously – yes.
Well, I say yes to the good ideas of South Australia.
I say yes to the people of South Australia.
I say yes to the big future which is waiting for you.
That's what I say and most of all, on this day, I say yes to the person who is carrying our hopes and dreams – not just the hopes and dreams of Liberals, but the hopes and dreams of everyone who thinks that tomorrow can be better than today.
Would you please give a big welcome to the man who we all believe will be the next Premier of South Australia?
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen it is a real honour to be here today, it is an honour to be in the presence of the Governor, the Deputy Premier, the Lord Mayor, Minister Dutton and Minister Cormann, and so many people who have made a magnificent contribution to this building. When I became the Health Minister back in 2003 it was not a position that I’d ever coveted, ever craved, ever asked for, but it was in some ways the most satisfying four years of my public life because the great thing about the health sector is that everyone is in it for the right reasons. They’re not there for money, they’re not there for preference for advancement, they are there because they want to work for the betterment of mankind and you do work for the betterment of mankind – particularly those who are involved in health and medical research.
Almost nothing changes our world like health and medical research. If we think back to our great grandparents’ times they were lucky to live to be 50 or 60. Today we can expect to live to be 80 or 90 and that change, that extraordinary opening of the world to all of us has been a function of advances in health treatment, it’s been due in large measure to the work of health and medical researchers such as the people whose work we honour today, the people who will be housed in this magnificent building behind us.
We here in Australia are very, very good at health and medical research. Howard Florey – the inventor of penicillin – has probably been the Australian who had most impact on the wider world. We’ve had a cavalcade – particularly in recent times – of internationally recognised health and medical researchers. Eight of Australia’s 15 Nobel Prize winners have been in health and medical research and obviously I acknowledge and recognise and honour Professor Barry Marshall here with us today from the University of Western Australia.
It’s very important to this Government, as it’s been very important to all governments that we continue to do what we can in health and medical research. I can assure everyone here today that having been a health minister for medical research, I am determined to be a Prime Minister for medical research in the months and years to come.
It’s a thrill to think that the meeting that I had with Professor Peter Klinken all those years ago has borne fruit in this way. I’m honoured, Peter, to be here with you today on your last day as Director of this Institute, I’m pleased to be with Peter Leedman on his first day as Director of this research Institute. Most of all I want to acknowledge everyone who has made today possible – the professors of course, the researchers of course, but all of the unsung people who have made it possible – the builders, the tradesmen, the craftsmen, everyone connected with Doric Constructions, led by Harry Xydas. They’ve all done such a magnificent job.
It’s nice to have the Hallelujah Chorus over there. Well, may they do their bit to commemorate today, because I am confident that our world, our country, our state will be so much better in the years and decades and centuries to come because of the work that will be done in this building behind us.
[ends]


I’m here to officially open the Liberal campaign for the Western Australian Senate by-election which we are having because of the ineptitude of the Electoral Commission.
I can understand the frustration of Western Australians of having to go to the polls yet again, but this is a chance for the people of Western Australia to vote for a strong team – for a strong team – that will give a fair deal to the people of Western Australia.
We’ve got a strong team and they will vote in the Senate, should they be elected, for a fair deal, a better deal for the people of Western Australia.
That’s what this is all about – voting for people who will be a strong team and will give the people of Western Australia a fair deal in the Senate.
Now, it’s very important – very, very important – that we get rid of anti-Western Australian taxes and the mining tax and the carbon tax are anti-Western Australian taxes.
That’s what they are. They’re anti-Western Australian taxes and they are only there still because the Labor Party and the Greens, voting together as they always do, have voted to keep them.
The question for Labor Party representatives in this state at this time is why are you voting in the Senate to keep the carbon tax and to keep the mining tax even though these are anti-Western Australian taxes?
That question should echo right around this state. Whenever you see a Labor politician – why are you voting to keep on this great state of Western Australia the mining tax and the carbon tax that are so damaging to this state and which are so obviously anti-Western Australian taxes?
So, it really is very simple and very clear cut – if you want a strong team that will do the right thing by Western Australia you have got to vote for the Liberal Party. You have got to vote for Coalition candidates. I have got great Coalition candidates in David Johnston, in Michaelia Cash, in Linda Reynolds and in Slade Brockman. I am very proud of them and we are a strong united team, as the presence of the Finance Minister Mathias Cormann and also Steve Irons the local member for Swan demonstrates today.
So, it is good to be here and it is good to officially open this campaign to do the right thing by the people of Western Australia with this strong team.
Thank you.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
It is excellent to be here at Royal Australian Air Force Base Edinburgh to confirm that the Commonwealth of Australia will be purchasing the Triton unmanned surveillance aircraft. This is a very important purchase that will dramatically add to our surveillance capability in the years and decades to come. It will complement the additional surveillance capability that will be given to us by the Poseidon aircraft whose purchase I announced some weeks ago.
In addition to confirming that Australia will go ahead with the Triton purchase, today I can also confirm that associated with the Triton purchase there will be some $100 million worth of works in and around RAAF Base Edinburgh which will be good for the South Australian economy. I can also confirm that we will be doing an additional $78 million worth of work with British Aerospace BAE, some of which at least will be here in South Australia.
So, while this is fundamentally a defence announcement rather than an economic announcement, nevertheless there are important economic spinoffs for the great state of South Australia and I’m pleased to have my senior South Australian colleague, Christopher Pyne, with us today for this announcement.
I want to stress, particularly to the men and women of the Royal Australian Air Force, who are here with us today, that this is a Government which will give our armed forces the equipment that you need to do your job. You keep us safe. You put your lives on the line for our country. It is important that you receive the support that you need from a grateful nation and a key part of the support that a grateful nation gives its men and women in uniform is the right equipment to do your job, the right equipment to maintain an edge over potential adversaries wherever we find them.
So, this is an important announcement today and I look forward to this new generation of surveillance aircraft that will maintain our effectiveness as a significant military power in our region and in the wider world.
I am delighted to be joined today by the Chief of Air Force who I understand wishes to add to these remarks.
AIR MARSHAL GEOFF BROWN AO:
Prime Minister, I’m absolutely delighted with the decision today to select the Triton as our future unmanned aerial system. Unmanned aerial systems are pivotal to the RAAF’s ability to deliver the air power effects that we need.
It’s interesting from a historical point of view, it isn’t actually the first time that the Air Force has operated remotely piloted air vehicles. In fact, here in South Australia back in 1952 we first flew the Jindivik, but this is a far more sophisticated and capable platform.
The Air Force has identified the need for UAVs in Afghanistan and we’ve operated the Heron there for a number of years. It continues to give great service to the men and women in Afghanistan and the Triton will revolutionise the way that we actually do maritime surveillance in that area. Its sensor sweep and the performance will allow the detection and identification of a large number of surface targets. The combination of the P-8 and Triton will provide a far better maritime patrol and response capability than we have at this time.
The mix of manned and unmanned platforms is really a lot greater than the sum of the parts and will actually support the Royal Australian Navy and its taskforces throughout the region.
In future, in South Australia, you’ll see Tritons and P-8s flying as much as you see the P-3 these days and with that, I’d like to hand over to Ian Irving from Northrop Grumman.
IAN IRVING:
Thanks Geoff, Prime Minister.
Northrop Grumman is really proud to be associated with this announcement today and I’d like to thank the Prime Minister and Chief of Air Force for the opportunity to speak.
The high altitude long endurance unmanned aerial vehicle system that you see behind me in the Tritons is really one of the most exciting innovations of this century. We see this technology as really a perfect fit for Australia. Its ability to cover vast land and maritime areas will be a valuable complement to the P-8 and in its own right is a tremendous and advanced surveillance capability.
But the arrival of this technology in Australia will also have huge implications for other areas, not the least of which is local industry. Australia is a country of innovators and we see the applications of this technology way beyond just defence, into areas of environmental monitoring, humanitarian relief, search and rescue and disaster relief operations.
The AIR 7000 programme will provide opportunities for local industry across a broad area of capability. Under the Future Acquisition programme, we’ll be looking at opportunities for local industry in the supply chain for advanced manufacturing of components, the development of operational ground infrastructure and the establishment of support and maintenance capabilities.
The introduction of the aircraft in to service will provide opportunities for MRO, for aircraft, operational and sustainment workforce requirements and the opportunity for local industry to get involved in block upgrades and capability advancements.
We’re really enthusiastic about helping to build Australian industries’ capabilities and strengths to meet this new need. We’ll be working with universities and innovative companies both here in South Australia and across the nation to identify those opportunities and develop new applications for this exciting technology.
Northrop Grumman is really committed to working with local industry to those ends and we already have relationships with a number of local firms as part of our global supply chain capabilities for our programmes here in Australia and across the globe.
In 2001 when the predecessor to Triton, the RQ-4 Global Hawk, made the Guinness Book of Records by flying autonomously from Edwards Air Force Base to this very location, it was done thanks to a partnership between the RAAF, the United States Air Force, DARPA, the DSTO and also Grumman and since that time Australia has played a very important role in partnership with the United States Navy in bringing this innovation to maturity.
But tomorrow’s innovation really starts with the youth of today and Northrop Grumman is very proud to be working with high school students across Australia as part of the UAV Outback Challenge and by sponsoring and mentoring these bright kids in UAV technologies we’re helping to motivate them and stimulate them to be Australia’s future engineers, scientists and technicians.
We’re very excited to be part of the RAAF’s transformation into the 21st-century air force and we’re looking very much forward to working with the Chief of Air Force, the Department of Defence and the Australian Government to bring this capability to fruition.
[ends]


Admiral Griggs, parliamentary colleagues, members of the armed forces and families of members of the armed forces. When HMAS Melbourne left more than six months ago a different government was in place here in Australia. The government that the ship’s company left behind was proud of them; the government that they come back to today is proud of them.
I want to say to all of you – the families of the ship’s company, the friends of the ship’s company – that we in Canberra are immensely proud of the work that your sons and daughters, your brothers and sisters, your fathers and mothers do. We are incredibly proud of the work you do.
The professionalism, the courage, the dedication is simply extraordinary and I know that lots of people question what government chooses to do with our armed forces, but I don’t believe any Australian today questions the professionalism, the valour, the patriotism and the idealism of the men and women of the armed forces of this country.
As Admiral Griggs has pointed out, the work that has been done on this deployment has been magnificent - some half a tonne of drugs intercepted and destroyed – street value of over $1 billion. That money would’ve funded people who wish to do our country, our way of life, the allies that we have - people who wish to do us harm. That harm will not be done because of the work of the HMAS Melbourne, the ship’s company, its allies and supporters in the Middle Eastern area.
On behalf of my parliamentary colleagues from both sides of the parliament: we admire what you do. We appreciate that just as the men and women who go away are serving our country, those who wait behind are in their own way serving our country, they also serve who only stand and wait. Thank you for the support that you have given to your loved ones while they are serving our country, our values, our world.
[ends]


Madam Speaker,
This is the Government’s first report on red tape and what we’re doing to reduce it.
Next week, the parliament will have its first ever repeal day: to abolish regulation and legislation that’s outlived its usefulness or is doing more harm than good.
Cutting red tape is at the heart of this Government’s mission: to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
Red tape is what officials wrap people in when they think that government knows best.
So, cutting red tape is a sign that this Government and this parliament want Australians, individually and in the community, to have more control over their own lives.
It’s an acknowledgement of the people, our masters.
Next week’s repeal day will scrap more than 9,500 unnecessary or counter-productive regulations and 1,000 redundant acts of Parliament.
More than 50,000 pages will disappear from the statute books.
Removing just these will save individuals and organisations more than $700 million a year, every year.
The first repeal day will abolish the Australian Charities and Not-for-Profits Commission because people serving our community don’t deserve a new level of scrutiny.
It will abolish the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor because all relevant legislation has already been reviewed and the former government ignored all the Monitor’s recommendations.
Redundant acts regulating – for instance – the 1970s conversion from imperial to metric measurement, governing state naval divisions (that became part of the Royal Australian Navy 101 years ago) and facilitating the construction of the Snowy Mountains Scheme (that was completed in 1974) will all go.
As a result of repeal day, films will only need to be classified once – not again and again when they are reissued in DVD, blu-ray or 3D.
As a result of repeal day, businesses won’t have to re-apply to use agricultural chemicals and veterinary medicines because one approval should be enough.
Universities will no longer have to submit capital asset management surveys in addition to other surveys which cover essentially the same thing.
And jobs agencies will no longer be required to keep paper records of every applicant which, in one agency alone, occupied 336 filing cabinets.
Businesses will no longer be required to administer the former government’s paid parental leave scheme, saving them an estimated $48 million.
Associated with repeal day, national businesses will be allowed to operate under one workers’ compensation scheme right around our nation rather than have to operate in up to eight.
Next week’s repeal day will be the first of many.
Under this government, there will be at least two a year – because we will make people’s lives easier, not harder.
It’s worth recalling that the first parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia passed just 513 pages of legislation – that’s just half a page of legislation per day.
That’s worth contrasting with the last parliament, the 43rd, which passed half an Act of Parliament per day.
Between 2007 and 2013, under the former government, some 21,000 new regulations found their way into national life.
No doubt, some of these were good and necessary but some, clearly, were overkill at best.
Why should a long day-care centre with 15 staff and 75 places have to do paperwork said to cost, on average, $140,000 a year – which is $2000 a child or nearly $10,000 a staff member?
The result of this is fewer child care services and higher prices for the ones that exist.
Why should a Sydney café that serves alcohol and has outdoor seating be subject to 21 local, 29 state and 25 Commonwealth regulations or sets of regulations?
That’s 75 different hoops to jump through that mean higher costs for businesses and fewer jobs for Australians.
Why should Australian medical researchers collectively put 500 years of work into preparing grant applications – of which only 20 per cent succeed?
That’s time not put into finding cures for disease.
Likewise, why should every Australian university be required to report more than 50 sets of data to the Commonwealth Department of Education and a further 50 to other government entities.
Because, again, this is time and money that’s not directed to teaching and research.
Of course, government should be confident that standards are maintained and that taxpayers’ money is accounted for but it’s too easy for officials to do their job at others’ expense in the name of safety or accountability.
A reason why bricks and mortar retailing is losing out to on-line sales is the compliance costs that shops face – from planning regulations to product standards.
A reason why our farmers find it hard to compete is that one dollar in every six of their earnings, the NFF says, is spent on compliance.
About 60 per cent of Australian businesses are sole traders and 85 per cent have fewer than five employees.
All too often, the local newsagent, dry cleaner, baker and butcher has to be the accountant, marketer, HR manager and cleaner for the business as well as the chief salesperson.
They are virtually suffocating in red tape and it’s well past time to say “enough”.
On the World Economic Forum’s global competitiveness ranking, Australia has slipped six places in four years, to 21st.
Australia’s ranking on the burden of government regulation, is 128th – yes, 128th in the world – nestled between Romania and Angola.
On The Economist’s productivity growth ranking, we come second last, just ahead of Botswana.
The first instinct of democratic politicians, confronted with a problem, is to promise to make it go away.
Like a fence at the top of a cliff, sometimes regulation is necessary but there’s a limit to what government should do to protect us from ourselves.
More regulation is not the solution to every corporate, community or personal failing.
Sometimes, we just have to accept that mistakes are inevitable and that misfortunes are unavoidable.
When someone in authority gets it wrong, the best outcome might be a timely resignation rather than more regulation.
When it comes to making us act responsibly, good example may be better than more rules.
As Tony Blair has conceded, government can’t guarantee a risk free life.
“Ambiguity, uncertainty, the wisdom that comes with failing and changing your mind”, he says, “are all essential to progress”; because “a risk averse public sector will stifle creativity and deny to many the opportunities to be creative”.
Since day one, this Government has been cutting red tape.
On day one, we began the process of scrapping the carbon tax.
Repealing the carbon tax removes over 1,000 pages of primary and subordinate legislation and removes compliance costs from over 75,000 businesses.
Repealing the carbon tax not only takes a $9 billion handbrake off our economy and gives a $550 bonus to households but will provide a direct red tape saving to business of $85 million a year.
And repealing the mining tax will save businesses more than $10 million in compliance costs.
Fifty-five announced-but-unlegislated tax measures will no longer proceed – including the previous government’s $1.8 billion FBT hit on the car industry, and the cap on self-education expenses that would have hit tradies, nurses and teachers.
Every cabinet submission now has a regulation impact statement so that its potential impact on business, community groups and households can more readily be identified.
All Commonwealth government portfolios now have a dedicated deregulation unit, formed from existing staff, because it’s sometimes more important to repeal old laws than to pass new ones.
Each cabinet minister is expected to consult widely before finalising new policy because the first law of government should be: do no harm.
At the December COAG meeting, all states and territories agreed to create one-stop shops for environmental approvals so that major projects will only need to be assessed once, not twice.
There’s already a one-stop-shop for offshore environmental approvals which the office of best practice regulation estimates will save businesses $120 million a year.
Soon, NH&amp;MRC grants will run for five years – not three – so that successful medical researchers will spend less time filling out forms.
This government is making it easier for people to do business with government by reducing reporting requirements, by using credit cards more and by paying bills on time.
This government has also scrapped the aged care workforce supplement that forced providers to sign up to union-dictated enterprise bargaining agreements.
All these measures demonstrate our seriousness about reducing red tape and making it easier for people to go about their lives.
But this is just the start, not the finish.
Every department and agency is conducting a comprehensive audit of the costs it puts on individuals and entities so that it can put a dollar figure on the cost of compliance and reporting and start reducing it every year.
Every department and agency will be required to contribute towards the $1 billion a year, every year, in red tape cost savings that the government is committed to deliver.
The Productivity Commission is finalising the indicators that will make red tape reduction easier to judge.
Not only will deregulation become a standing item on the COAG agenda but there’ll be less red tape within COAG, with the number of ministerial councils dropping from 22 to eight.
The reviews that the government has in-train – into competition policy, workplace law, and the financial system – all have a deregulatory focus.
The White Papers that the government plans – into tax and into the federation – are both intended to reduce overlap and complexity.
We are carefully considering the former government’s changes to coastal shipping and its changes to trucking rates to ensure that they make doing business easier, not harder.
For too long, governments have acted as if the Australian people work for them.
People don’t work for government; government should work for people.
It’s government’s job to serve the people; not people’s job to serve the government.
In simple terms, we work for you.
And we’re working for you today by creating the biggest bonfire of regulations in our country’s history.
Our mission is not bigger government; it’s bigger citizens with more opportunities.
To the Australian people, I say: this is about saving you money, saving you time, and trusting your common sense to make more choices about your life.
I am proud of the progress that the Government has made to date – but it’s only the start of what is to come.
[ends]


Thank you Mr Acting Deputy Speaker.
Mr Acting Deputy Speaker I wish to update the House with the latest developments in the search for ill-fated flight MH370. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority has advised that objects have been located by a Royal Australian Air Force P3 Orion and I can advise the House that HMAS Success is on scene and is attempting to locate and recover these objects.
The objects were spotted in the search area about 2500 kilometres southwest of Perth at about 2.45pm our time.
The crew on board the Orion reported seeing two objects, the first a grey or green circular object and the second an orange rectangular object. These are separate to the objects reported earlier today by a Chinese search aircraft.
I can advise the House that US Navy Poseidon, a second Royal Australian Air Force Orion and a Japanese Orion are also on route to or in the search area. Planes and ships continue to search the area for any sign of the missing aircraft.
I caution again, Mr Acting Deputy Speaker, that we don’t know whether any of these objects are from MH370. They could be flotsam. Nevertheless we are hopeful that we can recover these objects soon and that they will take us a step closer to resolving this tragic mystery.
This is an extraordinary mystery. An absolutely baffling mystery. But as I’ve said before, Mr Acting Deputy Speaker, let me reiterate to this House we owe it to the families of those on board, we owe it to the loved ones on board, we owe it to all the people who are concerned about the fate of this aircraft to do whatever we reasonably can to find anything that is out there, to test it and to see what we can learn about what so far is one of the great mysteries of our time.
[ends]


Well Peter thank you so much, it’s lovely to be here.
I acknowledge all of the special guests here tonight – you are all very welcome in this Parliament House, this place which aims to represent the best of us and occasionally succeeds.
Amongst my many Parliamentary colleagues I want especially to acknowledge and honour the political impresario of Harmony Day Senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells.
We can say many things about our country but one thing which is absolutely incontrovertible is that this country of ours is an immigrant nation. Our indigenous brothers and sisters aside, every single one of us is a migrant or a descendent of migrants and as time goes by migrants come in ever greater numbers.
We have had 7.5 million people arrive on these shores since the Second World War and 1.2 million arrive on these shores since 2000.
It is at the core of our being and sense of self as Australians that we are an immigrant nation and we should be so proud of the fact that people all around the world look to us as a place that they might choose to live.
We should be so proud of the fact that so many millions of people have voted with their feet for Australia.
Now, I know that sometimes the number of migrants is a little scary to those of us who have been here a little longer. There have been times in my life when I confess to feeling a little apprehensive about the pace of change, but the more you get to know migrants to this country the more you understand how keen they are to become Australian – yes, in their own way and yes at their own pace, but to become Australian as quickly as they can.
They have come here not to change us, but to join us so that, the us, is a greater more diverse and richer us than it was before.

We should celebrate the contribution that migrants have made to Australia and that indeed is the prime purpose of these awards tonight.
There is almost no field of endeavour in this country of ours that hasn’t been enriched and improved by the contribution of migrants.
I wish to take simply one example, one of your awardees this evening. Brought up in one language; educated in another language; as an adult became proficient in English and now makes his living as a master of communication in the various languages in which he is steeped, but in particular our language, our national language, English.
Yes, as Peter pointed out a few moments ago, we haven’t always been at our best. Yes, there have been times in our past and indeed episodes in our present when we have been less than our best selves. But you know even at the time when the Immigration Restriction Act was still spluttering on, we knew what it really meant to be an Australian. We knew of the welcome that was at the heart of being an Australian.
I came across this quote from Sir Robert Menzies: “Once received into our community, a new citizen is entitled to be treated in every way as a fellow-Australian. The strength and history of our people have been founded upon this vital principle”.
So, even at a time when we might have been in some ways at our worst, we were somewhat better than we sometimes think.
So I see tonight as a great celebration of Australia and of Australians. Yes, we are all on a journey, no one on more of a journey, few on as difficult a journey as those who come to this country from very different countries and yet we celebrate this country.
Most of all we celebrate those who have made a great leap of faith in us.
The greatest compliment anyone can pay Australia is to want to be an Australian.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


It’s an honour to address the Asia Society, which has been a leader in promoting the relationships between Australia and the rest of Asia since its establishment in 1997.
This Society understands the importance of trade to improving the understanding between nations. Every time one person freely trades with another, wealth increases; and when wealth increases, countries grow stronger.
Trade is an essential part of building a stronger and more prosperous economy and a safer and more secure Australia. International trade builds the economies of two countries, the seller and the buyer, and makes both of them stronger and more secure.
So, along with getting the Budget under control, scrapping bad taxes and cutting red tape, fostering freer trade is part of the Government’s economic plan. When I said on election night that Australia was once more open for business, I meant business with our trading partners as well as business amongst ourselves.
In a fortnight, I will lead trade missions to Japan, Korea and China. This will be my first official visit to North Asia and it’s happening very early in the new government’s term.
Trade means jobs. It means more and better jobs here in Australia and in the countries we do business with.
Serendipitously, this year marks the 80th anniversary of Australia’s first ever diplomatic mission and the destination was also Asia.
In 1934, the then Lyons Government’s Minister for External Affairs, Sir John Latham, whose picture hangs in the ante-room of the Coalition Party Room in Parliament House, embarked on what he called a ‘Goodwill Mission’ to Asia.
It was Latham who called Asia, and not the Levant, Australia’s “Near East”; just as Sir Robert Menzies subsequently referred to Far East as Australia’s “Near North”.
This week marks my 20th year as a Member of Parliament. In my first speech, back in 1994, I said that there was no limit to what Australia could achieve. It was true then and it’s true now particularly given the economic circumstances of the countries to our north.
The global middle class is projected to grow from 1.8 billion to over 3 billion by 2020 – and most of that growth will occur in Asia.
Asia will generate about half the growth in global output between now and 2030.
There is, of course, no law of nature saying that the Asian middle class must buy the products of Australian manufacturers, must use our services, must study at our colleges, or must visit our tourist destinations.
Just because Asian countries have found Australia a good supplier in the past, doesn’t mean they will inevitably do so in the future.
That’s why this Government is doing everything it can to complete free trade agreements with our top three export markets.
While in Korea, I hope to witness the signing of the Korea-Australia Free Trade Agreement. In Japan, I hope to help finalise the Japan-Australia FTA. In China, I hope to announce substantial progress towards freer trade. This is the trifecta of trade we are working towards.
The Korea-Australia Free Trade Agreement will reduce or eliminate tariffs on key agricultural exports and will open opportunities for innovative service businesses, well suited to compete in President Park’s “Creative Economy”.
We will open the doors – but Australian businesses will still have to walk through in order to maximise the benefits of these arrangements, in the same way that Hastings Fund Management, for instance, an infrastructure fund manager, has opened an office in Seoul and is now in partnership with the Incheon International Airport Corporation.
Free trade agreements mean little without businesses willing to make the most of them. So, accompanying this trip to our three largest trading partners will be a very senior business delegation, indeed.
My visit will also coincide with the inaugural Australia Week in China, to which Trade and Investment Minister Andrew Robb is leading the largest ever overseas business delegation from Australia.
It will involve small, medium and large companies from across our country and across all sectors of our economy – including financial services, food and agribusiness, and manufacturing. I’m pleased to say that it’s likely that all six premiers will also participate.
“Australia Week in China” represents an unprecedented level of focus and partnership with business in this key market – where Australian exports increased by over $2 billion in just the last year.
I want to say that the transformation of China is a watershed in human history. Lifting hundreds of millions of people into the middle class in just a generation is perhaps the most spectacular advance in human welfare ever accomplished.
I congratulate the Chinese Government and people on this remarkable achievement, of which they are justly proud, and am pleased that Australian coal and iron ore has helped to make it possible.
It’s hard to overstate the importance and the strength of Australia’s relationship with China. China is now by far our largest trading partner. In some years, it’s our largest source of immigrants and in most years it’s our largest source of foreign tourists and students.
As liberalisation spreads from the economy into other elements of Chinese life, I am confident that Australia will be a valued friend and strategic partner, as well as a rock-solid-reliable economic partner, to the Chinese people and government.
China’s achievement mirrors Japan’s and Korea’s, some decades earlier – only on a larger scale.
Japan and Korea have been strong democracies as well as powerhouse economic for decades. I honour the Japanese and Korean people, not only for their economic achievements, but for their steadfast commitment to liberal democratic values.
Indeed, Australia’s friendship with Japan has been one of the most mutually beneficial bilateral relationships in global history. Japan has been a key economic partner for almost six decades.
Coal and iron ore were little more than cottage industries focused on domestic production until Japanese demand and investment turned them into global giants. Australia’s post-war prosperity owes more to Japan than to any other country.
Our business people have similar outlooks and our companies thrive in transparent markets.  Australian and Japanese businesses are now working together throughout the region.
For example, Australian architectural consulting firm PTW and engineering consultancy firm Meinhardt have both won contracts to work with Japan’s Tokyu Corporation on the Binh Duong New Town project in Vietnam.  
Japan’s economic resurgence under Prime Minister Abe will be good for Japan, good for Australia and good for the world.
With a combined population of 1.5 billion and a GDP of $15 trillion, China, Japan, and Korea collectively have decisively shifted the world’s centre of economic gravity. For Australia, the tyranny of distance has given way to the advantage of proximity.
Australia sells significantly more to these three markets than it does to the rest of our trading partners put together: from the custom-made Maton guitar that accompanies Japanese singer-songwriter sensation Motohiro Hata, to the nine million Chinese using Baxter’s skin care products, to the cell and tissue cultures manufactured by Serana, which are exported throughout Asia from the company’s new production laboratory in Bunbury, Western Australia. 
There will be new opportunities as President Xi drives China’s transformation into a more market-driven and globally integrated economy; as President Park forges a more creative as well as a highly productive economy; and as Prime Minister Abe pursues market liberalisation to drive economic growth.
It’s telling that on the eve of my trip, Chinese and Japanese aircraft are together searching the southern Indian Ocean under the coordination of the Australian Maritime Safety Authority and Korean aircraft are also on their way.
In the search for flight MH370, the countries of our region have demonstrated an ability to work together in a good cause.
Deep down, what peoples have in common is always more important than anything that divides us.
Certainly, we are all much stronger and more successful working together than working against each other.
Australians are only too well aware that our prosperity depends upon the continued growth and strength of China, Japan and Korea. But for their part, China, Japan and Korea are among each other’s largest trading partners too. Anything that damages any of them, damages all of them.
Obviously, my objective is to strengthen Australia’s ties with all of our friends in North Asia. My predecessor, John Howard, often remarked that Australia did not have to choose between its history and its geography. My message is that making new friends doesn’t mean losing old ones.
This harmony was on display when the US and the Chinese presidents addressed the Commonwealth parliament on successive days in 2003.
And I hope that a Japanese Prime Minister might address our Parliament quite soon.
On issues like counter-terrorism, nuclear non-proliferation, combating piracy, and disaster relief, Australia’s engagement with our North Asian partners is strong but can yet be deepened. I’ll be looking for opportunities to work more effectively together on contemporary challenges such as maritime cooperation, cyber, food and energy security.
Together with our United States ally, I hope to strengthen collective political and security cooperation bilaterally and through regional institutions such as the East Asia Summit.
As Australia and the nations of Asia engage in more trade we will see a reinforcing cycle of investment, growth, innovation and prosperity.
It would be an unspeakable tragedy were this ever to be jeopardised by territorial conflicts based on the shadows of the past.
This year not only sees Australia chairing the G20 but China chairing APEC. I am keen to work together in the cause of freer trade, more efficient markets, more effective regulation, more modern infrastructure and more widely shared prosperity.
It was in fact another Coalition External Affairs Minister, Sir Percy Spender, who said, and I quote: “…our future, Australia’s future, depends to an ever increasing degree upon the political stability of our Asian neighbours, upon the economic wellbeing of Asian people, and upon the development of understanding and friendly relations between Australia and Asia.”
Spender’s insight led to the Colombo Plan, which brought the best and the brightest students from Asia to Australia to study at our universities. Australia has much to teach the world; but much to learn as well, especially from Asia.
Six decades after Spender, the new Australian government is completing the circle by sending Australia’s best and brightest to study at universities in our region. It is our mark of respect for our regional partners.
In Japan, I will launch the first pilot phase of the new two-way Colombo Plan which complements Prime Minister Abe’s ambition to double the number of Japanese students studying abroad.
Of course, for millions of Australians, the countries of Asia are family, through ties of ancestry, marriage and migration. These bonds are to be nurtured as much as the bonds of trade and commerce.
All these bonds rest on decades of strategic stability in our region. Australia’s relationships with Japan, South Korea and with China are not mutually exclusive but complementary.
Australia is strong enough to be a useful partner but not so strong as to be threatening one. We have been involved in many international conflicts but we’ve never started one and, afterwards, have always striven to turn enemies into friends.
That’s one of the reasons why I’m confident that the Asian Century will be Australia’s moment too.
For much of our first century as a nation, Australia’s leaders lamented our isolation from the centres of world affairs. How that has changed. We are not at the wrong end of the world but the right one.
We are in the right place, at the right time, with the right spirit. Australia will work with its partners to seize this moment.
[ends]


I pay tribute to our Governor General, for serving this country with grace, dignity and style.
Your Excellency, you came to the highest office in our land after a long and distinguished career as a legal academic, as the federal sex discrimination commissioner, as the principal of women’s college at Sydney University and as the Governor of Queensland.
Still, you were no stuffy or aloof viceroy. During one of your visits to Afghanistan you met a young soldier who was celebrating his 21st birthday. You leant over, kissed him on the cheek and said, “Happy Birthday, that’s on behalf of your mother.” In a way only a military man could, he smiled and replied, “But Ma’am, I miss my grandmother too.” So, the two kisses that he received made this young soldier’s day as he was serving our nation thousands of kilometres from home.
Your Excellency, you have supported a vast range of good causes and community organisations. Indeed, all of the 318 bodies of which you are Patron have recorded a message for this evening. We are not going to play all of them, but we will play a selection.
Your passion nevertheless has been for the advancement of women, young people and education. On one occasion you invited Girls for Oz – a performing arts group from remote communities – to what they called a “sleep-over” at Admiralty House and the joy was so complete that they promptly danced on the harbour side lawns for the benefit of the passing sailors.
Many years ago, it is said, the then Governor-General Sir William Slim and the then Deputy Prime Minister Sir Arthur Fadden were on a tour in outback Queensland. It was a hot day so they stopped at a pub and were soon talking with a local.
When the Deputy Prime Minister at some stage excused himself the local asked Sir William Slim who exactly was their companion. “Oh,” he said. “That’s Sir Arthur Fadden, Deputy Prime Minister of Australia.”
“Well, blow me down,” said the local to the Governor-General. “What a country we live in. Here is the Deputy Prime Minister having a beer with two ordinary blokes like us.”
Your Excellency, on the only recorded occasion when you have entered a pub you were much better recognised than your predecessor. It was Australia Day 2011 in the Lockyer Valley – a sombre celebration for the survivors of the inland tsunami and the local Mayor said you were “a tower of strength to our community and to me personally.”
For five years you have been with Australia in good times and bad – in our joy and in our grief. On four occasions you have held in your hands the Victoria Cross before presenting it to an Australian hero – in one case to the family of a fallen hero.
When asked what you have most enjoyed about your role you have typically answered, “today, because every day has brought me into contact with wonderful people.”
Well, Your Excellency, Australians may have inspired you but you have certainly inspired us.
Your presence and your example has helped us to come closer to being our best selves.
Last year, particularly, your year of three Prime Ministers, I suspect that Australians may have fixed their gaze on Yarralumla and thought “thank God there is at least one adult left in our system of Government.”
Your Excellency, you have been magnificently supported by Michael, one of our country’s finest architects and the principal design adviser to the Sydney Olympics. But with the family instinct for duty and service, indeed, I understand that on some Vice Regal occasions in Brisbane Michael could be found directing traffic in the uniform of the State Emergency Services.
Your Excellency, you have had a life of exemplary public service.
Your new office at the Queensland University of Technology suggests more teaching and more encouragement for young Australians.
It is typical, entirely typical, that you requested support for the Clontarf Foundation rather than a farewell gift.
Ladies and gentleman, Australia’s first female Governor-General has added mightily to the lustre of this great office.
Dame Quentin Bryce, I salute you.
[ends]


Your Excellencies, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
Whenever she was talking to a group of politicians, Dame Quentin Bryce would observe that Members of Parliament don’t get the credit they deserve for their vocation to public life.
It was typical of her decency that she would dwell on the good in everyone.
But that’s what Governors-General do – they encourage us to be our best selves.
They are our cheerleaders-in-chief. They celebrate all that is good in our community in the hope that we just might live up to it.
Regrettably, it’s often hard to be proud of political leaders grappling with the most contentious issues we face.
Happily, it’s easy to be proud of Governors-General providing leadership beyond politics and appealing to the things that unite us.
Governors-General, like the monarch they represent, are the dignified part of our Constitution.
As Sir Peter Cosgrove and Lady Lynne travel the length and breadth of our country, visiting all the places that aren’t important enough for Prime Ministers, you will affirm these two fundamental Australian characteristics: to give a fair go to others and to have a fair go yourself.
As Governor-General, you will be a Knight for rolling up your sleeves and getting on with things, because that’s what you’ve always done – as a decorated platoon commander in Vietnam; as the clean-up commander after Cyclone Larry in Queensland; and as the commander of the Australian force which turned East Timor from a troubled province into a free country. There was nothing in that for Australia but risk, expense and the danger of antagonising a powerful neighbour, but you made the near impossible achievable.
We all yearn to lose the largely self-imposed shackles on what’s possible for us.
We all want to believe that tomorrow can be better than today.
Every human being wants to be uplifted and inspired and I can think of no better man than Peter Cosgrove to maintain our national morale and to fire our faith in ourselves.
The role of a monarch, said Bagehot, was to be consulted, to encourage and to warn.
I know, Sir Peter, you will approach this work with respect, discretion and judgement and our Government and our country will be the better for it.
Welcome, Sir Peter, 26th Governor-General of Australia – the latest in a long and distinguished line.
You will help to lead us into our future.
[ends]


Thank you so much for making me so welcome.
This is my first ever visit to a submarine. These are an extremely potent unit of the Royal Australian Navy and I appreciate that I am with elite members of our Navy in being here with you.
Obviously it’s a different world down here to the world on a surface ship. It would require extraordinary levels of discipline and mental toughness and I am full of admiration for the professionalism of all our military personnel, but I am particularly full of admiration for the professionalism and mental toughness of our submariners.
So, it’s great to be here. I very much appreciate the work you do. I understand just what a sophisticated piece of equipment this is. I appreciate the extraordinary levels of interoperability that we have with our principal ally because of the equipment on this boat and as I said, I realise just what an amazing capability this gives us thanks to your work and your professionalism.
So thank you so much. I’m looking forward to spending a bit of time talking to you. I’m also looking forward to spending a bit of time talking to Admiral Griggs and the team about various submarine related issues. But I’ve got to say, just looking around now; it sure is a different world.
[ends]


Team, it’s great to be here in Perth.
This is obviously an important week for us because it’s the week where we have the West Australian Senate by-election.
It’s good to be in Perth because this is a Government which is doing the right thing by the people of Western Australia. We’ve got record roads funding, we’ve got record school funding and of course every day we are working to repeal the mining tax and the carbon tax which are anti-Western Australian taxes, and every day we are working to repeal these anti-Western Australian taxes, the Labor Party is trying to keep them there.
They say one thing in Perth but they do the opposite in Canberra.
In Perth, they say they’re scrapping the carbon tax. In Canberra, they vote to keep it.
So, we are the people who are being fair dinkum with the voters of Western Australia.
The interesting this is that not only does Labor want to keep the carbon tax, it actually wants to increase the carbon tax because if they’re going to raise the emissions reduction target from 5 per cent to 15 per cent, obviously they’re going to need an even bigger carbon tax to try to achieve that reduction.
So, Labor’s plan is not just to keep the carbon tax, but to increase it.
That’s why it’s so important that we get a strong Senate full of Senators who will stand up for the people and against the Greens; full of Senators from Western Australia who will stand up for this great state.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER ABBOTT:
Ladies and gentleman, it is a real honour for me to be here again for the second time in four days to thank all of the personnel from many countries for the work that is being done in searching for and recovering ill-fated flight MH370.
This is a remarkable international cooperation – a truly remarkable international cooperation.
It’s great to be here with my friend and colleague Prime Minister Najib Razak of Malaysia, but it’s really good to be here with the service personnel of Australia, of Malaysia, of China, of Japan, of Korea, of the United States and of New Zealand.
To have the military forces of so many countries working together for our common humanity shows what we can do. It shows what we can do and if anyone would ever be unhappy or distraught about the prospects for international peace and harmony this operation is a marvellous antidote to pessimism – a marvellous antidote to pessimism.
So thank you for your commitment. Thank you for professionalism. Thank you for your idealism.
I am confident that everything that possibly can be done to find this aircraft will be done. We cannot be certain of success, but we can be certain of the professionalism and the effort that will be brought to the task.
Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER NAJIB:
Prime Minister Tony Abbott, Ministers, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here at the Royal Australian Air Force Base in Pearce to personally thank everyone involved in this gigantean task to find missing MH370.
When Prime Minister Tony Abbott called me a few days ago I was both relieved and thankful that Australia is willing to be very forthcoming to step up and offer their assistance to locate the missing aircraft. As the saying goes – a friend in need is a friend indeed. So Australia has proven to be a very reliable and a true friend to Malaysia. So thank you very much Prime Minister Abbott.
I am also delighted that Prime Minister Abbott has appointed Air Marshal Angus Houston, whom I know personally – a man of great experience and skill – and I’m confident that he’s providing the true professional leadership of this Joint Action Coordination Centre which requires true coordination among so many personnel from many countries, as well as other agencies involved in this search operation.
I would also like to thank all the countries involved. It was a very heart-warming experience to be introduced to the leaders of the various countries – from China, from the United States, from New Zealand, from Japan from the Republic of Korea, from New Zealand and of course from both Australia and Malaysia.
Indeed this is probably the largest mission put together by so many countries to locate an aircraft and your commitment is very, very much appreciated by Malaysia and by the world.
We owe it to the grieving families to give them comfort and closure to this rather tragic event and the world expects us to do our level best and I’m very confident that you will indeed show what we can do together as a group of nations that we want to find answers. We want to provide comfort to the families and we will not rest until answers are indeed found.
I’m very confident with the level of professionalism shown as alluded to by Prime Minister Abbott that indeed in due time we will provide a closure to this event, or this tragedy.
So once again, thank you very much to all of you. I know it is a daunting task to go out there in very inclement weather, in very challenging circumstances. Malaysia is indeed grateful for your courage and for your commitment.
And above all, I’d like to thank Prime Minister Abbott once again and the Australian Government for your steadfast commitment to the search mission and together let us work hand-in-hand to provide answers in what is probably the biggest mystery in aviation history thus far.
Thank you once again.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, Parliamentary colleagues, it is great to be here today to officially open this splendid new terminal building.
In the 19th-century it was the grandeur of railway terminals which spoke of the confidence and pride of the city or the country where you were. Today it is the grandeur of the airport terminals which speaks of the pride and confidence of the city or the country where you are and this is truly a proud and beautiful terminal.
I can remember flying into Canberra back in the 1960s. It was a small airport with an almost non-existent terminal and I can remember that white Meccano terminal that was built in the ‘80s and I thought that was the last word in opulence and luxury, but thank God it’s gone to be replaced by this truly magnificent building – a truly magnificent terminal that is part of an airport which is not just a place to board a plane but which has become an epicentre of the economy here in the Australian Capital Territory.
I do want to thank Terry Snow and the Snow family for what’s been done here. $2 billion has been invested since the Snow family took over this site, including almost half a billion dollars on this particular terminal. The airport precinct is a vital and dynamic part of the entire ACT economy, adding, as I understand it, some 12,000 jobs and contributing $1.3 billion to the local economy and that’s now, but shortly it’s thought that the contribution to the economy and the contribution to employment will double. This is not just an airport, this is a precinct, this is an industrial park, this is a technology park, this is a very dynamic part of the local economy.
I do want to say what a pleasure it is to be in this building – what a delight it is to arrive here, or to walk through here, because this is a building which is not just functional but truly beautiful. Whether it be the water sculptures outside, whether it be this splendid piece that we stand beside now, whether it be the sense of style and spaciousness that we have all around us, this is a credit to everyone associated with it and it is a monument not just to the great city of Canberra, our national capital, but it is a monument to the determination, the courage and the vision of the Snow family and in particular, you Terry. So, thank you so much. It’s an honour to be associated with this on this important day.
[ends]


I will be in Japan, Korea and China. In all three countries I will be taking with me a delegation of very senior business leaders but in China I will be joined by the Trade and Investment Minister Andrew Robb who will, himself, be leading to Australia Week in China a delegation of over 700 business people from every part of the Australian business community.
What we need to understand is that trade means jobs. The wealth and the prosperity of our country – the growth and the future of our country – depends upon more and freer trade. That is what this trip really is all about – it is about more and freer trade because trade means jobs.
I should also say a word about the Western Australian Senate election today.
The only reason that the carbon tax and the mining tax are still in place is because Labor and the Greens are blocking the repeal legislation in the Senate.
If you want to get rid of these anti-Western Australian taxes, today, you have got to vote for candidates who are absolutely committed, unambiguously committed, to getting rid of these anti-Western Australian taxes and that means voting Liberal.
Send a strong message to Canberra. Send a strong message to the Labor Party – you can’t say one thing in Perth and do the opposite in Canberra.
That’s my plea.
This election in Western Australia does matter. It is important for your future. It is important for the future of our country.
[ends]


Just before leaving for North Asia, I went to Pearce airbase near Perth to thank the international team that’s been searching almost three weeks for missing Malaysian Airlines Flight MH370.
This is one of the great mysteries of our time. It is probably the most difficult search in human history. Amidst tragedy, though, there is hope: the main countries of North Asia – Japan, China and Korea – have joined Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, the United States and the United Kingdom in scouring the remote ocean looking for clues that might help solve this riddle.
I thank the people and the government of Japan for the help that they are giving to Australia as we lead this search and recovery effort. I thank all the countries involved but especially the countries of North Asia for working together in the cause of our common humanity.
We owe it to the families of the 239 people on board; we owe it to an anxious world wondering how a modern aircraft can simply vanish; not to rest until we have done all that technology, human ingenuity and hard work can achieve.
The knowledge that aviators from Japan, China and Korea are planning missions together and flying daily search grids together – along with pilots from Australia and the US – should be an antidote to the strategic pessimism that sometimes clouds consideration of our region’s future.
As the search for Flight MH370 abundantly demonstrates, we can achieve so much more together than apart. Our futures are inextricably linked. The countries of the Asia-Pacific will advance together or we won’t advance at all.
Over the past few decades, the countries of North Asia have achieved an economic transformation unparalleled in history. Japan has arisen from the ashes of war to become one of the world’s most prosperous societies. Korea has moved from the third world to the first in less than half a century. And China has emerged from war and foreign intervention to shift hundreds of millions of people into the middle class and once more to become the world’s largest economy.
History has many lessons but there are few more instructive or uplifting than Japan’s emergence from war to become a liberal democracy and a model international citizen; Korea’s emergence from dictatorship to become a beacon of democratic prosperity to its oppressed brothers and sisters in the north;  China’s emergence from a century of turmoil again to take its place as one of the world’s leading nations; and also the United States’ generosity to former adversaries and preparedness, for the good of the wider world, to engage with countries that have quite different systems.
History is important. It shapes how we think and feel. The past should guide and inform our actions, provided we learn the best lessons of history, not the worst. Lord Palmerston was only partly right when he said that England had no permanent friends or enemies; just permanent interests. It is, in fact, the permanent interest of every country to have more friends and fewer foes.
So, there are many challenges ahead for all the countries of the Asia-Pacific region. Strength and success brings responsibilities as well as opportunities but the rest of the world expects us to grow together, not apart, and it’s our collective duty not to let them down.
The world is looking to our region to drive global prosperity. World-wide, the middle class is projected to grow from 1.8 billion to over 3 billion in the next decade – with most of that growth occurring in Asia. Asia, mostly North Asia, is expected to generate about half the growth in global output between now and 2030.
History, we know, has too many examples of countries that put pride before long-term interest; but, luckily for a world which has benefitted enormously from its rise, the countries of North Asia have grown accustomed to choose cooperation over confrontation.
When I was young, there were ex-soldiers’ clubs in Australia that wouldn’t let Toyotas into their car parks because of bitter memories. Even then, statesmen in both our countries were looking forward, not backwards. The 1957 Japan-Australia trade treaty which Prime Minister Menzies and Trade Minister McEwen negotiated with Prime Minister Abe’s grandfather was the foundation of the coal, iron ore and, later on, gas exports that have helped to make both our countries rich.
I am confident that the long awaited free trade or economic partnership agreement between Japan and Australia will shortly be finalised. I am confident that this will be seen as a milestone in our relationship and a testament to far-sighted governments the way we now see the 1957 agreement.
It will allow both of us to develop further the industries that are our nations’ strengths. More affordable Japanese consumer products will be good for Australian families. More affordable Australian food will be good for Japanese families. More trade will make both countries richer and our relationship even stronger.
Australia is hoping to import more sophisticated manufactures from Japan. We are hoping to export more high quality food and services to Japan. We are looking to collaborate more with Japan on major projects, in third countries too, and we’re confident that Japan, also, wants to build and deepen an already very strong and stable friendship.
Inevitably, freer trade brings domestic adjustment issues and uncertainties as some industries grow faster than others. Still, the availability of the best possible product at the best possible price ultimately makes all countries richer; and the richer a country is, the better it can cope with change.
Even in the short term, more trade means more jobs. In the long term, more trade means better jobs for everyone because more people work in world-class industries. And it doesn’t stop there. More trade means more friends.
We trade with people whose products we respect and whose word we can rely on. No one buys inadequate products for long, regardless of price; and no one does repeated deals with people who promise but who don’t deliver.
Each of the businesses represented on the senior trade delegation that’s with me on this trip appreciates that it’s impossible to make a profit without providing a worthwhile product or service. Their focus is on what they can do for their customer because that’s the foundation of whatever they might make for themselves.
In this way, trade doesn’t just build wealth; trade builds trust. A long-standing commercial relationship depends upon the respect that the buyer has for the seller and vice versa. People might initially be brought together by self-interest but they stay together through the friendship that these shared endeavours bring.
Through shared endeavours and through shared experiences comes the realisation that there are shared values too. It’s hardly surprising that Australia’s friendship with Japan has grown as our trade has increased; and that this friendship has broadened from trade into increasingly close partnership in a whole range of areas from science to defence.
I welcome Prime Minister Abe’s determination to remove entrenched impediments to economic growth. Like Australia’s new government, the Japanese government is determined to be “open for business”. Part of this restructuring, here in Japan as in Australia, is maximising workforce participation, especially female participation.
My government, in Australia, is determined to make it easier to do business: by eliminating the carbon tax and the mining tax; by cutting red tape; by establishing a one-stop shop for environmental approvals; by restoring the rule of law on major construction sites; by saying what we mean and doing what we say; and by getting the budget back under control because fixing the budget is a big step towards fixing the economy.
Under the new government, environmental approvals have already been given to projects worth $400 billion and every major foreign investment application, bar one, has been approved. 
I also welcome Japan’s growing contribution to regional and global security and acknowledge Australia and Japan’s joint efforts to help bring peace to Cambodia, East Timor and Iraq.
As the countries of North Asia grow economically stronger, quite properly, they will be militarily stronger too. As countries grow stronger, it’s more important than ever that disputes be resolved peacefully and in accordance with international law because the alternative should be unthinkable.
Today, the countries of North Asia are not only Australia’s largest trading partners – with 55 per cent of our total two way trade – but are also among each other’s largest trading partners. Trade between Japan, China and Korea has certainly helped mutual prosperity and it should ultimately help mutual understanding as hundreds of thousands of businesses and tens of millions of people appreciate how much they need each other in order to succeed.
With a combined population of 1.5 billion and a GDP of $15 trillion, Japan, China and Korea have decisively shifted the world’s centre of economic gravity. For North Asia, the challenges of weakness and war have given way to the challenges of strength and success. Self-evidently, these are better challenges to have!
For Australia, the tyranny of distance has given way to the advantage of proximity.
My predecessor John Howard famously said of an Australia supposedly torn between Europe and Asia that “we do not need to choose between our history and our geography”. My own response to those urging Australia to choose between our economic and our security interests, is that you don’t make new friends by losing old ones; and you don’t make one friendship stronger by weakening another.
The best response to those who fear that North Asia is doomed to a cold peace or worse is that more trade means more understanding and more understanding means less tension.
Trade, however, is not enough.
I am here in North Asia early in the term of a new government to boost trade, certainly; but, above all, to build friendships. Friends, after all, don’t visit each other because they need to but because they want to.
Of course, Australia is interested in the economic benefits of closer relationships with the countries of North Asia but these relationships now involve so much more than trade. That’s why, as well as business leaders, my delegation includes cultural and educational leaders too.
A few years before Prime Ministers Menzies and Kishi concluded the first Japan-Australia trade treaty, another Australian statesman had launched the Colombo Plan to bring to Australian universities the brightest students of our region.
Sir Percy Spender said at that time: “Our future depends, to an ever increasing degree, upon the political stability of our Asian neighbours; upon the economic wellbeing of Asian people; and upon the development of understanding and friendly relations between Australia and Asia.”
Australia has much to offer the world; but much to learn as well, especially from Asia. Six decades later, the new Australian government is completing the circle by sending Australia’s best and brightest to study at universities in our region.
Here in Japan, I will launch the first pilot phase of the new two-way Colombo Plan which complements Prime Minister Abe’s ambition to double the number of Japanese students studying abroad.
Of course, for millions of Australians, the countries of Asia are family, through the ties of ancestry, marriage and migration. These bonds, too, are to be nurtured just as much as the bonds of trade, commerce, culture and strategic cooperation.
No less than the peoples of North Asia, Australians are conscious of our country’s history and steeped in the values and traditions that have shaped us. Still, my presence here, so early in my prime ministership and prior to any travel beyond our region, is a deliberate statement of my government’s priorities.
Australia has well and truly put behind us any yearning to count for more in Europe that might once have seemed the centre of world affairs. We are not in the wrong region but in the right one.
I am determined that the Asian Century will be Australia’s moment too. We are in the right place, at the right time, with the right spirit and will strive to make the most of all the advantages we have.
[ends]


It’s an honour to address this Boao Forum, which now rivals Europe’s long-running Davos Forum, and which does so much to showcase the Asia-Pacific region.
I am pleased to be the fourth Australian prime minister to attend, and will be a regular participant in the future.
On this trip to China, I am accompanied by the foreign minister, the trade minister, five state premiers, one chief minister, and 30 of my country’s most senior chairmen and CEOs.
It’s one of the most important delegations ever to leave Australia.
What better way could there be to demonstrate that Australia is open for business: than to visit all three of our largest export partners on the one trip, culminating with the biggest one?
And to conclude free trade negotiations with Japan; sign the free trade agreement with Korea; and, perhaps most hopeful of all, accelerate free trade talks with China?
With a collective GDP of $15 trillion and a combined population of more than 1.5 billion in North Asia alone, the world’s economic and geo-political centre of gravity has decisively shifted towards our region.
The rise from the ashes of war to economic leadership by Japan, by Korea; and by China – most spectacularly of all – has been a transformation unparalleled in human history.
The rest of the world is rightly in awe of the way these countries have lifted hundreds of millions of people into the middle class in just a generation.
This is the greatest and the quickest advance in human welfare of all time.
It’s happened because governments have allowed individuals and families to take more control of their own futures.
It’s been a practical acknowledgement of the inherent capability of every human being.
I am proud that Australian coal, iron ore, gas and services exports have helped to drive this prosperity.
Australia has the natural and human endowments to give the countries of our region the resource security, the food security and the energy security that all seek.
Australia has the capacity and the reliability to be the energy supplier and the food supplier to our region.
After all, Australia is the number one global exporter of coal, iron ore and beef.
We are the world’s fourth largest exporter of gas.
Australia is fifth in the number of universities in the world’s top 100, and hosts the fourth highest number of international students.
On a GDP basis, we have the world’s 12th largest economy, the world’s fifth highest standard of living and the world’s 5th most traded currency.
And we have first class military forces that regularly operate with the world’s best.
Australia is strong enough to be a valuable partner, but not a dominant one.
Last week, I twice visited the Pearce airbase near Perth to thank the aviators searching for the missing flight MH370.
I particularly thanked the airmen from China, Japan and Korea – who are planning and executing missions together – along with their counterparts from Malaysia, New Zealand, Australia and the United States.
This cooperation in a good cause is a powerful antidote to the strategic pessimism that sometimes clouds discussions of our region’s future.
It is yet another demonstration that the countries of our region can achieve so much more together than apart.
Indeed, the comparison of our region’s pre-war and post-war history abundantly demonstrates that we will all advance together – or we won’t advance at all.
Australia’s preference is always to look forwards rather than backwards; to win friends rather than to find fault; to be helpful, not difficult.
Team Australia is here in China to help build the Asian Century.
China, after all, has taken to heart Deng Xiaoping’s advice that “to get rich is glorious”.
And China should be richer still, thanks to Premier Li’s reforms.
To be rich is indeed glorious – but to be a true friend is sublime.
Australia is not in China to do a deal, but to be a friend.
We don’t just visit because we need to, but because we want to.
Our region and our world need peace and understanding based on international law and mutual respect.
Participation in this Forum has helped to build Australia’s strategic partnership with China which has much to offer each country and our region.
[ends]


In the days before leaving Australia, I twice went to Pearce airbase near Perth to thank the international team that’s been searching almost four weeks for missing Malaysian Airlines Flight MH370.
This is one of the great mysteries of our time.
It is probably the most difficult search in human history.
Amidst tragedy, though, there is hope: the main countries of North Asia – China, Japan and Korea – have joined Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, the United States and the United Kingdom in scouring the remote ocean looking for the wreckage that could help solve this riddle.
I thank the government and the people of China for the help that they have given to Australia as we lead this search and recovery effort.
China was the first country to despatch vessels once the search moved to the Indian Ocean.
I look forward to providing President Xi with the latest update on the search when I meet him in Beijing this afternoon.
We are confident that we know the position of the black box flight recorder to within some kilometres.
Still, confidence in the approximate position of the black box is not the same as recovering wreckage from almost four and a half kilometres beneath the sea or finally determining all that happened on that flight.
I grieve with all the bereaved, especially the friends and family of the 154 Chinese victims, and offer them the assurance that Australia will not rest until we have done everything we can to provide comfort and closure.
You will be among sorrowing friends should you choose to come to Australia.
Of the six Australian citizens on that flight, two – Naijun Gu and Yuan Li – were residents of Beijing.
Almost a million Australians now have Chinese ancestry and Mandarin is Australia’s biggest minority language.
Australia’s relationship with China is different from that with the United States, the United Kingdom or even Japan – yet it is of incalculable importance.
It has deeper roots than most people think.
There were thousands of Chinese gold diggers who never went back. Trooper Yin Gan was one of the first Australians to land at Gallipoli.
Senator Thomas Backhap served in the Federation parliaments.
I’m proud that the first Chinese-born member of an Australian parliament and the first Chinese-born member of the Commonwealth parliament happened to be members of my own political party.
Everyone knows that China is by far Australia’s largest trading partner.
Not everyone realises that China is also our largest source of immigrants in most years, our largest source of overseas students and our largest source of international tourists.
Few are aware that total Chinese investment in Australia, at about $60 billion, is only a little less than total Chinese investment in the United States.
Far more than trade, investment in another country is a sign of trust.
You don’t put your hard-earned cash into another country unless you are absolutely certain that your investment will be respected, that you are likely to make a reliable profit and that you will be able to repatriate the money.
The fact that China has invested almost as much in our economy, as it has in an economy ten times our size, is a sign of trust in Australia.
Australia’s investment of about $40 billion in China, with a very different legal and political system, is much more than just a bet on the world’s coming economic superpower.
It’s proof of our trust in China.
The purpose of this trip is to seal that mutual trust and to establish further mechanisms that will deepen our strong strategic partnership.
That’s why Team Australia is here, for the inaugural Australia Week in China.
I am accompanied today by no fewer than two ministers, five state premiers and a chief minister – as well as Chairmen and CEOs representing over half the value of our stock exchange.
It’s the most high-powered delegation ever to leave Australia.
It’s more than we have ever done with any other country.
When I say that Australia is “Open for Business”, I meant it.
Finalising, on this trip, free trade negotiations with Japan and signing an agreement with Korea, makes concluding the China-Australia FTA more imperative than ever – for both sides.
Soon, officials will begin the 20th – yes 20th – round of negotiations since Prime Minister Howard proposed an FTA way back in 2005.
I welcome Premier Li’s commitment to accelerate these talks and hope that they might be concluded by the time President Xi visits Australia in November.
Australia hopes for much more Chinese investment – on the same basis that we welcome investment from our other FTA partners such as the United States.
We now appreciate that most Chinese state-owned enterprises have a highly commercial culture.
They’re not the nationalised industries that we used to have in Australia.
That’s why Australia has never rejected any investment application from a Chinese SOE and recently approved a large SOE investment in critical infrastructure.
Australia and China have complementary strengths.
Australia is already the world’s number one exporter of coal, iron ore and beef.
We will soon be the world’s number one exporter of natural gas.
This means that Australia can offer China (and the other big economies of North Asia) the resource security, the energy security and the food security that all seek.
It’s hardly surprising that Australia’s friendship with China has grown as our trade has increased; and that this friendship has broadened from trade, into more extensive ties in a whole range of areas from education to science to defence.
Even in the short term, more trade means more jobs.
In the long term, more trade means better jobs for everyone because more people work in world-class industries.
But it doesn’t stop there. More trade means better friendships.
From next year, China has agreed to take hundreds of Australian government-funded students under the New Colombo Plan.
For decades, some of the best and brightest students of our region have come to Australia to study – but there was very little return traffic.
We do have much to offer; but we have much to learn as well.
The New Colombo Plan is our way to honour the cultures of Asia.
As well, Australia has agreed to renew funding for the Australia-China Science and Research Fund.
We’re expanding the approved destination status scheme to help more Chinese tourists come to Australia.
And we’re working towards making Sydney an offshore R.M.B. centre.
Along with the Senior Business Leaders’ Forum, there’s now a new High-Level Dialogue, which former Treasurer Peter Costello chairs for Australia.
This aims to do for us and for China what the long-established Leadership Dialogue has done for us and the United States.
It’s my hope, following Military Commission Vice-Chairman, General Fan’s visit this year, that Australia and China might expand our defence contacts to officer exchanges and more participation in exercises, including trilateral ones.
The co-operation, right now, of pilots from China, Japan and Korea – alongside those of Australia and the United States – shows that we can achieve far more together than apart.
It’s a good antidote to the strategic pessimism that sometimes clouds consideration of our region’s future.
This region, after all, has been a marvel to the whole world.
Over the past few decades, the countries of North Asia have achieved an economic transformation unparalleled in human history.
Japan has arisen from the ashes of defeat to become one of the world’s most prosperous democracies.
Korea has moved from the third world to the first in less than half a century.
Most extraordinarily of all, China has emerged from war and internal turmoil to shift hundreds of millions of people into the middle class.
This is the greatest advance in human welfare of all time.
Putting all this at risk should be unthinkable.
That’s why it’s more important than ever that disputes in our region be resolved peacefully and in accordance with international law.
We will all advance together – or we won’t advance at all.
Luckily for the world, all the countries of North Asia have grown accustomed to choose cooperation over confrontation.
My predecessor John Howard once said of an Australia supposedly torn between Europe and Asia that “we do not need to choose between our history and our geography”.
My own response to those urging Australia to choose between our economic and our security interests, is that you don’t make new friends by losing old ones; and you don’t make some friendships stronger by weakening others.
My presence here, so early in my prime ministership and prior to any travel beyond our region, is a deliberate statement of my government’s priorities.
I am determined that the Asian Century will be Australia’s moment too.
We are in the right place, at the right time, with the right spirit and will strive to make the most of all the advantages we have.
[ends]


Every nation has a story and every nation has its story tellers. What actually happened matters but so, too, does how it is perceived. A nation, after all, is shaped by its historians and well as by its history.
World War I was the crucible in which the Australian identity was first forged and CEW Bean is the person who first and best told us what it meant.
In 1901, six British colonies had formed the Commonwealth of Australia.  We had a parliament and a flag but no real sense of nationhood because our story, up till then, was that of New South Wales, of Victoria, of the other colonies and of the wider British Empire.
In Bean’s words, when our soldiers sailed for war, they left “a nation that did not yet know itself”.
For those who lived through it, the Great War blotted out everything that had come before.
From an Australian population of just under five million, 417,000 enlisted; 332,000 served overseas; 152,000 were wounded; and 61,000 never came home.
Of men aged 18 to 42, almost one in two enlisted and, and of those who served overseas, almost one in five were killed in action. Of the 270,000 who returned, more than half were wounded. We cannot imagine how many were psychologically scarred.
Other countries suffered no less grievously which is why the Great War still casts a long shadow.
But this was our “baptism of fire”. For us, it’s akin to what the War of Independence was to America. It’s when we were first put to the test and not found wanting. 
Charles Bean went ashore at Gallipoli on April the 25th 1915. He had complete freedom of the front, reported the war continuously though all four years and carried a Turkish bullet in his thigh for the rest of his life.
He then dedicated the next 30 years to writing and editing the monumental Official History and to establishing the Australian War Memorial dedicated to the memory, and commemorating the character of all who’d served to build up the nation for which they’d given their lives.
The War Memorial is more than a shrine and more than a museum. It is also a priceless archive of letters, diaries and photographs that has enabled later generations of writers and historians to add their insights to those of Bean and his contemporaries.
Bean deeply grasped the heavy responsibility on those providing the “first draft of history”. His rival correspondent, Keith Murdoch, said of him that “no accounts of actions could be more accurate than his – no description of the men’s suffering and gallantry could be more sympathetic.  He is always in the place where he can see and help most, however dangerous it may be.”
This is not to suggest that Bean was without fault. He intrigued against General Monash and tried to stymie his appointment as commander of the Australian army corps – but was man enough, subsequently, to revise his judgments.
Over time, Bean became much more than a reporter. Every Anzac Day, it’s his voice that echoes around the dawn services and it’s his lessons that make the Remembrance Day silence so eloquent.
Over four years of war, recording scenes from darkest nightmares, witnessing death upon death upon death, Bean knew the toll taken on his young country. He became the “keeper of the ANZAC flame”, to use Les Carlyon’s words.
Carlyon, of course, is the modern Bean. His magisterial works, Gallipoli and The Great War, are worthy successors to Bean’s Official History in their sympathy and in their scholarship and have helped to renew our nation’s foundation stories.
Carlyon has ensured that we are a country of memory as well as of memorials.
As we move towards the Centenary of Anzac, and through all the anniversaries of the next four years, Bean and Carlyon should be our teachers. We honour this sacrifice by learning from it.
For us, commemorations will begin in September to mark Australia’s first action: the capture of German New Guinea.
Then, there’s the centenary of the sailing of the first ANZAC convoy from Albany in Western Australia, guarded by a Japanese cruiser as well as by the Emden-bound HMAS Sydney and ships of the Royal Navy.
Obviously, April 25th next year will be a pivotal moment but there will be other Gallipoli anniversaries: such as Lone Pine, the Nek, and the only unambiguously successful part of the whole campaign, the evacuation.
Over the next four years, some major war memorials will be upgraded and restored with help from the Anzac Centenary Public Fund that’s being marshalled by Angus Houston and Lindsay Fox.
This includes the shrines in Melbourne and Sydney and the travelling exhibition being overseen by the War Memorial to visit towns across Australia.
There will, of course, be local commemorations funded by the $125,000 that the Commonwealth government is providing to each federal electorate.
It’s my hope that more schoolchildren will research war veterans from their area so that the example of those young Australians might work on the imagination of today’s young Australians: not to glorify war but to promote the ideals of duty and service.
All these commemorations should unflinchingly acknowledge the terrible sacrifice. Over the next four years, we should acknowledge “the good and the bad, the greatness and the smallness” of the entire Anzac story.
For most of the past century, Gallipoli has shaped Australians’ thinking about the Great War. But when all is said and done, Gallipoli was a defeat; a magnificent loss perhaps, but a loss nonetheless.
Then came the carnage of the Western Front, especially the horror of Fromelles, with more than 5000 Australian casualties in a single night.
Under Sir John Monash, undoubtedly one of the very best allied generals, Australians eventually mastered the organisation of infantry and armoured attack behind a creeping artillery barrage in ways that changed the war.
Between March and November 1918, the five divisions of the AIF, operating together for the first time under Monash, bested no fewer than 39 enemy divisions. They took 29,000 prisoners, captured 338 guns, and advanced over more than 40 miles of contested ground.
They comprised less than 10 per cent of total British Empire forces but made almost a quarter of all the gains in the war’s decisive final months.
Gallipoli was a magnificent defeat. The Western Front was a terrible victory.
There may be more lessons in defeat than in victory. Still, we should remember our victories at least as much as our defeats.
Perhaps more than any other time, this was the moment when Australians have most shaped history. In the words of Professor Robin Prior, it’s the only time when our forces have engaged the main enemy on the main battlefront and made an appreciable difference to the outcome.
We should remember the Western Front; and tell that story, as well as the Gallipoli one.
That’s why our commemoration of Anzac won’t just climax on the 25th of April next year.
The government is considering the establishment of an interpretative centre alongside the Australian National Memorial at Villers-Bretonneux.
This would be a lasting tribute to General Monash and his men, and its opening would be a fitting conclusion to Australia’s commemoration of the war that shaped us.
As Bean put it, it’s “in disaster that human character is most clearly exhibited and, though she had known fire, drought and flood, Australia had never seen the one trial that, despite civilised progress, all humanity still recognises – the test of a great war…
“And then” says Bean, “during four years in which nearly the whole world was so tested, the people of Australia looked on…They saw their own men – those who had dwelt in the same street or been daily travellers in the same trains – flash across the world’s consciousness like a shooting star.
“In the first straight rush up the Anzac hills in the dark; in the easy figures first seen on the ridges in the dawn sky; in the working parties stacking stores on the shelled beach without the turning of a head; in the stretcher bearers walking, pipes in mouths, down a bullet-swept slope to a comrade’s call, unconsciously setting a tradition that may work for centuries; in things seen daily from that first morning until the struggle ended, onlookers had recognised in these men qualities always vital to the human race.
“Australians watched the name of their country rise high in the esteem of the world’s oldest and greatest nations. Every Australian bears that name proudly abroad today and by these daily doings, great and small…the Australian nation came to know itself”.
In no way should the Centenary of Anzac glorify war but it should commemorate what’s best in our human character and acknowledge that the worst of times can bring out the best in us.
As Bean observed, to an unusual extent among British forces, Australian troops “had the habit of reasoning why and not merely of doing and dying”.
Among officers and men alike, the Australian soldier’s “unspoken, unbreakable creed was the miner’s and the bushman’s: stand by your mate”.
Soldiers do indeed sometimes have to do terrible things but they should always remain decent people.
This, I believe, has been the characteristic of Australian Forces from that day to this: in East Timor, Iraq and Afghanistan as much as in the Great War. Our times deserve a Charles Bean to tell this story too.
At the end of the war, Bean took two weeks’ leave and, characteristically, spent it writing about the future of our country.
He called the tract “In your Hands, Australians”.
“We have to make up our minds”, he said “right here and now…whether we are going to work…for ourselves or for Australia … We have done with the war, God knows – we are only trying to make full and real use of the peace for which our finest Australians fought…and died; and that is a struggle in which we all can join, even those who honestly opposed the war.”
That he could look so clearly to the future, after four years witness to carnage on a daily basis, gives us the measure of the man.
With his optimism and his enthusiasm for what Australia could be; with his desire to learn from the past but not be shackled by it; and with his quest to be helpful, not difficult, he had the true measure of our country.
[ends]


Thank you so much. It is a thrill to be here this morning and it’s terrific to be amongst so many people who are making a difference to the lives of millions of Australians, but hopefully are going to make more difference over time to the lives of millions of young Australians by helping them, inspiring them, giving them the work that they are all looking for.
Now I looked at my programme this morning, it said Keynote address - Prime Minister, 20 minutes. Well I’m not going to talk for 20 minutes; you can rest assured that the purpose of today is not to listen to a politician. The purpose of today is to hear a whole range of individuals, a couple of them who happen to be CEOs, one of them who happens to be a politician talk about jobs and what jobs and what might make them happen.
I used to be the employment minister, I spent a lot of time talking with people who were looking for work, providing work and facilitating the provision of work, and this idea that we sometimes get when we’re discussing the subject of employment that it’s something that happens ‘out there’, that jobs are things that government or the economy is responsible for is a little misleading because employment happens when an individual employer gives an individual person a job. So it’s basically about two people and yes, those two people operate in an environment, in an economy, but essentially employment is about two people: the person who says yes, I’ve got a job and the person who says yes, I’ll do the job.
That’s what it’s about and as employment minister I spent a lot of time with people who were part of my signature employment programme Work for the Dole. Now it wasn’t always a popular programme Work for the Dole, some people thought that it was a bit demeaning to be in a programme called Work for the Dole, but the great thing about Work for the Dole back then under the Howard government was that it was about giving people a chance, not to show the world what they couldn’t do, but to show the world what they could do. That they could actually do something rather than doing nothing and that’s very important because Grant was saying a moment ago that our greatest commodity is optimism. You are so right and life crushes the spirit and the optimism of so many people and there is nothing that is more spirit crushing than the sense that you have something to give, but nowhere to give it.
Life ends up programming too many of us to fail and we have to try to ensure that we change the programme. Program people to succeed because everyone can be good at something, it’s just a question of finding what that is. I’m still looking myself! I have to say it’s been a pretty different journey. I dare say everyone in this room could talk about his or her journey to this point this morning and it’s different for every one of us and there’s probably been some pretty surprising twists and turns for every one of us.
My first jobs was building a fence for a friend of my dad’s when I was 16 years old. I did it for three weeks, I got paid two dollars an hour and I hope the fence is still there. I’ve been a labourer, a bartender, I’ve been a handyman, I’ve written case notes for CCH, I’ve picked up glasses in the Charlton Bar at Manly. I’ve done all those things before finally becoming a journalist and then a Member of Parliament. You know it was interesting, not long after becoming a Member of Parliament someone gave me a piece poll data that purported to rank the ethics and honesty and standing of various occupations and there was doctors and nurses up there at 80 per cent for ethics and honesty and standing, and judges and lawyers at 50 per cent and there were bankers and stockbrokers at 30 per cent and there were politicians down there at 10 per cent. I thought that’s pretty dispiriting, but then I looked further down the list and I thought – geeze I’m a social climber – because journalists are only five per cent for ethics and honesty.
But all of us have been on a journey and I think the message that we have to give to our young people is that it doesn’t matter where you start as long as you start. It’s not where you start, it’s where you’re going and where you end up which matters and yes, we have a responsibility as leaders in our society to try to ensure that everyone gets a fair go, but what we need to encourage in others is the readiness to have a go because that’s the magic combination that we here in Australia are so good at: giving everyone a fair go and encouraging everyone to have a go.
Now I want to congratulate and thank all of the employers in this room. Obviously I want to thank News Limited because News Limited were good enough to employ me for a period of time. Thank you Julian and the others at News Limited who have been my friends and sometime bosses. But I particularly want to thank Woolworths. Grant, terrific initiative. This really is a terrific initiative and the interesting thing about Woolies is you employ the number of people that as far as I can work out, it exceeds the entire workforce of Tasmania. One company employees more people than the entire workforce of Tasmania and as you told us today, everyday 87 youngsters start their first job at Woolworths - what a marvellous social service that is. The general view of big business is you’re out there gauging people so that you can pay yourselves big salaries and enrich already wealthy shareholders. Well, wrong, wrong, wrong; companies like Woolworths are providing a service every day that helps us to live, helps us to live better and one of the services is of course keeping people in work.
So I want to thank all of the employers of our country, particularly the small business employers because if you go and work for Woolies all you can lose is your job, but if you are a small business employer you not just might lose your job, but you could lose your house if the business goes bad. So I thank all of the employers of our country, but I particularly thank the small business employers of our country. Now I want to assure you all, workers, employers, would-be workers and would-be employers that the Government I lead is determined to create the best possible environment for you to provide work and for you to find work .The best way to do that is to try to make our economy as strong as possible and everything that this Government is doing is designed to make the economy stronger. We want to get unnecessary taxes off, because the lower the taxes the more creative activity there’ll be in our economy. We want to get regulations down for exactly the same reason. We are currently, as you all know, wrestling with the challenge of the Budget and trying to rein in what we think is unsustainable spending and we’re not doing that just to keep the headline writers at the Financial Review happy. We’re not doing that just to win plaudits from economists, we’re doing this because in the end it produces more jobs and more prosperity because if spending is out of control, sooner or later taxes will be out of control and that makes it bad for everyone.
Yesterday, you might have noticed we announced a commitment to an airport for Western Sydney. This is essentially a jobs package for what is the third largest urban economy in our country. This is about growth for the great city of Western Sydney. Last week - Grant was kind enough to recall - I was in North Asia; that was all about jobs. Yes, we were talking about Free Trade Agreements, but trade equals jobs and more trade means more jobs. So that’s at the heart of every single thing that this Government is doing, but it doesn’t matter how well you do, you can always do better. There is always more to be done; you are never finished. There’s always something else to have a go at. That is my message to everyone in this room. That is my message to myself every morning: it doesn’t matter what you’ve done, there’s always more to do; it doesn’t matter how well you’ve done, there’s always more to have a go at but it’s incredible what we can achieve if we do have a go.
Just think everyone of us here, the most marvellous day of your life, the best thing you’ve ever achieved, I am sure there would have been so many times when you thought, I can’t do it, it isn’t going to happen and yet it did because people had a go.
Thanks.
[ends]


Your Royal Highnesses, Excellencies, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
A couple of years back, Kelly Slater visited Manly in my electorate. There were over a thousand screaming fans – as you would expect when the world’s greatest surfer visited the world’s greatest beach. But as I have seen with my own eyes, Sir, Ma’am, in Manly you are bigger than Kelly Slater, perhaps by a factor of ten!
My friends, this is the 50th royal visit to Australia and it will be remembered as one of the very best.
With young children and with teenagers, sometimes in very difficult circumstances, with Indigenous people, with Australians in all our diversity who have flocked to royal events, your dedication to all your future realms, Sir, and your grace and warmth, Ma'am, have been abundantly on display.
Now, royal visits are a reminder that the best things in life are those that have stood the test of time.
Over centuries, the Crown has come to symbolise the ideals of duty and service at the heart of our culture.
People instinctively warm to those who represent the good to which we all aspire.
We saw that during your previous trip, Sir, in 2011, specifically to meet communities impacted by the Victorian bushfires and the Queensland floods.
As a Royal Air Force search and rescue pilot, you know what it's like to endure ‘drought and flooding rains’. You know what it means to serve in the armed forces.
We have seen in you, Sir – during both your visits – through your words and through your deeds, the decency and the sense of duty of your father and the compassion of your mother.
Your great-great-grandfather, the future George V, opened our first Parliament in 1901.
Your great-grandfather as Duke of York opened our first Parliament House in 1927.
Your grandmother, the Queen, opened this building in 1988.
And your father, the Prince of Wales, has been here many, many times.
Many decades, hence, when a currently unknowable Australian Prime Minister welcomes your son, King George VII to this building, that will be a sign of the stability and the continuity in the life of our nation.
Your Royal Highnesses, you have taken such obvious pleasure in this visit and that warmth has been amply reciprocated by the Australian people amongst whom you will always be most welcome.
It is not necessary to live permanently in Australia well and truly to belong here.
This visit has meant a lot to millions of Australians.
Thank you for the joy you have given us.
[ends]


John, thank you so much. Thank you for your lovely words and thank you for the honour of riding with the Soldier On ride from Lake George into the War Memorial this morning.
I have to say that I do feel more than usually fraudulent this morning. First, because I’m not a soldier – never have been – but it is an extraordinary honour to mix with our serving men and women. It’s a particular honour to spend time with those who have been on the various frontlines on which Australians have been active in recent years, suffered for their service, returned and dwelt amongst us.
I also feel slightly fraudulent because the ride was more than 200 kilometres and I’ve only done about 30, but nevertheless, it’s a terrific way – as John has just pointed out – to maintain physical and mental health.
I congratulate Soldier On for the work that they’re doing.
No one deserves well of us like our former military personnel.
No one deserves better of us than those who have put their life on the line for our country.
Yes, we all know that people who come back from military service abroad carry physical scars and, often, the even worse mental scars. It is fitting and right that these be recognised, treated, but above all else, understood and accepted, and that’s what events like today are all about.
It is about appreciating that even the strongest, even the bravest, even the toughest, can carry scars through life that need to be understood and accepted.
So, yes, it is a real honour to be here today.
I feel humble as well as just a little proud to have been a part of this ride.
It was particularly good to be able to spend a few moments with Mrs Janny Poate whose son was one of our killed in Afghanistan. No one suffers like the parents of those who suffer.
So, it is good that Soldier On recognises and helps all who are part of our ex-service community.
Thank you so much, John. It’s a pleasure to be with you.
[ends]


As someone who has never served in the armed forces, never faced a shot fired in anger, and never lost close family members in war, I am in awe of the ANZAC generation who were tested almost beyond endurance.
Today, we remember the Gallipoli landing.
Yet this was just one day and Gallipoli was but one campaign in a four year war.
On the 99th anniversary of Australia’s baptism of fire, we remember that fateful day.
We also remember the great tide of events – of which Gallipoli was just one part – that shaped our nation and that still casts its shadow over the wider world.
The First World War impacted Australia like nothing else, before or since.
From a population under five million; 417,000 enlisted; 332,000 served overseas; 152,000 were wounded; and 61,000 never came home.
Of men aged 18 to 42, almost one in two served in uniform.
Of those who served overseas, almost one in five died on active service.
Of the 270,000 who returned, more than half had been wounded – and others had mental scars that never healed.
Individually and collectively, it was sacrifice on a stupendous scale.
But what was the alternative, in Britain’s time of need, and when Europe was at risk from Prussian militarism?
Over the next four years that mark the centenary of the Great War, we will remember all the key events in which Australia was involved.
This September is the anniversary of Australia’s first military action: the capture of German New Guinea.
In November, we will remember the sailing of the first ANZAC convoy guarded by a Japanese cruiser, as well as HMAS Sydney, and ships of the Royal Navy.
Inevitably, the 25th of April next year will be a high point but there will be other Gallipoli centenaries: Lone Pine, the Nek, and – the only unambiguously successful part of that campaign – the evacuation.
We will remember the charge at Beersheba and the capture of Jerusalem and Damascus, spearheaded by the Australian Light Horse.
Above all else, we should remember the Western Front, not just for its carnage, but also for Australia’s moment on the stage of history.
When the last big German offensive split the British and French armies in March and April 1918, it was largely the Australians that plugged the gap and held the line.
In the closing months of the war, the five divisions of the First Australian Imperial Force, fighting together for the first time, bested no fewer than 39 enemy divisions, took 29,000 prisoners, captured 338 guns and advanced over 40 miles of contested ground.
The AIF were less than a tenth of all British Empire forces but made nearly a quarter of all the gains.
It’s the only time in history when Australian forces have engaged the main enemy on the main battlefront and made an appreciable difference to the outcome.
When all is said and done, Gallipoli was a defeat; but the Western Front a victory.
Victories, even terrible ones, should be no less iconic than heroic defeats.
That’s why one of the main outcomes of the centenary of Anzac will be an interpretive centre honouring General Monash and his men focused on the Australian National Memorial at Villers Bretonneux.
Whether it’s the organizational skill of Monash who perfected the “all arms” battle – the coordination of artillery, infantry, armour and aircraft – to turn stalemate into victory on the Western Front; the legendary self-sacrifice of Simpson with his donkey at Gallipoli; or the story of nurse Rachael Pratt tending to the wounded in France despite being herself hit by artillery fire, the Centenary of Anzac should mean, for all of us, pondering anew the example of our mighty forbears.
We should be a nation of memory, not just of memorials, for these are our foundation stories.
They should be as important to us as the ride of Paul Revere, or the last stand of King Harold at Hastings, or the incarceration of Nelson Mandela might be to others.
We commemorate Anzac Day every year and will commemorate the centenary of Anzac over the next four years because the worst of times can bring out the best in us.
As the official historian, Charles Bean, put it: “during four years in which nearly the whole world was so tested, the people of Australia looked on…They saw their own men – those who had dwelt in the same street or been daily travellers in the same trains – flash across the world’s consciousness like a shooting star.
“In the first straight rush up the Anzac hills in the dark; in the easy figures first seen on the ridges in the dawn sky; in the working parties stacking stores on the shelled beach without the turning of a head; in the stretcher bearers walking, pipes in mouths, down a bullet-swept slope to a comrade’s call, unconsciously setting a tradition that may work for centuries; in things seen daily from that first morning until the struggle ended, onlookers had recognised in these men qualities always vital to the human race.
“Australians watched the name of their country rise high in the esteem of the world’s oldest and greatest nations. Every Australian bears that name proudly abroad today and by these daily doings, great and small…the Australian nation came to know itself”.
Our commemorations today, as throughout the Centenary, do not and will not glorify war; rather they honour what’s best and noblest in human nature.
Australian soldiers have been called upon to do the terrible deeds that war requires but have remained decent people.
Mateship, humour, and respect for an honourable foe – as well as an implacable will to win – have characterized the Australian soldier from that day to this: in World War II, Korea and Vietnam; in Iraq, Afghanistan and all the other places where Australians have served.
Members of our armed forces have done what most of us are never asked to do: they have been prepared to put their lives on the line for our country.
We honour those who have done what we have not; and hope that we might find it in ourselves to rise to the supreme challenge, as they did, should we ever be put to the test.
On the half century of Anzac, 49 years ago today, Queen Elizabeth said: “in remembering the courage of those who did so much to ensure victory, we…draw strength to face the problems of our own time”.
This Anzac Day, we welcome amongst us Prince William, the Queen’s grandson and a Royal Air Force search and rescue pilot.
Long ago, we ceased to regard Britain as the mother country but we’re still family.
Your presence Sir, reminds us of all our comrades-in-arms.
These are the ties that bind.
Lest we forget.
[ends]


It was about the middle of last year when Gerard Henderson first asked me if I’d address this 25th anniversary dinner.
My response was along the lines that you might not want me if the election goes the wrong way.
It’s to Gerard’s and The Sydney Institute’s credit that he was prepared to take a punt on an Opposition Leader who was no sure thing but Gerard has always been prepared to “have a go”.
It’s made him one of our very foremost public intellectuals and, with Anne Henderson, he’s made this Institute a force for good in the life of our country.
I’m pleased that this is the 10th time in 12 years that I’ve been able to address The Sydney Institute.
I have to say that this will be my most economically focused address because, without a strong economy, it’s impossible to have strong and sustainable communities.
Economic growth is the means to a stronger society and a happier people.
That’s why my election pledge, endlessly repeated, was to build “a strong and prosperous economy” – not as an end in itself – but “for a safe and secure Australia”.
Right now, Canberra is fixated on the coming budget – as we should be – because budgets matter.
We’re striving to achieve a stronger budget because that’s the way to a stronger economy, to a stronger society and to make your life better and your job more secure.
On election night, I said that Australia was open for business – and every day since we’ve been working to implement our Economic Action Strategy.
We promised to abolish the carbon tax and the mining tax – and we won’t rest until they’re gone.
We promised to stop the boats – and to end the $11 billion border protection cost blow out; and for the past four months none have come, not a single one, compared to over 100 carrying more than 6000 people in the same period last year.
We said that we’d conclude free trade negotiations with Japan and Korea, and we have, and we’ve accelerated talks with China.
We promised a one-stop shop for approving big projects; that’s well underway and we’ve given the green light to new projects worth over $400 billion – yes, $400 billion worth of new projects have been given environmental approval since the election last year.
We promised to cut red tape costs by a billion dollars a year, every year. We’ve made a strong start taking some 50,000 pages off the statute book and the budget will do more.
We promised to crack down on union officials who rip off their members and that’s happening.
We promised an airport for Western Sydney; with the help of the New South Wales Government that’s happening too.
We said that we wouldn’t chase failing businesses waving blank cheques at them because the end of the age of entitlement should start with the end of business welfare.
Above all, in promising to deliver a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia, we promised to get the budget back under control because you can’t fix the economy unless you fix the budget.
Now, there’s far more that’s right about our country than wrong; and there’s far more grounds for optimism about our future than worry.
But we do have to get the economic fundamentals right.
Prosperity is not a gift; we have to work for prosperity through being smarter and more diligent than our competitors.
Like households and like businesses, governments have to live within their means.
Every dollar that government spends is a dollar taken from the people in taxes or in borrowings.
Everything that government does has to be paid for either by today’s taxes or tomorrow’s taxes – with interest.
And continuing a cycle of debt and deficit might briefly save a government from a bad headline, but it won’t help you, the people, to plan a stronger and better future.
A government that understands its limits is a government that allows the people to grasp their full potential.
Every time a government spends people’s money for them, it limits their own freedom; hence the famous dictum that government should do what the people cannot do for themselves, and no more.
As many of you would remember, the previous Liberal government in Canberra inherited $96 billion in net Commonwealth debt and a $10 billion budget black hole.
It took the good work of John Howard and Peter Costello to produce surpluses averaging almost 1 per cent of GDP with almost $50 billion in the bank by 2007.
I regret to say that this government’s budget inheritance has been even worse. Labor debt and deficit stretches out as far as the eye can see: $123 billion in cumulative deficits over the next four years, debt projected to reach at least $667 billion – which is $25,000 for every Australian man, woman and child – with $10 billion a year in interest repayments alone.
At this level, countries no longer control debt; debt starts to control them.
There were roof batts that caught fire, school halls that cost twice the going rate, super clinics with no doctors, and the NBN that cost more and more to deliver less and less.
The Labor government made vast open-ended commitments on schools and hospitals to take effect beyond the forward estimates period.
They didn’t just booby-trap the budget; they created a ponzi scheme of unsustainable spending because they thought that new taxes, more spending and bigger bureaucracies were the answer to every problem.
This budget will not change everything with one stroke.
It won’t offer a spurious guarantee of a surplus by a particular date.
This budget will by no means be the only installment in the long-term restructuring needed to restore our economic health.
But this budget will bring us close to surplus, over the forward estimates and on track to a strong surplus within a decade.
This was the commitment we made, pre-election, and this budget keeps faith with our election commitments.
Prior to the election, we committed to abolish the School Kids Bonus that had nothing to do with education and the Income Support Bonus because these payments were a cash splash with borrowed money.
There are other one-off payments that should never have been introduced and are unaffordable at this time.
Prior to the election, we said we’d maintain school funding over the then forward estimates but explicitly refused to commit to Labor’s changes beyond that.
The best way to improve schools is to give local communities more say because parents and principals will be better than bureaucrats at getting the best possible value for taxpayers’ dollars.
Prior to the election, we said that we wouldn’t cut overall health funding but that we’d find ways of making health spending more efficient.
Part of that will be more price signals in the system with a strong safety net because “free” services to patients are certainly not free to taxpayers.
Prior to the election, we said that we wouldn’t cut the age pension. I want to assure vulnerable people that the age pension won’t be less tomorrow than it is today and that people turning 65 tomorrow are certainly not going to have to wait five years to retire.
I’m confident that pensioners will be better off because they’ll lose the carbon tax but keep the carbon tax compensation.
Still, with four out of five seniors on the pension, the number of workers per retiree dropping from five to three by 2050, and more than 1000 people becoming eligible for the age pension every single week, long term reform is essential and unavoidable.
To keep our commitments, there will be no changes to the pension during this term of parliament but there should be changes to indexation arrangements and eligibility thresholds in three years’ time.
There are other social security benefits where indexation arrangements and eligibility thresholds could be adjusted now.
Adjusting indexation slows the rate of increase and helps to ensure that a strong social safety net can be preserved for everyone’s future.
And everyone will benefit from the abolition of the carbon tax which damages our economy without helping the environment and which is costing the average household $550 a year.
I know that most families are doing it tough, including many families with above average incomes but with heavy commitments.
Not for a second would I label families as “rich” just because they are earning $100,000 a year. A teacher married to a part-time shop assistant with children to feed, clothe and educate is certainly not rich especially paying a capital city mortgage.
But the best way, the best way to help families on $100,000 a year is long-term tax relief and more business and job opportunities, not social security.
The changes in this budget will make the personal tax cuts much more likely in four or five years’ time.
Still, come budget night, I suspect that there won’t be many without a potential grumble – but involving everyone in repaying Labor’s spending binge is the only way to be fair.
The budget pain will be temporary but the economic improvement will be permanent.
I can assure you that everyone, everyone will be involved, including high income earners such as members of parliament.
I know that the tendency on budget night is to focus on “what’s happening to me” but we need to focus on “what’s happening to us” because everyone needs to be involved in fixing Labor’s debt mess if all of us are to prosper in the years ahead.
This will not be a budget for the rich or the poor; it will be a budget for the country.
It will be a nation building budget, even though it cuts spending, because you can’t build a nation by spending money you don’t have in ways that don’t build up your economic strength.
Everything about this budget is calculated to boost the long term strength of the economy; spending less on consumption so that we can spend more on capital including human capital in the areas at which we excel.
Business programmes will involve less bureaucracy and be more about backing businesses’ own judgment.
Training programmes will focus less on trainer priorities and more on employer needs.
Universities’ funding will shift but they will have much more freedom to innovate and to build on Australia’s strength as a magnet for students, teachers and researchers from around the world.
School leavers will be earning or learning – not becoming accustomed to unemployment.
Starting in this budget, for older people, for people with disabilities and women with young children, our aim is to maximise everyone’s ability to participate in the economy; it’s about driving change, but even more it’s about empowering choice.
And, of course, in a modern economy, that means more freedom to move around our cities rather than spending hours in some of the world’s longest parking lots.
This budget will fund our biggest ever national roads programme and make it easier for the states to fund the metro roads and rail that commuters need.
Now, I said earlier that budgets reveal the character of governments; they also show the mettle of countries.
This budget is about shifting our focus from entitlement to enterprise; from welfare to work; from hand-out to hand-up; from our own short-term anxieties to our nation’s long-term opportunities.
Government’s job is to make it easier for people to make big decisions: to build a house, to begin to study, to start a business, to employ someone or to save for the future – and to make it more likely that people will decide to have a go – because we can’t be a generous society unless we are also a productive one.
For the government, of course there are political risks in this budget.
But we owe it to our country; we owe it everyone who elected us to clean up the mess and to take decisions rather than to defer them.
Without a clear economic plan, our standard of living will decline; with this budget plan Australia can continue to be a beacon of prosperity, freedom and hope for the wider world.
Serious people and serious countries must be able to have an adult conversation about the choice that we face.
That’s what The Sydney Institute has invariably tried to promote and our country is the better for it.
For too long, governments talked about being economically responsible but squibbed the big challenges. 
I don’t expect the government to be more popular the day after the budget but I do hope that we might have earned people’s respect for saying what we mean and doing what we say.
[ends]


I welcome my fellow Premiers and Chief Ministers here to Canberra for this my second meeting of COAG.
And of course, Mike Baird and Will Hodgman’s first meeting of COAG. Welcome and congratulations.
I see this as a very important part of governance in Australia and not an opportunity for the Commonwealth to give anyone lectures but more an opportunity for all of us to learn from each other.
We have got some quite significant items on the agenda this morning. I am particularly pleased to see so much work that we are doing together on infrastructure because right around Australia our citizens expect us to make a difference. They expect us to put political differences that we might sometimes have behind us and to work together to make a difference to their lives.
I guess one of the most tangible things of all is to get busy building the roads and other infrastructure of the 21st century that we so badly need.
We have a Commonwealth infrastructure agenda. Certainly, I hope to be the infrastructure Prime Minster. I know you want to be infrastructure Premiers and Chief Ministers as well.
Not only will we be talking about the projects that we are currently working together on but later on today we will be talking about ways of the Commonwealth assisting states and territories on additional infrastructure projects which are your initiatives – not necessarily joint initiatives.
I think it is quite an exciting day that we have got ahead of us and I am looking forward to it very much.
[ends]


Thanks very much Kate, Noeleen, Perry, my ministerial colleagues; Peter Dutton the Minister for Sport, Michaelia Cash the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Women and of course Senator Bridget McKenzie. Most of all to everyone who loves the great game of netball it is a real pleasure and honour to be here today and to be associated with the announcement of our Commonwealth Games netball team.
Prime Ministers usually display a certain amount of sporting memorabilia in their offices. I have got a number of sports represented in my office. I have got a number of sporting activities represented in my office including my own Queenscliff Surf Club patrolling jersey with signed members of the patrol up there. One of the very special items of sporting memorabilia that sits right behind my desk is an Australian Diamonds netball.
So, I am here, yes, as Prime Minister. I am here representing a Government which committed an additional $6 million during the election campaign to support netball, particularly the Netball World Cup, but I am also here as a netball Dad. For much of the last two decades I have been on netball sidelines watching my daughters compete in what can only be described as a very tough, vigorous game that requires the highest standards of commitment and athleticism.
I have spent far more time watching netball over the last two decades than any other sport and I have come to love this game which gives Australian girls and Australian women a great chance to demonstrate their sporting prowess.
It is perhaps our largest sport for women. There are some 350,000 players, some 5,000 clubs. Every weekend in winter tens, if not hundreds of thousands of parents and friends and supporters line netball courts right around our country in some very humble venues and in some quite sophisticated venues. Watching on TV are many more tens if not hundreds of thousands.
So, netball is a great game. It is just as important as some of the games which get more attention in the media. And I guess that’s the final reason to be here: women’s sport deserves more attention than it gets. Just because a sport is predominantly played by women doesn’t mean that it is not equally worthy of attention and I want to promote sport because sport builds character, sport builds team spirit, sport enables us to be everything that we can be. It helps to realise our dreams.  But women’s sport is every bit as important as all sport and it’s important that the Prime Minister of this country acknowledge it.
So, it’s great to be here. I hope that we have a fabulously successful Commonwealth Games, but I particularly hope that we beat the Kiwis when it comes to the netball gold medal.
[ends]


Andrew, thank you so much. I very much look forward to working with you and the other people in this room to try to ensure that this industry continues to flourish.
We are all here, I suspect even Labor Members of Parliament are here because we want this industry to flourish and I do acknowledge all my Parliamentary colleagues, particularly Ian Macfarlane, the Industry Minister, the Shadow Treasurer and so many of my Parliamentary colleagues who are here tonight.
I want you to know that you are not in hostile territory; you are here amongst people who want you to flourish and if there is one message that I can give you this evening, it is that this Government wants you to succeed, because when you succeed, our country succeeds.
Back in September of last year, on election night, I said that Australia was under new management and that we were once more open for business and I hope in the eight months since then you have seen plenty of evidence to justify those statements.
We do appreciate what this industry does for our country. You may not employ as many as some other industries – only about two per cent of our workforce are in the mining and resources sector – but you are 10 per cent plus of our GDP - and in recent times you have been some 60 per cent of new investment in our economy.
Our prosperity rides on the ore and gas and coal carriers steaming the seas to our north, just as surely today as once it rode on the sheep’s back.
Our job in Government is to keep mining strong. It’s not to tell you how to do your job; it is to allow you to do your job.
That’s why this Government is utterly determined to abolish the mining tax because that’s the third tax that your industry pays on top of royalties and on top of company tax.
We are determined – utterly determined – to abolish the carbon tax because, as your President has just pointed out, this tax has achieved the quinella of damaging our economy without helping our environment.
We will restore the Australian Building and Construction Commission because in your industry, particularly in the investment phase, there should be a tough cop on the beat to ensure that the ordinary law of the land applies.
We are establishing a one-stop-shop for environmental approvals because massive investment requires swift and certain processes and, even though there are still some steps to go before we get to that position, already under this Government, projects worth $500 billion have received environmental approval.
And yes, there will be some additional support through a kind of capped flow-through share scheme for small start-up miners.
You see, the main difference which I’m sure you know but which I suspect many of our people have forgotten, between the modern and the pre-modern world is energy consumption and it is our destiny in this country to bring affordable energy to the world.
It’s particularly important that we do not demonise the coal industry and if there was one fundamental problem, above all else, with the carbon tax was that it said to our people, it said to the wider world, that a commodity which in many years is our biggest single export, somehow should be left in the ground and not sold. Well really and truly, I can think of few things more damaging to our future.
But, my friends, I want to speak to you tonight, not just as miners but as citizens.
I want to speak to you as Australians, not simply as business people.
I want to speak to you tonight not just about your industry and government policy towards your industry, but about the Budget on which so much now rests.
I want to assure you that as far as this Government is concerned, the Budget is nothing like an indulgence to keep economists happy. This Budget is a necessary response to an inherited debt and deficit disaster.
Now I know my predecessors did not mean to get us into the predicament in which we are in, but good intentions are not enough to manage an economy, and the truth is that the former government gave us the six biggest deficits in our history.
Under the policies of the former government we would have had four more record deficits. Under the policies of the former government we would have had a decade of deficits. And as all of you know, any entity that is spending more than it makes, any entity that is borrowing to pay the interest is doomed – is doomed.
It simply cannot continue.
Each year’s deficit means more debt and ever higher debt means ever higher interest – $1 billion a month is what the Commonwealth is currently paying. Every single month, $1 billion to meet the interest bill alone and on the projections which we inherited, within a decade it would have been $3 billion every single month.
It simply could not continue.
That interest is just dead money. It’s money that we cannot spend on the things that we wish to invest in. It’s money that we couldn’t invest in tax cuts, it’s money that we couldn’t invest in schools and hospitals and infrastructure. It’s just dead money.
So this Government simply had no option but to tackle the debt and deficit disaster. We had to tackle it, but I want to say to you that the changes that we have made in this Budget are not made simply because they’re necessary; they’re made because they’re right.
And how do you know that we believe they’re right? Because we have taken risks – quite significant risks – in order to do what is right for our country.
The Medicare co-payment – perhaps the most difficult policy change in this Budget. It sends a price signal – a necessary price signal – because visits to the doctor might be free to most patients, but they certainly haven’t been free to the taxpayers of this country. And if it’s right to pay a co-payment when you get a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme drug, how can it somehow be morally wrong to face a modest co-payment when you go to the doctor?
Indexation of most social security benefits to CPI rather than Male Total Average Weekly Earnings is necessary, not because we want to be hard on anyone but because over the years the number of contributors is shrinking and the number of beneficiaries is growing. At the moment the ratio of working age people to retirement age people is 5:1. By 2050 it will be under 3:1. So these are necessary changes if our social security system is to be sustainable for the longer term.
And yes, we’ve raised the pension age to 70. Let’s never forget that when the pension age was first set at 65 back in 1907, most Australians died before the age of 60. Today, most Australians live to be beyond 80. It’s perfectly reasonable to take it up to 70 by 2035 when life expectancy and healthy life expectancy could reasonably be expected to have increased again. If there was no real argument about taking it up to 67, as happened under the former government with the support of the then opposition, why not take it to 70 by 2035?
And yes, there’s some modest activity testing being brought in for the Disability Support Pension because it’s cruelty, not kindness, to keep people on welfare when they could be economic contributors.
And yes, we’re expecting young people who leave school to either earn or learn, because we want them to make the most of their lives and you don’t make the most of your life by starting it on welfare.
And yes, there are some changes to Family Tax Benefit Part B for two reasons. First, because we do want to bear down on what’s often described as ‘middle-class welfare’, and while we’re all in favour of choice and we want to support choice, there’s a limit to the amount of taxpayer support there should be for families once the youngest child is at school.
And yes, there are higher education changes, because unlike every single government in this country up until now, we trust our best and our brightest, whether they’re in universities or considering going to universities, to make rational decisions about their future.
And not only do we trust them, but we trust our future tradies, we trust people who are going for diplomas as well as degrees to make rational decisions for their future and that’s why we have extended the FEE-HELP system effectively to them.
Now some of these changes are very difficult.
Some of these changes are hard for people to get their minds around.
Change is often bracing, change is often challenging, but sometimes change is necessary and I believe that the changes that we have brought forward in this Budget represent the best values of our people.
These are, I have to say, testing times for our Government but they’re also testing times for our country. But I am confident that our character, I am confident that our country’s character is up for these changes.
As the Treasurer said in his Budget night speech, we are a nation of lifters, not leaners. We are a nation of workers, not shirkers.
We are people who are just as determined to have a go as we are determined to extend a fair go to others.
So my friends, it’s very good of you to be here this evening.
Thank you for coming to this Parliament. Thank you for bringing to this Parliament – bringing to all of us on all sides of politics – the insights that you have from the work that you do.
Thank you for coming at this critical time in the life of the new Government.
I think over the past eight months you’ve seen enough to know the character of this Government.
We have all but stopped the boats.
We have responded quite appropriately to requests for corporate welfare given that the age of entitlement is dead.
We have successfully negotiated two out of three of the major free trade agreements that we’ve been pitching for as a nation.
As you’ve seen in the Budget a fortnight ago, we are capable of meeting the fiscal challenges that our country faces.
I hope you’ve seen the warm heart that every decent person should have, the clear head that every serious thinker should have and above all else, the strong spine – the backbone – that a good government needs.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


Thank you Madam Speaker.
I move that the Bill be now read a second time.
Madam Speaker, this Bill is another step in delivering reform to intercountry adoptions.
For too long adoption had been in the too hard basket. For too long, it has been too hard to adopt and for too long, this has a policy no go zone.
It shouldn’t be that way - because adoption is all about giving children a better life.
There are too many children who have no parents or no effective parents, and they deserve a better life and adoption is a way of giving it to them.
The Government wants to make it easier to adopt when it is in the best interests of the child. We don’t want to repeat the mistakes of the past, but we do want to remove the red tape and reduce the delays that don’t benefit anyone.
It is red tape that impacts in children who legitimately need a safe and loving home and Australians who dream of providing that home.
So Madam Speaker in December last year, I announced that the Government would improve overseas adoption by the end of this year.
We have been delivering on that commitment.
Already, the Government has considered a report by senior officials on options to reform overseas adoption which was informed by over 100 submissions from the public.
We have announced improvements to the process for families adopting from Taiwan and South Korea.
We have opened a new overseas adoption programme with South Africa and are commencing discussion with seven other countries about possible new overseas adoption programmes.
COAG – the Council of Australian Government – has also agreed in principle to a new national overseas adoption service from 2015 and the Minister for Immigration is developing options to reduce waiting times for visas for adopting children from overseas.
This Bill is another important element of my Government’s commitment to reform intercountry adoption.
The purpose of this Bill is to facilitate the grant of Australian citizenship to children adopted by Australian citizens under bilateral adoption arrangements between Australia and countries that are not party to the Hague Convention on intercountry adoption.
Under such bilateral arrangements, Australian citizens have, for several years been able to adopt children from South Korea, Taiwan and Ethiopia. Although the intercountry adoption programme with Ethiopia is now closed there are a number of families who are awaiting the finalisation of their adoptions.
At present children adopted under bilateral arrangements require a passport from the home country and an Australian adoption visa to travel to Australia. This imposes additional complexity and cost on the adopting families. Under the amendments to be made by this Bill, children will be able to be granted citizenship as soon as the adoption is finalised. They will then be able to travel to Australia on an Australian passport with their new families as Australian citizens.
This Bill will place children adopted by Australian citizens under bilateral arrangements in the same position as children adopted by Australian citizens under Hague Convention arrangements. The overarching requirement from Australia’s perspective that a potential partner country is, first, willing participate in intercountry adoption arrangement with Australia, and, second, will meet the standards in safeguards equivalent to those required under the Hague Convention.
Where a non-Convention country meets these standards, there is no reason why adoptions should not be recognised in the same way as adoptions in Convention countries.
The Government has recently given effect to this principle by amending the Family Law (Bilateral Arrangement – Intercountry Adoption) Regulations 1998 to provide for automatic recognition of adoptions in partner countries once the adoption is finalised and an adoption compliance certificate has been issued.
Children adopted from Hague Convention countries which issue adoption compliance certificates are already able to obtain Australia citizenship as soon as the adoption is finalised. This has been the case since the enactment of the Australian Citizenship Act 2007. The adoption compliance certificate provides assurance that the adoption has been carried out in accordance with the ethical and legal framework required by the Hague Convention. As the process for children adoption under bilateral arrangements, including automatic recognition under Australian law is in substance identical. There is no reason why those children should be treated differently in the Australian Citizenship Act.
The key feature of the Bill is an amendment to Subdivision AA of Division 2 of Part 2 of the Act. The amendment simply expands the scope of the existing Hague Convention provisions so that they also cover adoptions in accordance with bilateral arrangements. The decision making framework remains the same. An application must be made to the Minister for the child to become an Australian citizen. The application can only be approved if the adoption has been finalised in the overseas country and an adoption compliance certificate issued by the authorities of that country.  The adoption must also have the effect terminating the legal relationship between the child and his or her previous parents. Importantly, the Minister retains a discretion to refuse an application which meets the requirements.
This would be relevant if fraud or some other irregularity came to light before citizenship was granted. Similarly, the Minister must not approve a child becoming a citizen if the Minister is not satisfied of the identity of the child.
Madam Speaker, the amendments made by the Bill will apply for the benefit of all children adopted under bilateral arrangements whether the adoption was finalised before or after the amendments come into force.
I am pleased to undertake this real action to bring families together.
Without pretending that everything is going to be simple and straight forward immediately, I hope that this Bill and my Governments other reforms to intercountry adoption will provide significant new hope for parents without children and significant new hope for children without parents.
I commend the Bill to the House.
[ends]


Thank you ladies and gentlemen for being here on this gorgeous Paris evening, here in the Australian Embassy, to make me welcome and to talk about Australia and the investment and the business opportunities that there are in our country right now.
It is a real thrill for me to be here – my first trip to France as Prime Minister and indeed my first ever official visit to France. I am here to encourage you to think of Australia as an even better place to do business, as an even better place to invest today than it might have been just a short while ago.
When I say that Australia is open for business I want it to be open for business from all over the world particularly from France given the strong record that so many French companies have investing and doing business in Australia.
Thales is one of our biggest defence contractors. Accor is perhaps our biggest hotel chain. Veolia is providing the drinking water for some 25 per cent of the people of Sydney. There is great work which your railway companies are doing in Australia – but it is a two way street. I have just come from an event where I met an Australian business man who is supplying software to the French railways so this is a partnership – it is not just a one way street. I think it can be a better and stronger partnership in the future than it has been in the recent past.
All of us, as you know, are looking forward to the G20 in Brisbane in November. We have been working closely together to try to ensure that economic growth is stronger right around the world.
If we want stronger economic growth we have got to get taxes down, we have got to get regulation down and we have got to work as closely as we can with the business that are at the heart of a stronger economy and a more prosperous society.
The Government, the new Government in Australia is abolishing the carbon tax, we are abolishing the mining tax, we are reducing company tax, we are establishing a one-stop shop for environmental approvals and since the change of government in September some $500 billion worth of new projects have received environmental approval. So, I want to ensure all of you that if you are looking to invest in Australia you will find a sympathetic government, a government that is looking to say yes – not no - and which want to constantly improve the environment in which you operate.
We have just brought down a Budget. It is a tough Budget - as it needed to be. It is a Budget which is reforming our economy by deregulating higher education, by introducing more price signals into the health systems, by significantly reforming elements of our welfare system because we understand its today’s reforms that build tomorrow’s prosperity. We also understand that it’s better to have a tough Budget as your first Budget rather than as your last Budget.
I am confident that we have the team, we have the commitment, we have the insights to build a stronger economy for a safe and secure Australia in the months and years ahead.
Of course, my friends, I am here in France, not just to promote Australia as an economic partner but to commemorate the marvellous history that the people of France and the people of Australia have together. Tomorrow is the 70th anniversary of the Normandy landings which led to the liberation of Europe and the establishment of a freer, fairer and more prosperous order across the world.
France has been a pillar of that order which has brought so much peace, freedom and security to the world in the years since the Second World War.
As well as visiting the beaches of Normandy I will also be visiting some of the battlefields of northern France. No spot on earth has been so drenched with Australian blood than the fields of northern France. I represent the 46,000 Australians who died in the defence of France between 1916 and 1918.
We have stood together in bad times and in good times. We share the values that have made western civilisation perhaps the finest secular thing that this world has seen and which has brought so much justice and freedom, which has enabled so many people to realise their dreams in a way that our forebears could scarcely even have begun to imagine.
It is terrific to be here in Paris tonight with people who are friends of Australia, with French people who are friends of Australian, with Australians who are friends of France.
Thank you so much for making me so welcome.
[ends]


Yesterday, we marked the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings.
The Normandy landings marked the beginning of the liberation of Europe and led to the final defeat of Nazi Germany.
It’s important to honour the men who fought that day – including the 3000 or so Australians who took part, mostly providing air support to the landings in our own or in British squadrons.
By 1945, there were more than 15,000 Australian air force personnel serving in Europe.
Yesterday, it was a privilege to be in the presence of seven Australian veterans: self-effacing heroes who claimed to be “just doing their job”.
Their job was making the world a safer place where people could live in peace and freedom under a government that they’d elected.
World War Two was a war against conquest; against racial pride; and against any country bullying another just because it could.
We should be grateful for the post-war order, secured by the wartime allies, which has allowed so many nations to build their own futures in peace and freedom.
Subsequent to that victory, the golden rule: to treat others as you would have them treat you, has applied to world affairs in ways unprecedented in human history.
Long may that continue.
But D-Day was by no means Australia’s only contribution to the struggle for freedom and justice in Europe.
Today, at Villers-Bretonneux, we remember a time when Australia helped to shape world history as never before or since.
Here, said the Allied commander-in-chief Marshal Foch, “you saved Amiens, you saved France. Our gratitude will remain ever and always to Australia”.
Today, we honour the Australians of the First World War whose service and sacrifice changed the world and shaped our nation.
From an Australian population of just under five million at the time, 417,000 enlisted, 332,000 served overseas in the First Australian Imperial Force, 152,000 were wounded, and 61,000 never came home.
Of men aged 18 to 42, almost one in two enlisted and, of those who served overseas, almost one in five were killed in action.
Some 46,000 died on the Western Front – almost a thousand of them are in the cemetery here and the names of almost 11,000 who have no known grave are carved on the monument here.
No place on earth has been more “densely sown with Australian sacrifice” than these fields in France.
Our duty to the dead is to remember what they achieved.
In the final six months of World War One, the five divisions of the Australian corps bested no fewer than 39 enemy divisions, took 29,000 prisoners, captured 338 guns and advanced over more than 40 miles of contested ground.
They comprised less than 10 per cent of total British Empire forces but made almost a quarter of all the gains in the war’s decisive final months.
It’s the only time Australia’s forces have been in the main battles of the main war theatre and made a major difference to its outcome.
Their commander, General Sir John Monash, brought organisation and technology to the battlefield to break the stalemate of trench warfare and the futility of men charging against barbed wire and machine guns.
Prime Minister Lloyd George called him the “most resourceful general in the whole of the British Army”.
Australians should be as familiar with the story of the western front as we are with Gallipoli.
Australians should be at least as familiar with the achievements of Monash as we are with the heroism of John Simpson Kirkpatrick.
Australians should congregate here, every April 25th, no less than at Anzac Cove.
And on Anzac Day four years hence, the centenary of the Battle of Villers-Bretonneux, I’m sure they will.
Because that’s the day, all going well, a new interpretive centre, the Sir John Monash centre, will open here on the principal site that Monash and his fellow soldiers chose to dedicate to their comrades’ service and sacrifice.
As the historian Les Carlyon has said, if we remember them – if we remember what they did – they are still alive in our hearts.
[ends]


On my first visit to the United States as Australia’s Prime Minister, I have a clear and simple message:
America matters to the world; Australia matters to America; and Australia wants to matter more to America and to the world in the years and decades ahead.
Some people say that America is a spent force. They’re wrong.
By a large margin, America is still the world’s largest economy, the world’s greatest power and the world’s greatest source of new ideas.
Yes, America’s relative dominance is less than it was, as other countries have adopted modern technology and market freedom.
It’s good that other countries, especially in Asia, now have much bigger economies because their own people are better off and because they’re better customers for everyone else.
As imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, growing your economy by embracing freer markets is more a tribute to America than a threat to it.
Thanks to its inherent creativity – and the serendipity of shale gas – America’s energy vulnerability is lessening and its economic growth is at last becoming more robust.
A measure of this change is that manufacturing is now returning to America.
But whatever the latest economic statistics, and whatever the latest developments in Syria, Ukraine or the South China Sea, the world knows that America is trying to help and that America’s friendship counts.
So there are, you’ll be pleased to know, countries whose goodwill to America is no less than America’s goodwill to them and whose capacity to reciprocate is more than you think.
My country, Australia, has the world’s 12th largest economy, the world’s fifth highest standard of living and the world’s 5th most traded currency.
And, of course, America has no better friend.
We are the number one global exporter of coal, iron ore and beef.
We are currently the world’s fourth largest exporter of gas and likely to become the world’s largest within five years.
Australia ranks fifth in the number of universities in the world’s top 100 and hosts the fourth highest number of international students.
And we have first class military forces, in part because of the American alliance that allows our personnel to operate regularly with the world’s best and gives us ready access to the world’s leading military technology.
Australian and American forces have served together in World Wars One and Two, Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan.
In fact, when the doughboys first went into action in France in 1918, they did so under an Australian general at the battle of Le Hamel.
After 9/11, Australia invoked the ANZUS treaty because that wasn’t just an attack on America. It was an attack on civilisation.
America is Australia’s third largest source of imports and fourth largest export destination and that could increase thank to the US-Australia Free Trade Agreement negotiated by Prime Minister John Howard and President George W Bush.
Our country has invested nearly half a trillion dollars in America – and America has invested rather more than half a trillion dollars in Australia because we trust each other to treat each other’s hard earned cash with respect.
Since last year’s election, Australia has been under new management and once more open for business.
We are open for business because this government understands that you can’t have strong communities without strong economies to sustain them; and you can’t have a strong economy without profitable private businesses.
Wherever I have been in the world, this has been my consistent message.
“You can’t spend what you haven’t got.
No country has ever taxed or subsidised its way to prosperity.
You don’t address debt and deficit with yet more debt and deficit
…(And) profit is not a dirty word because success in business is something to be proud of…”
These are the economic fundamentals that peoples and governments lose sight of to their peril.
“Every dollar that government spends comes from the people, either through taxes and borrowings,
or…through the process known as quantitative easing which is not indefinitely sustainable”.
In the words attributed to Lincoln, government should do for people what they cannot do for themselves – and no more.
Since September last year, the new Australian government has practised what we’ve preached.
Environmental approval has been given to big projects worth some half a trillion dollars.
We’re well on the way to a one-stop-shop for environmental approvals.
And we’ve negotiated free trade agreements with Japan and Korea and hope to finalise one soon with China.
More than 100 major foreign investment proposals have been approved.
There’s been one business rejection – just one – because you don’t normally replace a locally-owned monopoly with an overseas-owned one.
We’ve repeatedly said “no” to businesses requesting government handouts – because if the “age of entitlement” is truly over, that surely starts with stopping business welfare.
The recent Australian budget deregulates higher education, because if there’s one sector that should be able to manage itself it’s universities.
We’ve reformed welfare, because young people should leave school to earn or learn rather than start their adult life on social security.
We’ve put a price signal on visits to the doctor, because medical treatment is certainly not free to taxpayers and people should normally make a modest contribution to the benefits they receive.
We haven’t actually reduced spending on hospitals, schools and social security – but we have reduced its growth because a system with relatively fewer contributors and relatively more beneficiaries is not sustainable for the long term.
Still, this is a budget for building as well as for saving: it funds the biggest national road-building programme in our history.
And I have a business delegation with me because we hope that American investors will help us to deliver it.
It’s a budget that plays to our strengths as well as lives within our means: it creates one of the world’s biggest endowment funds for medical research.
Instead of a two per cent of GDP deficit four years hence, the final budget result is close to balance; and gross debt, a decade hence, is reduced by almost $300 billion, or over 15 per cent of GDP.  
We’ve done this because it’s better to be tough in your first budget than in your last.
There’s been a political cost, of course; but we have refused to put short term popularity ahead of long term respect.
As chair of the G20 this year, Australia is determined to lead by example.
The best way to boost private sector-led growth is to get taxes down, regulation down and productivity and participation up.
That’s why we’re abolishing the carbon tax, abolishing the mining tax and cutting company tax.
That’s why we’re cracking down on union standover tactics in the construction industry and improving our paid parental leave scheme so that younger women can realise their economic as well as their social potential.
The G20 should focus on boosting global growth; and, as it happens, the climate change policies that Australia will pursue are those which can directly reduce emissions without damaging people’s standard of living through economy-wide taxes and charges.
In the aftermath of the Crisis, Australia had four of the world’s top ten double-A rated banks.
Strong global financial governance is needed to guarantee confidence without inhibiting banks’ freedom to lend.
We need global tax rules to ensure that businesses pay tax in the countries where they earn revenue.
And we need financial system and energy system governance that better reflects the changing balance of economic power.
Australia supports freer trade and investment because more trade means more prosperity and that means more jobs.
Countries should focus on the things they’re best at, confident that lower costs and more freedom will produce more opportunities for jobs in successful businesses.
Who would have thought, for instance, that the largest manufacturing business in Australia would be making parts for aircraft that are built in other countries.
So we support bilateral, plurilateral and multilateral trade deals that make it easier for countries to trade with each other.
We support the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations; we hope that the best deal that has been offered to anyone will be offered to everyone; and we applaud President Obama’s free trade leadership.
If people are to lead better lives, they need clean water, healthy buildings and good transportation systems.
There’s an estimated $30 trillion gap in infrastructure that the world needs to fill by 2030.
Private capital is available to help build what we need but only if investors can be sure that their money is safe.
Creating a better framework for this infrastructure investment is one of the objectives of Australia’s G20 presidency.
In the space of a generation, the global middle class has grown by at least a billion people, nearly all of them in Asia.
The rise of China has been good for the wider world because there are now so many more people to afford to buy what the rest of the world produces.
A rich China means doesn’t mean a billion competitors so much as a billion customers.
We should be fundamentally optimistic about the future because these are all people with much to lose if things go wrong.
I’m looking forward to the coming Asian century.
The Asian century will be an Indian century, a Japanese century, a Korean century and an Indonesian century – as well as a Chinese one.
The Asian century will be an American century too because America is a Pacific power as well as an Atlantic one.
Asia needs America involved.
The world wants America to succeed.
The world needs America to succeed.
My hope is that you Americans will have as much faith in yourselves as the rest of the world has in you.
When the space shuttle was lost, President Reagan declared that the future did not belong to the feint-hearted; the future belonged to the brave.
It’s good to be here.
It’s good to be in what I too consider a land of the free and a home of the brave.
[ends]


Two months ago, I visited Pearce air force base near Perth to thank the aviators involved in the search for missing Malaysian Airlines flight MH370.
There was a collective photograph with all the air crew: involving personnel from Australia, the United States and New Zealand – and also from China, Japan and South Korea.
Because of my impending trip to North Asia, I then sought a second, smaller photo.
But the Chinese and the Japanese were a little awkward standing close to each other – so, to secure the picture, I placed myself between them with my arms on the shoulders of the Japanese and Chinese officers.
When my colleague Joe Hockey delivered the recent budget, the ambassadors of China, the United States and Japan sat next to each other on the floor of the Australian parliament.
I wish I could say that our relations with the countries of Asia had always been so smooth.
Although a Japanese cruiser helped to escort the Australian army to Egypt at the start of World War One, Japan had been offended by the Immigration Restriction Act of our first national parliament.
Some of the most savage fighting of World War Two was between Australians and Japanese and some 10,000 Australian prisoners of war died in Japanese custody.
Even so, just 13 years later, at a time when Australian ex-service club car parks still banned Japanese vehicles, Japan’s then-prime minister, Prime Minister Abe’s grandfather, paid his respects at our war memorial.
For most of the next half century, Japan was Australia’s largest trading partner.
In the wake of Henry Kissinger’s famous 1971 trip, Australian Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was one of the very first Western leaders to visit China and to establish diplomatic relations.
Ever since, support for better relations with China has been settled, bi-partisan policy in Australia – long before China was to become our biggest trading partner over the last decade.
On successive days in 2003, the then presidents of the United States and China addressed our national parliament.
As Prime Minister John Howard famously put it, this demonstrated that Australia did not have to choose between its history and its geography.
Another way of saying it might be that we’ve never been in the business of making new friends by losing old ones.
But Australia hasn’t reached out to the countries of Asia only when it suited us.
Sixty years ago, we set up the Colombo Plan to bring our region’s best and brightest to Australian universities – and now we are setting up the New Colombo Plan to take our best and brightest to the universities of our region.
During the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, Australia provided credit facilities to our Asian neighbours.
When the Indian Ocean Tsunami hit, just five years after our work for the independence of East Timor and two years after terrorists had killed 88 Australians in Bali, Australia provided a billion dollars to help Indonesia to rebuild.
Whether it’s the earthquake in Japan, the typhoon in the Philippines, or the ongoing underwater search of 60,000 square kilometres of deep ocean for MH370, in our own neighbourhood and further afield, Australia has always been amongst the very first to lend a hand and the very last to say “enough”.
I suspect that this “regional mateship” – as John Howard called it – was at least a subliminal factor in our successful free trade negotiations with Japan and Korea.
It helps that, in most circumstances, Australia is strong enough to be useful but not big enough to be threatening.
It also helps that there are some two million Australians of Asian background and that Mandarin is Australia’s most widely spoken language after English.
It helps that Australia now schedules annual ministerial meetings with India and with Singapore (as well as with the US and with the UK) and annual heads of government meetings with Indonesia and with Japan as well as with China.
Still, Australian prime ministers and ministers have met the Dalai Lama, visited Taiwan, and protested against China’s unilateral declaration of an air defence identification zone over territory that Japan administers.
And there are currently some 1100 US marines rotating through Darwin.
Through all this, we’ve managed to be both a good friend to China and the strongest possible ally of the United States.
We’ve been clear about our own values without hectoring other countries.
Our instinct is not to dwell on differences but to seek common ground and to build on it.
Our preference is always to look forwards rather than backwards, to win friends rather than to find fault, and to be helpful, not difficult.
As citizens of a great power, it’s understandable that Americans should be wary of potential rivals.
But America is the first great power in history that has sought to liberate other countries rather than to dominate them.
The wars that America and its allies have fought have been wars of freedom, not conquest.
“With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in”.
This is the true and authentic voice of the world’s exceptional, indispensable nation.
America should take pride in others’ success because it has done so much to make that success possible.
Japan and Korea have risen from the ashes of war to astonishing economic success under a US security umbrella.
China has become the world’s second largest economy by becoming more like America, not less like it, in cultivating business success.
One day, China will liberalise more than its economy because people who are free to get rich will apply that creativity to other aspects of their lives.
For America to begrudge what the Chinese haven’t yet achieved – more than to admire what they have – would be out of character, especially as the movement, in just a generation, of hundreds of millions of Chinese into the middle class is a transformation unparalleled in human history.
It’s the greatest and the quickest advance in human welfare of all time and the Chinese people and government have every right to be proud of it.
The rise of China is not without its complications for regional stability but so far has undeniably and indisputably been good for the world.
A rich China is not just a billion new customers but a billion people with a massive stake in keeping the peace – scarcely less than Americans have – because it’s impossible to have a prosperous world that’s not also a peaceful one.
The relationship between America and China is worth all the effort that both countries are putting into it – because no relationship is more vital for the world’s future.
I remain fundamentally optimistic because conflict is in no one’s best interest.
We will all advance together or none of us will advance at all.
I am confident that the coming century will indeed be the Asian century – but only if America is there too, to keep the peace and enforce the rules.
America has long been asked to bear burdens expected of no other nation.
But you’ll never walk alone.
Australia has been America’s partner in every conflict from World War One to Afghanistan.
Undoubtedly, America will have more important friends.
Occasionally, America will have more useful friends.
But America will never have a more dependable friend…than Australia.
[ends]


It is a pleasure to be here in Houston at the Asia Society Texas Centre.
Like its sister society in Australia, the Asia Society Texas is dedicated to promoting understanding between nations.
Few nations understand each other so deeply or so well as the United States and Australia.
We are more than allies.  We’re family.
There are no countries with a stronger community of interest and values.
Our alliance exists to promote the universal decencies of humanity, not to threaten other countries.
Around the world we seek no privileges, ask no favours, crave no territory.
Our shared preference is for more open markets, more humane societies, more democratic polities and more freedom under the law.
And we share an optimistic world view that embraces the future and all its possibilities.
Our relationship is a partnership for peace, for prosperity and for greater harmony right around our region and the wider world based on respect for the rights and dignity of every human being.
People who share a language are never total strangers and our particular partnership has the character of a warm and genial friendship. 
One of the founders of the Asia Society Texas, former First Lady Barbara Bush, said in her memoir that “the people of Australia are warm, relaxed, and very much like Texans, the biggest compliment I can pay anyone[1].”
A Texan President, Lyndon B Johnson, said after his plane made a forced landing in central Queensland that Australians are “the best damn folks in the world, except maybe for the folks in Texas”.
When democrats and republicans agree that Australians are like Texans then you can take it as true.
Certainly the friendly and hospitable people of Houston resemble Australians.
Like us, you look outward, with confidence, to meet tomorrow’s challenges.
The people of Houston see your city as an energy capital in the Asia Pacific Century.
From the other side of the ocean, Australia shares with you a common interest in powering that future with abundant and reliable energy.
Affordable, reliable energy fuels enterprise and drives employment.
It is the engine of economic development and wealth creation.
Australia should be an affordable energy superpower, using nature’s gifts to the benefit of our own people and the wider world.
Plentiful energy from reliable suppliers like Australia and the United States is essential for global growth.
Australians have followed closely the success of America’s shale energy revolution that has led to the United States once again becoming one of the world’s largest producers of oil and gas.
In fact, Australians have helped make it happen, with BHP Billiton one of the largest foreign investors in US shale.
Shale energy means more economic growth and more jobs for Americans – McKinsey estimates up to 1.7 million more jobs by 2020 – and the world gets a reliable, stable energy supplier with a commitment to markets and the rule of law.
Sam Houston[2] once said of Texas that “no country upon the globe can compare with it in natural advantages.”
Of course, General Houston never visited Australia.
Our resources are also remarkable:
Australia will soon be the world’s number one exporter of liquefied natural gas.
Australia is the world’s largest exporter of black coal.
And we are the world’s third largest uranium producer.
Australian has significant resources of conventional gas, and more than one third of the world’s known uranium sources.
Western Australia alone is estimated to hold the fifth largest reserves of shale gas in the world[3].
And we have an abundance of renewable energy, including some of the best wind and solar energy sources, and large geothermal energy potential.
A dynamic flow of investment and technology across the Pacific between Australia and the United States has helped to drive massive growth in Australia’s energy production.
Chevron’s[4] Gorgon LNG project is Australia’s single largest oil and gas project investment.
ConocoPhillips and Bechtel, based here in Houston, are currently building four of Australia’s seven new LNG projects using Bechtel’s cascade technology.
Discussion about developing our natural resources often goes hand in hand with conversation about climate change and impacts on the environment.
It is prudent to do what we reasonably can to reduce carbon emissions.
But we don’t believe in ostracising any particular fuel and we don’t believe in harming economic growth.
For many decades at least coal will continue to fuel human progress as an affordable, dependable energy source for wealthy and developing countries alike.
Australia is abolishing the carbon tax because it has damaged our economy and increased energy costs for businesses and families.
We’re replacing it with a AUS$2.55 billion fund that will prioritise cost-effective, targeted means to reduce emissions such as afforestation, soil carbon and cleaner power stations.
It’s an incentive-based approach which will support Australian businesses and households to lower their energy costs at the same time as reducing Australia's emissions.
Australia is cutting red tape and getting rid of unnecessary regulation so that it is easier to do business in Australia, while maintaining our high environmental standards.
And we’re streamlining our decision making, giving the green light to new projects worth over $500 billion since the new government was elected in September last year.
Australia is also actively seeking new markets, vigorously pursuing freer trade with our key trading partners.
In words that might be familiar to this Texas audience[5], on the night of my election I declared that Australia is open for business.
Now, I know that Governor Perry declared “Texas is wide open for business” – I guess everything’s got to be bigger and better in Texas – but I say to Governor Perry, in the spirit of healthy competition, that Australia will be hard to beat.  
We recently concluded an economic partnership agreement with Japan, and signed a free trade agreement with South Korea.
We have also accelerated talks toward a free trade agreement with China.
The recently signed Free Trade Agreement with South Korea will ensure that Australia’s mining resources, including crude petroleum and natural gas, will all become tariff free over 10 years.
Australia now has trade agreements with seven of its top ten trading partners.
And we’re working with President Obama to achieve a Trans Pacific Partnership agreement that is as comprehensive and ambitious as possible.
Trade is an essential part of building a stronger and more prosperous Australia.
Trade and commerce with Asia is thriving: three quarters of Australia’s exports are to Asia.
Australia is a gateway to a region of immense opportunity, and because we are more than trading partners - because we are good global citizens – we are seeking to improve the operations of the world energy market.
The global energy landscape has changed dramatically in recent decades.
Emerging economies have become major players and the balance of energy trade has shifted towards the Asia Pacific region.
As this year’s President of the G20 we want global energy institutions to reflect this reality, and want to make energy markets more transparent, resilient and efficient.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the similarities between Australia and Texas are striking.
Our populations are roughly equal with prosperity especially flowing from our energy, minerals and tourism.
We both look to the Asia Pacific region.
While Australia is the world’s 12th largest economy by GDP, the state of Texas is the 13th.
Mark Twain visited Australia in 1895 and praised our ‘spirit of independence’; likewise, the independent spirit of Texas is the stuff of legend.
And each year in Australia a special service remembers the crew of the USS Houston, which was sunk alongside HMAS Perth in 1942, in the Battle of the Sunda Strait, heroes to the last fighting a much larger force[6].
I have been buoyed to see evidence everywhere in Houston of Australians and Americans working together to meet the energy needs of the world.
That will increase with the establishment of an Australian Consulate-General here in Houston to promote and facilitate our links.
Nana Booker has well and truly alerted us to the possibilities of this city and this state over fourteen wonderful years and will forever be Honorary Consul Emeritus.
The modern world is unimaginable without energy.
Energy consumption defines prosperity.
As a world energy capital – this city is helping to power much of the planet.
And there’s more that we can do together to end energy poverty and give people everywhere the better life we all seek.
[ends]
 
[1] Barbara Bush: A Memoir, page 446-447.
[2] Houston is named after former General Sam Houston, who was president of the Republic of Texas.
[3] US Energy Information Administration, quoted in CSIRO “Australia’s Shale Gas Resources”.
[4] Chevron is sponsoring this function
[5] Governor Rick Perry has declared “Texas is wide open for business”.  He has established a website – www.texaswideopenforbusiness.com
[6] The Battle of Sunda Strait.


I have said many times that Australia’s relationship with Indonesia is very important to me and is critical to our country. In some respects, it is our most important relationship given Indonesia’s size, proximity and potential as the emerging democratic superpower of our region.
This exhibition gives us a window into the soul of our friend and neighbour, so I congratulate the National Gallery of Australia and in particular Robyn Maxwell on curating such a vibrant exhibition and I also congratulate Ron Radford for his work over many years.
Now, it’s often said by families who have lost their homes that the one thing that is irreplaceable is the family photo albums, our photos, our children’s drawings when they were younger; the snapshots into where we come from, who we are and what we value. The National Gallery is that to Australia, and as we are discovering, it’s also that to Indonesia – it is an irreplaceable treasure.
Art is the thoughtful reflection of our human experience and it’s so right that in this place we display and honour the art of our most important neighbour. I’m pleased to say that this exhibition is certainly not an afterthought. The Gallery has been building its Indonesian and its vast Bali collection for over 50 years.
We have the foresight of the erstwhile Commonwealth Art Advisory Board to thank for much of what we see today and the board was ahead of its time. The fact that a substantial portion of the collection was acquired in the late 1960s says a lot about art and the dimension that it adds to our national story. This collection helps to illustrate how our focus in the arts, as in so much else, has broadened from Europe and to the wider world, but particularly to our neighbourhood.
For some Australians this repositioning was a wrench, but the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board saw the value of learning about our regional neighbours and this collection continued to grow even after the Board ceased to exist in 1973.
It may be the first exhibition in this country devoted to Bali, but it’s certainly not the first time Indonesian art has figured in the National Gallery and as Ron has already mentioned earlier this year, the NGA exhibited Garden of the East: photography in Indonesia 1850s – 1940s and I was delighted to personally send the catalogue of that marvellous exhibition to President Yudhoyono.
We all know that Australians have a love of Bali and more than 800,000 of us travelled to Bali last year alone.
For most Australians, Bali is a place to have fun, but twice, Bali has been a place of anguish. But even in the bad times the kindness and the goodness of the Balinese people shines through and this exhibition reflects that. It reflects a rich culture and a timeless spirituality.
As we know, Indonesia is a Muslim country, but it is a pluralist society and it’s to Indonesia’s great credit that so many cultures have been able to flourish in peace throughout its vast archipelago.
Bali holds a special place in the hearts of many Australians and so I hope thousands and thousands will get the chance to see this magnificent collection.
I am delighted to be here, I really am.
I wish Bali: Island of the Gods every success and it is my pleasure and an honour to declare this exhibition officially open.
[ends]


Thanks Mr Deputy Speaker. I present the Clean Energy Legislation (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013, No. 2 and the explanatory memorandum to this Bill and the True-up Shortfall Levy (General) (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013, No. 2, the True-up Shortfall Levy (Excise) (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013 No.2, the Customs Tariff Amendment (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013, No.2, the Excise Tariff Amendment (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013, No.2, the Ozone Protection and Synthetic Greenhouse Gas (Import Levy) Amendment (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013, No. 2 and the Ozone Protection and Synthetic Greenhouse Gas (Manufacture Levy) Amendment (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013, No.2.
Thanks so much Mr Deputy Speaker, today the Government reintroduces the Clean Energy Legislation (Carbon Tax Repeal) Bill 2013.
As I said back in November of last year when I introduced this Bill for the first time, the Australian people have already voted on this Bill and now the Parliament again gets its chance.
The people have spoken and now, it’s up to this Parliament to show that it’s listened.
The Australian people pronounced their judgment against the carbon tax: they want it gone and this Bill delivers.
It delivers on the Coalition’s commitment to the Australian people to scrap this toxic tax.
So Mr Deputy Speaker, the Budget that the Government delivered recently was tough but it was visionary.
It was about setting this country on a path to long-term structural change.
But, a cornerstone of this Government’s plan for a stronger economy, for lower taxes, for less regulation and for stronger businesses, is the repeal of the carbon tax.
The first impact of this Bill will be on households whose overall costs will fall by about $550 a year on average.
Because of this Bill, household electricity bills will be around $200 lower next financial year without the carbon tax.
Household gas bills will be about $70 lower next financial year without the carbon tax.
Prices for groceries, for household items and for services will also fall because the price of power is embedded in every price in our economy.
This is a Bill to reduce the bills of the Australian people – that’s what it is – it’s a Bill to reduce the bills of the people of Australia.
When the price of power comes down, the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission will be ready to ensure that these price reductions are passed on to households and to businesses.
But – and this is important Mr Deputy Speaker – families and pensioners will keep the tax cuts and the benefit increases already provided.
The carbon tax will go, but the carbon tax compensation will stay so that every Australian should be better off.
Repealing the carbon tax will reduce costs for all Australian businesses, for every single one of them.
Now the previous government said and argued that only big business paid the carbon tax but this simply wasn’t true.  Every small business paid the carbon tax through higher electricity and gas bills and higher costs for supplies.
As well, Mr Deputy Speaker, the carbon tax acts as a reverse tariff.
Not only does the carbon tax make it more difficult for Australian businesses to compete abroad, it makes it more difficult for domestic businesses to compete at home – because there is no carbon tax on imports.
So Mr Deputy Speaker, repealing the carbon tax removes over 1,000 pages of primary and subordinate legislation.
Repealing the carbon tax cuts the size of the climate change bureaucracy.
So, repealing the carbon tax will reduce the cost of living, make jobs more secure and improve the competitive position of our country.
That’s what it does: it reduces the cost of living, it makes jobs more secure and it improves the competitive position of our country.
Now why would anyone be against that, particularly when it’s what the Australian people have voted for?
Mr Speaker, repealing the carbon tax is what the employers and what the jobs providers of our country want now.
The Business Council of Australia for instance “supports the wind-up of the current carbon pricing mechanism because it places excessive costs on business and households and because (our) carbon charge…is now one of the highest in the world;” that’s what the BCA says about the carbon tax.
The carbon tax has ripped through the economy, hitting schools, hitting hospitals, nursing homes, charities, churches, council swimming pools and community centres.
It has hit each and every group and each and every individual that uses power – and that was always its goal: to make electricity more expensive.
That was the intention of the previous government, to put power prices up because that was their way of reducing emissions.
The intention of the new Government, of this Government, is to put power prices down by axing this toxic tax and by using other means to reduce emissions.
By reducing the cost of electricity and gas, we will help to make households better off, workers more secure and our economy stronger.
Now Mr Deputy Speaker, no one should be in any doubt – the Government is repealing the carbon tax in full, we are repealing the carbon tax in full. We are doing what we were elected to do.
Others have said that they would terminate the carbon tax, but they were only renaming it.
Well, Mr Speaker, we are not renaming it. We are abolishing the carbon tax in full.
Repealing the carbon tax at the end of the financial year provides certainty for business and it simplifies the transition.
It means that the Government will not be proceeding with the previous government’s legislated carbon tax increase that would have taken effect from the 1 July.
Now Mr Deputy Speaker, unfortunately, the new Government cannot undo the past, we can only make the future better – and that is precisely what we intend to do.
Under this Government, the carbon tax will not apply from the 1st of July so there will be no need for further compensation packages.
We will end the merry-go-round of carbon tax industry assistance that takes from one pocket and puts less back in the other.
We will ensure that the benefits of repealing the carbon tax are passed on to consumers.
The ACCC will have further powers to take action against any business that engages in price exploitation in relation to the carbon tax repeal.
There will be penalties of up to $1.1 million for corporations and $220,000 for individuals.
Mr Deputy Speaker, it is prudent to do what we reasonably can to reduce carbon emissions.
But we don’t believe in ostracising any particular fuel and we don’t believe in harming economic growth.
Climate change is a serious issue and we do have strong policies to come into place so that we rest lightly on the planet.
The Government is repealing the carbon tax because there is a less complicated and less costly way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions – a way that will actually reduce emissions and won’t damage the economy.
So, we’ll scrap the carbon tax and then proceed with our Direct Action Plan.
The centrepiece of this Direct Action Plan will be the Emissions Reduction Fund – a market-based mechanism for reducing carbon dioxide emissions; a fund which provides a powerful and direct additional incentive for businesses to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.
The $2.55 billion fund will use positive incentives to reduce Australia’s emissions and it will prioritise cost-effective, targeted means to do so.
It’s an incentive-based approach which will support Australian businesses and households to lower their energy costs at the same time as reducing Australia's emissions.
It will see us plant more trees, get more carbon captured in soils, clean up power stations and use smarter technology.
We believe, Mr Deputy Speaker, that by the time the five per cent reduction kicks in in 2020 we'll have an overall reduction in our emissions of some 22 per cent of 2000 levels off a business as usual and this is serious action about a significant problem.
Mr Deputy Speaker, the carbon tax is a $9 billion hit on our economy this year alone.
It is a $9 billion hit on jobs, a $9 billion burden on investment and a $9 billion burden on Australians that we just don’t need.
This Bill gets rid of it.
This Bill, Mr Deputy Speaker, is the Government’s Bill to reduce the Australian people’s bill and so I commend the Bill to the House and I move that this Bill be read a second time.
[ends]


John, thank you so much. Stephen, thank you so much and yes you did throw me out a couple of times when I was a very new of Member of Parliament, but your role now is more elevated and you’re doing it splendidly if I may say so.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a real thrill to be here because this committee of yours, this committee for the economic development of Australia has for a very long time now been one of the best forums for the development of serious thinking about where our country is going.
For over 50 years, CEDA has helped to drive debate about our country’s social and economic development.
Most people have an opinion about what’s best for our country – unsurprisingly, it’s often whatever’s best for the person expressing the opinion but because CEDA has no institutional self-interest to push, it’s been better than most at taking a long-term view focused on what’s genuinely in the national interest, so congratulations.
The decisions that we now acknowledge have shaped our country and have set up our prosperity have often been unpopular in the short-term and initially difficult for the governments that made them.
Prime Minister Menzies for instance opened up trade with Japan at a time when Japanese cars were still banned from RSL club car parks.
Prime Minister Whitlam opened the door to China when many Australians thought that communism and trade could not mix.
Prime Minister Hawke’s opening to foreign banks, privatisation and tariff cuts were deeply unpopular inside the Labor Party.
Prime Minister Howard’s tax reforms, waterfront reforms and welfare reforms were ferociously opposed by the then-opposition.
It’s always easy to pander to fear and short-term self-interest but Australia has succeeded because at least some governments have been better than that.
Especially between 1983 and 2007, a golden quarter century of political courage and economic reform, good governments from both sides of the political fence made Australia more competitive, more innovative and more productive.  As this State of the Nation Conference meets, we again face tough choices that will lay the foundation for a stronger Australia.
What must surely be clear is that doing nothing is not an option.
In 2007, the Commonwealth government had a $20 billion surplus and $50 billion in the bank. But by 2013, consistent surpluses had turned into the six biggest deficits ever with no end in sight under the policies of the former government despite the best terms of trade in our history.
The former government was addicted to borrowing and spending. In real terms, spending grew almost twice as fast as the economy and debt was forecast to grow to $667 billion. So the task for this government has been to get spending down while maintaining and even increasing economic growth.
We need to boost the three “Ps”- population, productivity and participation without taking the soft option of pretending to do so just by spending more.
Today, I want to focus on the Government’s measures to encourage more people to join the workforce or to stay in the workforce. But first, we need to be clear about the scale of the challenge: Longer lives are a cause for celebration – I am celebrating more the older I get! But all these extra retirees have to be paid for. The ratio of working age people to people over 65 will decline from five to one to under three to one by 2050.
To preserve generous social security benefits and good health and education services, we need relatively more tax payers. We have to find ways of increasing the proportion of workers in our economy. We need more people who are “having a go” in order to preserve the “fair go” that has always been such a crucial part of the Australian way of life and we need to start addressing these issues now, and changing policy now, rather than later when change will be even harder.
Policy drift is the refuge of the political opportunist who has forgotten the purpose of public life.
Now almost everything that this Government does is designed to ensure that more people have jobs. But there’s a right way and a wrong way to boost the number of jobs: more government spending might boost employment in the short term but, in the long-term, more government spending usually makes it harder to sustain the profitable private businesses that are the real engine of jobs growth.
Lower tax, less red and green tape, and freer trade are the best and most successful means to higher economic growth and more jobs. But in particular, we need to make it easier for young people, for older people and for women to enter or to re-enter the workforce because these are the groups with the most potential to boost employment participation. Lifting participation among these three groups is an important economic outcome that would help offset the pressures of an ageing population.
Over sixty years ago, Sir Robert Menzies put the case for greater workforce participation. He said: a job “is much more than source of income…it is also a source of personal satisfaction and individual dignity….The pursuit of happiness lies along a self-made road; seldom along a road made by others no matter how good their intentions”. “The sense of individual dignity”, he said, “which comes from doing a job gives to the doer the personal satisfaction of helping one’s self, rather than having to rely on a social security benefit”.
So the policies of this Government are very much in the tradition established by our distinguished forbear.
You’ll note that Menzies wasn’t just referring to more self-reliant people; he was celebrating more self-fulfilled people.
This Government is not promoting more jobs because that’s what economic theory tells us to do. We are promoting more jobs because that is most likely to lead to happier, more-self-fulfilled people. We are building a stronger economy because that will lead to a happier society.
Empowered citizens can do more for themselves than government will ever do for them, and the best form of empowerment is a job.
My friends, work is so much more than just a way to gain a living. Work gives people’s lives meaning and purpose.  Work gives individuals the satisfaction of providing for themselves and their families. Work helps to give people the practical, intellectual and social skills needed for a full and rewarding life. Indeed, the camaraderie of workmates is something we don’t often appreciate fully, until we don’t have it anymore.
To be without work is a disaster, especially for young people. It locks them out of the economic and social mainstream of our community. It stops them achieving their potential.   That’s why there’s no compassion in having people start their adult lives on unemployment benefits. Even in difficult times, there’s little that’s more satisfying than finding a job, making a success of it, and providing for yourself.
That’s why all fit young people should be earning or learning – and expected to persevere for six months to find a job or to choose a further training programme before accessing welfare payments. That’s why all young people who do find themselves on unemployment benefits should be working for the dole. Fit young people should be working, preferably for a wage but, if not, for the dole.
From 1 January next year, new jobseekers up to the age of 30 will have to look for a job for six months before receiving unemployment benefits.   Young people who have been working will wait a shorter time because they have been having a go and making a contribution.  Of course, there’s no change to access to income support for young people in education or training; or for young people with a significant disability or parenting responsibilities.
These changes do mean, though, that the days of doing nothing on the taxpayer are over.
Gone.
The era of something for nothing is no more.
Being an adult means taking responsibility for the choices you make and making the best possible choices in the circumstances you face. Only after six months will young jobseekers receive income support and then there will be a requirement to participate in at least 25 hours a week of Work for the Dole. Work for the Dole is giving as well as receiving; that’s why there’s a dignity to work for the dole that’s not there for people who simply receive unemployment benefit, especially long-term recipients. Given a choice between being useful in the community and taxpayer-funded idleness, governments, parents and society at large should prefer purposeful activity every time.
As Employment Minister, I spent a lot of time with people on Work for the Dole projects. I never saw anyone demeaned by it; I never saw anyone who hadn’t benefitted from participation.  Most unemployed people are yearning to show the world what they can do – not what they can’t do – and work for the dole gives them that chance.
Because there is no time to waste, next week, Work for the Dole will commence in 18 areas across Australia for all job seekers between 18 and 30 years old. Work for the Dole will move to a full national scheme from 1 July next year.  Under these reforms, young jobseekers, at any time, may commence eligible study or training and receive Youth Allowance for students until this is completed.
Australia’s training completion rates are too low – only about 50 per cent of the people who commence an apprenticeship actually finish it. 
One of the reasons young apprentices don’t complete their training is because they can’t afford the costs of being an apprentice – especially when their workmates are earning more in less skilled jobs.  So from 1 July this year, we will support those learning a trade by providing concessional Trade Support Loans of up to $20,000 over a four-year apprenticeship – with the loans structured to encourage completion. And from 1 July 2016, the Government will remove the 25 per cent loan fee that applies to VET FEE-HELP for eligible full-fee paying students in higher level vocational education and training courses.  Along with support for younger Australians seeking training, this Government is determined to make employment more attractive for mothers.
First, we’ll make the existing child care system more flexible and accessible than it already is – and the Productivity Commission will report shortly to the Government with its recommendations.
Second, we’re implementing a Paid Parental Leave scheme that’s based on people’s actual wage rather than the minimum wage.
It’s important to remember that of the 34 nations of the OECD, 33 offer paid parental leave schemes – and, of these 33 countries, Australia is one of only two that fails to pay leave based on a replacement wage.
Paid parental leave isn’t a gift. It isn’t welfare. It’s a workplace entitlement – and to ensure it doesn’t make it more expensive to employ a woman, it’s administered by government and paid for by a levy on big business. 
As well as boost youth participation and female participation in the workforce, this Government is determined to boost seniors’ participation too.
Ability, not age, should be the test for employment – but all too often older workers face prejudice when they apply for jobs. Older workers have the experience, wisdom and stability to be the very best of employees.  So from 1 July this year, the Government will introduce a new wage subsidy, Restart, for businesses that take people over 50 off welfare and into sustained work.   Employers who hire an eligible older job seeker for full-time work will receive $10,000 over 2 years.  This should be sufficient incentive for employers to step outside their comfort zone, and give mature jobseekers a fair go.
As well, we want to ensure that disabled people with some work capacity are supported to seek employment, especially those under 35. So the Government will strengthen the measure introduced by our predecessor to create participation plans for disability support pensioners under the age of 35 with some capacity to work.
I want to stress that Australia has always been the land of the fair go; but part of giving people a fair go is encouraging them to be their best selves; making it easier for them to have a go too.
The new Government wants more Australians to be economic contributors as well as social and cultural contributors and the best way for that to happen is through work.
I want more Australians to be workers; I want our people to be more productive because, that way, our country will be stronger and our citizens will be more fulfilled.
I want this Government to be the best friend that the workers of Australia have ever had and making it more likely that more Australians will join the workforce is part of that.
So ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for the opportunity to be here this morning.
Again, I very much appreciate the work that CEDA does to promote informed and intelligent debate about the problems that face our country. And I want to thank all of you for your participation in that debate.
Every single one in this room is a busy person; the fact that you’re prepared to give up a couple of days to come to Canberra and participate in these discussions is a sign of your commitment to our country and we need more people more committed to our country if we are to succeed as we should in the years and decades ahead.
Thank you very much.
[ends]


President Alan Stockdale, Premier Napthine, Premier Newman, Premier Hodgman, fellow Liberals.
On this the 70th anniversary of our party, my colleagues and I stand before you proud of our history, humbled and honoured by the responsibility of government and determined to keep faith with our values that have shaped modern Australia.
We are the party of Menzies and Fraser and Howard – determined to do the right thing by the forgotten people, by the battlers and by everyone who is making a contribution – or who is yearning to make a contribution to our great country.
As Liberals, we stand for the people who work hard, pay their taxes, volunteer in their local community and save for their retirement.
Because you embody what’s best in our national character; helping neighbours, giving people the benefit of the doubt, welcoming strangers, and “having a go” at making everyone’s life better.
As Liberals, we stand for you: the citizen over the official, the community over the state and the family over everything.
As Liberals, we trust the citizens of Australia to get most things right, most of the time – and mostly, you do because you understand your best interests, at least as well as officials.
No one owns the Liberal Party except its members who are drawn from every nook and cranny of modern Australia.
And because no one owns us, we can govern in the national interest – for all Australians.
On this, our 70th anniversary, we can be proud of what we have achieved.
It is the Liberal Party that always has to clean up the mess our opponents create: to end the waste, pay back the debt, scrap the big new taxes and stop the boats.
And because people turn to us to clean up the messes we did not create, we can take credit for our country’s best years, under Howard and under Menzies, when millions of jobs were created and wages went up and up.
It is the Liberal Party that oversaw the post-war explosion of home ownership – putting the keys of a home within the grasp of most families.
It is the Liberal Party that rejected sectarianism and backed parents – providing  funding for independent schools.
It is the Liberal Party that created the modern university system and built our national capital.
It is the Liberal Party that has always supported small business with lower tax, less regulation, and a hand up rather than a hand out.
It is the Liberal Party that delivered child endowment, family allowances and the baby bonus.
It is the Liberal Party that drove the post war migration programme and ended the white Australia policy – and it’s the Liberal Party that welcomes immigrants from the four corners of the Earth eager to join our Australian team.
It is the Liberal Party that doesn’t just announce the infrastructure of the future – we build it!
We built the Snowy Mountains Scheme, completed the Alice Springs to Darwin railway, created national highways and are now building the roads of the 21st century:
East West Link stages one and two here in Melbourne;
WestConnex and NorthConnex in Sydney;
the Gateway upgrade in Brisbane;
the North-South Road in Adelaide;
the Swan bypass in Perth, and
the Midland Highway in Tasmania.
It is the Liberal Party that put forward the 1967 Referendum; that selected the first Indigenous members of the Senate and the House of Representatives – and that will sponsor a referendum acknowledging the first Australians in the Constitution.
It is the Liberal Party that kept Australia strong by signing the ANZUS Treaty, by properly funding our defence force and by stopping the boats – not once but twice!
But we don’t do this on our own: we have had the National Party by our side and I honour them today.
As John Howard has often reminded us, we succeed in Coalition – and only in Coalition.
He also reminded us that our party is the political custodian in Australia of the liberal and the conservative traditions.
As Liberals we support lower taxes, smaller government and greater freedom.
As conservatives we support the family and values that have stood the test of time.
And as patriots  we assess our actions not against ideology but against common sense – does this make our people and our country stronger?
While much has changed since 1944, our yearning is undimmed: to leave our children richer than ourselves, to come closer to our best selves individually and collectively and to leave our country a better place.
A better Australia needs a government that values long-term respect ahead of short-term popularity.
That’s why we are taking action now to repair the Budget.
The Australian people know that we inherited porous borders and a broken Budget.
You know that our country faces difficult choices and you expect us, as your government, to deal honestly with them.
You know that the Commonwealth Government can’t keep spending $1 billion every month on interest alone.
You know that economic drift is not a policy – because we had six years of that.
You know that problems don’t automatically go away and that tough decisions today are needed to avoid even tougher ones tomorrow.
That’s why this government has faced up to the challenges before our country, not put them off for another day.
This Budget cuts almost $300 billion from our projected debt over the next decade and brings the Budget back to balance within four years.
It shifts the focus from short-term spending to long-term investment.
It saves and it builds; it lives within our means and it plays to our strengths, with the Commonwealth’s biggest ever road programme and perhaps the world’s biggest medical research future fund.
The Budget is purposeful, thoughtful and effective.
We are asking young Australians to earn or learn – because no one should start adult life without a clear purpose.
We are changing the way social security benefits are indexed - to make the system sustainable – because what’s fair for some payments is fair for others.
We are deregulating higher education – because universities, of all institutions - should be capable of running themselves.
And we’re spreading Commonwealth support to more institutions of higher learning and to diploma courses.
We are charging a modest co-payment for visits to the doctor – to make Medicare sustainable - because what’s fair for the PBS is fair for Medicare.
The Budget is not about what’s easy or popular in the short-term.  It’s about what’s right for the long-term.
It’s about clear principle and sound practice – the clear principle and sound practice that has marked the nine months since the election.
There is still work to do but there has not been one single successful people smuggling venture this year.
Handouts to shaky business have stopped because you can’t subsidise your way to prosperity.
Infrastructure projects are starting.
After 50 years of procrastination, Sydney’s second airport is finally going ahead.
I’ve led business delegations to China, Korea, Japan, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, the United States and Canada – because the world should know that when we say that Australia is under new management and open for business – we mean business!
By the end of this term you will see real changes across every area of our country – to give you more choice, more freedom and more control over your future.
Families won’t pay the carbon tax – saving about $550 a year.
Pensioners will keep the carbon tax compensation – but lose the carbon tax.
Bulldozers will be at work on new roads up and down the Eastern Seaboard.
Exporters will be reaping the benefits of free trade agreements with Korea and Japan – and, we hope, with China.
Young unemployed people will have their dignity restored with expanded Work for the Dole.
Businesses and community groups will see less red and green tape – with 50,000 pages of red tape, costing $700 million a year to administer, already identified and on the way out.
Investors will be more confident – because of a one-stop shop for environmental approvals; the construction cop back on the beat; and the Mining Tax gone.
More Indigenous kids will be in school, adults at work and communities safe.
Apprentices will have access to $20,000 in low interest loans to finish their training.
Australian university students and researchers will be fanning out through our region under the New Colombo Plan.
The Green Army will be marching to the rescue of degraded land and polluted streams.
Refugees will be coming safely to our country through the front door, not unsafely through the back door.
Our armed forces and security agencies will be better funded and more capable.
We will be a better friend to our neighbours because our foreign policy will be “Jakarta before Geneva” - with a practical approach to problem solving.
And the people smugglers will stay out of business – because this government will never return to the failed policies of the recent past.
I wish I could say that at the end of this term, our farmers will be experiencing more rain – I can’t promise that.
Still, our $320 million drought package is a sign that we will respond to whatever challenges are ahead.
And we will be on the path to reforming our federation.
We all know that our federation has great strengths – combined with buck passing, duplication, waste and inefficiency.
With Liberal-National governments in Canberra and most of the states and territories, now is the time to make each level of government sovereign in its own sphere.
Today, I announce that the Government has released the Federation Reform White Paper terms of reference.
This White Paper will be developed with the states and territories, released by the end of 2015, and inform the policies we take to the next election.
Next week, there will be a new Senate – and our invitation to the new senators is to help us build the better country that our people want.
Work with us to reduce families’ power bills.
Work with us to restore confidence in our mining sector.
Work with us to return the rule of law to building sites.
Work with us to establish one of the world’s biggest medical research funds.
Work with us to give working mums a fair go.
I say to the new senators – we won’t hector you and we won’t lecture you.
We respect your election as we ask you to respect ours.
We simply ask that you acknowledge the trust placed in us by the Australian people to be their government.
There are many people to thank for last September’s win and the leadup to it.
I thank all my parliamentary team – in particular, my Deputy Julie Bishop and our Deputy Prime Minister Warren Truss.
I could not ask for more steadfast colleagues.
New Liberal Senators will join us next week – and if anyone has earned a place it is Senator-Elect Linda Reynolds from Western Australia – who didn’t win just one election, but two.  Congratulations!
I thank outgoing party president Alan Stockdale – a former Treasurer of Victoria as well as President of the Party who took the job when no one wanted it and steered us back to victory.  Thank you Alan. 
I thank the incoming President, Richard Alston – a former state president, cabinet minister and high commissioner in London who then took on the presidency of the Kooyong F.E.C – a true and selfless servant of our party.
I thank Brian Loughnane – Our Federal Director is the finest political analyst and best political organiser in a generation.
I thank my own office, headed by Peta Credlin, the fiercest political warrior I’ve ever worked with.
I thank our state leaders – back in 2010 our only State Premier was Colin Barnett.
Now we have Liberal Governments in NSW, Victoria, Queensland, Tasmania and the Northern Territory thanks to you, the Liberal family right around Australia.
At our 70th anniversary our party is strong.  It is united.  It is delivering the leadership and policies that our country needs.
We are guarding and guiding the destiny of a nation that’s as free, fair and prosperous as any on earth and may God guide us as we go about this task.
Finally, I say to the Australian people that we will strive to be worthy of the faith you have placed in us and to give you ever more reason to be proud of our country.
[ends]


Colleagues, it is good that we are gathered here today on the first of July – the day that the new Senate starts. 
The new Senate has some very important work to do because not only does the new Senate start today but of course, pending its repeal, the carbon tax goes up today. 
Pending repeal the world’s biggest carbon tax just got bigger now and this is why the repeal legislation that will be dealt with next week is so important. 
The carbon tax, as we know, is nine per cent on the price of power. It is a $9 billion handbrake on our economy. It is a $550 hit on every household’s cost of living so it is very important that the first significant item of business for the new Senate is the carbon tax repeal legislation.
We do welcome the new Senate. We do want to work constructively and respectfully with the new Senate. 
Obviously, Eric, you in particular have been having discussions with the incoming Senators. I have had discussions with some of them. I am reasonably optimistic that we can do good things together for our country and for the benefit of our people.
There are other things happening today. Work for the Dole as a mandatory continuous activity for people under 30 – for unemployed people under 30 – starts today or is beginning today in 18 areas right around our country. 
The youth job retention bonuses start to operate from today. 
The Restart wage subsidy programme for older workers starts to operate from today. 
These are some of the constructive new policies that were announced in the Budget kicking off from today.
Finally, could I just say what a good, strong team we have been over the last nine months. Obviously, we had a very difficult inheritance from our predecessors – $123 billion of prospective deficits, debt peaking at $667 billion. This is a dreadful legacy of debt and deficit disaster that we inherited from the government on top of all the other disasters; such as the border protection disaster, the sheer incompetence and untrustworthiness that we had for six years but the commitments that we made are being implemented. We are stopping the boats. We are building the roads. We are getting the Budget back under control and the carbon tax and the mining tax are going to be repealed. 
So, I think we can all be very confident that the deal that we struck with the Australian people in the election campaign is being delivered upon so, well done. 
I think we can feel reasonably happy with the first nine months – it hasn’t been easy, it certainly hasn’t been easy. There have been lots of political ups and downs but nevertheless those fundamentals, those fundamentals that we made a commitment to the public on – we are delivering.
[ends] 


Thanks very much, Robert. Thanks Phil and Gary. It’s great to be here and the fact that I’m here with the Premier and with so many of my federal and state parliamentary colleagues shows what an important day this is for Victoria, for dairying, for manufacturing and ultimately for consumers because they will get a better product as a result of what we are doing here today.
I guess I should first of all pay tribute to Murray Goulburn. This is our biggest dairy business; it’s by far our biggest diary exporter. 50 per cent of your product is exported and that’s dollars for Australia coming in from abroad, so well done. Well done to the 2,500 thousand farmers that are your owners, well done to the 2,000 staff who are responsible for your product and I suppose I should say well done to those busy, busy cows that produce 3.2 billion litres of milk every year to make these fine products!
It is an antidote to any pessimism that we might sometimes be tempted to feel about dairying, about manufacturing and about the ability of Australian companies to work together to give Australian consumers the best possible deal.
Coles cops a bit of flack because it’s our biggest retailer and Coles and Woolies between them have a very dominant position in Australian retailing, but it was a great credit to Coles that they were prepared to offer Murray Goulburn a ten year contract because that’s what Murray Goulburn needed to invest $160 million in this plant and in a comparable plant in Sydney to service that contract.
Corporate Australia comes in for a lot of criticism, but this is an example of two large businesses – Coles and Murray Goulburn – working to the benefit of the 2,500 farmers that are their owners and the millions and millions of Australians that are their consumers. So, this is our market capitalist system working as it should work for the benefit of everyone and we should celebrate that today.
This is your day, it’s not my day, it’s not Denis’ day. We are here to pay tribute to you. We are here to thank you for what you have done for us and for Victoria and for Australia and indeed for the wider world, but I probably should indicate that government at all levels is trying to work for your further benefit.
We are, as Denis and Phil and Gary pointed out, working as hard as we can to complement the free trade negotiations that have been concluded with Korea and with Japan, with a free trade agreement with China. We all know that the Kiwis have stolen a bit of a march on us over the last few years and we want our farmers and our businesses to be competing in China on a level playing field with those of New Zealand.
As Denis has pointed out, between the Commonwealth and the state, we are determined to ensure that the East West Link goes ahead so that produce can move around  this great state and this great country much more effectively and efficiently than it currently does and get to port more efficiently and effectively than it currently does.
I am hoping – I don’t take anything for granted in this uncertain world in which we live – but I am hoping that next week you will finally be rid of the toxic tax – the carbon tax.
We have some crossbench senators who were elected on various platforms, but invariably, their platform included scrapping the carbon tax and I am confident that the new members of the Senate will act in accordance with their pre-election commitments and next week this carbon tax which adds $5,000 plus to the cost of the average dairy farm will be gone, for the good of dairying, for the good of manufacturing and ultimately for the good of Australian consumers.
So, thank you everyone. I really appreciate the opportunity to be here today and well done – well done. You should feel very proud of yourselves, everyone associated with this development.
[ends]


Tonight, I want to address the question: “whether a reforming prime minister can succeed any more in this country given the decisive shift in the system and culture against reform?”
It’s an important question.
It’s the question Paul Kelly posed in his column yesterday.
It’s a question many of you may have pondered – especially over the past few weeks.
It can only be answered with a decisive “yes”.
“Yes” because business as usual is not an option for a country that’s living beyond its means.
“Yes” because the Australian people will never be content to wallow in mediocrity.
And “yes” because, for the past ten months, a reforming government has been in place and is already making a difference.
The age of reform has not ended in Australia.
It has only been interrupted and is now beginning again.  Strongly.  Purposefully.  And I believe effectively.
Before the election, the Coalition made a contract with the Australian people: to stop the boats, repeal the carbon tax, build the roads of the 21st century; and get the budget back under control.
A lot else has happened since the election but the boats are no longer coming, an infrastructure boom unmatched in our history is shortly to begin, the budget is now projected to be in balance, and the carbon tax is likely to be gone within a week.
This government is arguing for difficult but necessary reforms – not justifying incompetence or trying to excuse negligence.
This government has a clear plan to address the big issues facing our country – not just the hope of survival from one day to the next.
This, surely, is massive change for the better in less than a year.
I don’t underestimate the challenges ahead.
The only time reform has looked easy was under Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, because the only real opposition they had was internal.
But I don’t underestimate the Australian people either.
You know that no country has ever taxed or subsidised its way to prosperity.
You know that no government can give what it can’t raise.
You know that there is a limit to taxation because there is a limit to your trust in government.
And you know that profitable private businesses are at the heart of the strong economy needed for a strong and stable society.
Wishing that there was an alternative will not create one.
Eventually – if not at the first attempt or even the second – this budget will pass, because no one has put up a credible alternative.
The challenge – for those who understand the importance of change – is not to lament its difficulty, but to work harder to bring it about.
The bad news is that we have indeed had six years of economic drift – lost years.
The good news is that even the Labor Party will eventually realise that you can’t block the government’s Economic Action Strategy without one of your own.
The better news is that while Labor and the Greens are in denial, the government is getting on with doing what’s right and needed.
As your conference theme, “Pathways to growth: the reform imperative”, implies: economic growth is not given; it is earned by continual decisions to stay competitive.
Australia has now experienced 23 uninterrupted years of economic growth; it is a record unparalleled in our history and currently has few equals in the world.
It’s the result of a quarter century of political courage and economic reform.
The reforms of 1983 to 2007 to the financial system and competition policy, and in trade, tax, workplace relations and federal-state relations, resulted in an Australia that was competitive, innovative and productive.
But reform is again imperative.
This government inherited a debt and deficit disaster and a booby-trapped budget with unsustainable and undeliverable spending promised beyond the current forward estimates.
The demographic pressures on tax revenues and on health and welfare spending; and the need to lower business costs and lift productivity to help our businesses become more competitive – all demand that we resume long-term structural reform.
As you have heard today, the government is repairing the budget; rolling out the NBN sooner and at less cost to taxpayers; making the welfare system simpler and more sustainable; and exploring ways to make child care more affordable and accessible.
As you know, we’ve concluded free trade negotiations with Korea and Japan and hope to do so with China.
We’re well on the way to one-stop shop environmental approvals for big projects and have already given the go-ahead for $500 billion in new investment.
There’s to be more reform of the welfare system based on the work of Patrick McClure and Andrew Forrest.
Next year, there’ll be white papers on tax reform and on reform of the federation.
And there’ll be a Productivity Commission report on how workplace changes might improve productivity.
None of this should come as any surprise.
Addressing this conference in 2012, I said that our policy would “be directed towards lower and simpler tax; fairer and more effective administration; better and more efficient services; and, above all else, towards a stronger and more prosperous economy.”
An essential part of our Economic Action Strategy is record investment in infrastructure.
We need it to address the end of the investment phase of the resources boom.
We need it to improve our country’s long-term competitiveness and productivity.
And we need it if there is, indeed, to be an infrastructure prime minister!
Investments in infrastructure are investments in the productive capacity of Australia and Australians.
Little boosts confidence more than seeing cranes in the sky and bulldozers on the ground – because it shows that investors have faith in the future.
As you all know, there is a big difference between investing in an asset and putting day to day expenses on the credit card.
So this year’s budget shifts spending from short term consumption to long term investment.
All too often, at every level, governments have been thinking short term, not long-term.
It’s why, in my own city, road congestion costs some $5 billion a year and why a plane trip from Sydney to Melbourne can take longer than it did 50-odd years ago.
It’s why dams haven’t been built and the construction of new base load power stations is mostly put into the too hard basket.
Then there’s the syndrome known as BANANA – build absolutely nothing anywhere near anyone – that has been a further handbrake on building the infrastructure Australia needs.
Traffic jams plague our big cities.
Freight waits – and waits – on inefficient road and rail connections, especially inland.
Almost 70 per cent of businesses are frustrated with our country’s infrastructure, telling an Australian Industry Group survey that infrastructure was in their top three priorities.
So, in our first Budget, the government has committed a record $50 billion to the infrastructure of the 21st century.
We are already moving on major projects right across Australia.
There’s the East West Link – stages 1 and 2 – that’s by far the most important piece of infrastructure for Melbourne and Victoria because it will provide a new, safe route between Geelong and the Mornington Peninsula.
For more than 50 years governments have talked about a second airport for Sydney.
The talk is over.
We’ve taken the final decision that Badgerys Creek will be the site of Sydney’s second major airport – or, as I prefer, Western Sydney’s first airport.
By 2060, the new airport has the potential to drive an increase in Australian gross domestic product of almost $24 billion and generate 60,000 new jobs.
And heeding past lessons, it will be a case of roads first, airport second: the roads will be built before the first plane has landed.
To get Western Sydney moving again, the budget included a $2.9 billion western Sydney infrastructure plan for major road projects over the next 10 years.
Then there’s WestConnex linking the west with the CBD, the airport and Port Botany.
NorthConnex will make it possible to travel from Newcastle, through Sydney, to Canberra and on to Melbourne without encountering a single set of traffic lights.
The duplication of the Pacific Highway means that, within a few years, there will be just two sets of traffic lights – at most – between Melbourne and Brisbane.
We’re improving the Gateway Motorway in Brisbane, upgrading the North-South Road Corridor in Adelaide and the Midland Highway in Tasmania and funding the long awaited Perth Freight Link.
We’re upgrading the Bruce Highway, building the Toowoomba range crossing, and improving roads in the Northern Territory.
To help the states, there’s the $5 billion Asset Recycling Initiative incentivising them to sell existing assets and to reinvest the sale proceeds into new infrastructure.
Shifting government investment out of existing assets and into new ones adds to economic activity.
It gives reassurance to the taxpayers who paid for assets in the first place that their investment is being preserved and their legacy built upon.
Every state and territory has signed the National Partnership Agreement on Asset Recycling – because it will help to build the infrastructure they need – including, it should be said, public transport infrastructure.
Over the next two years, the Commonwealth will work with the states and territories – on a first come, first served basis – to determine the specific assets to be sold and the additional infrastructure to be built.
Where there are risks that might impede private sector funding, this government has shown that it’s prepared to manage them using mechanisms like concessional loans.
And because Australia will need foreign investment if we are to achieve more infrastructure goals, business delegations have been looking at these prospects during my recent visits to Canada and the United States.
The global infrastructure gap – the difference between infrastructure needs and infrastructure spending – is now about US$1 trillion a year.
Governments can’t finance the world’s infrastructure needs on their own – as we have found in Australia and seen elsewhere.
The private sector must do more.
This is a priority for the G20 this year – and, as president, Australia wants member countries to get the settings right for business to invest in infrastructure.
That means deciding priorities and sticking to them; and it means giving businesses the information they need to make investment decisions.
It also means simpler, speedier and more predictable decision-making processes.
These changes will give business confidence to invest for the long term.
They will also help our G20 goal: to boost the world’s collective GDP by more than two per cent above current projections over the next five years.
In 1949, during the last months of his prime ministership, Ben Chifley put the case to the nation for the Snowy Mountains Scheme that was ultimately delivered by his successor, Sir Robert Menzies.
It was, he said, “…a plan for the whole nation, belonging to no one state, nor to any group or section … This is a plan for the nation – and it needs the nation to back it.”
Provided the numbers stack up, we should back big plans for our nation.
We are not a mean or petty people and we will not be a mediocre nation.
We will set no limits to what we can achieve.
We will remain a beacon of hope and optimism, freedom and prosperity in a troubled world.
We owe it to ourselves; we owe it to the people who depend on us, and the people who look up to us, not to let them down.
It was again Ben Chifley who said just over 60 years ago “if… a thing is worth fighting for, no matter what the penalty is, I will fight for the right, and truth and justice will prevail”.
The new Government is embarked on a great and necessary task.
All of us are gathered here tonight in the cause of a better Australia.
And I tell you this: we will not fail.
[ends]


Members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Tonight in this Great Hall of our Parliament, we honour a respected leader, a great friend and as was said by both myself and the Opposition Leader earlier today, our partner in peace and prosperity – Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan.
I welcome you Sir, I welcome Mrs Akie Abe, I welcome the large, the extraordinarily influential delegation of business leaders that you have brought with you from your country. I thought I had taken a very large and impressive business delegation to Japan, but Prime Minister, your business delegation has trumped mine.
But I do particularly wish to acknowledge and thank all of those business leaders that have travelled from Japan to Australia as part of this trip, just as I thank again those business leaders who travelled from Australia to Japan as part of my trip in April.
We should never underestimate the length and the strength of the business relationship between Australia and Japan. Mitsui have been here for as long as the Commonwealth existed. Mitsui first came in 1901; Mitsubishi have been here since 1920. There are very few Australian businesses that have been as long in this country as Mitsui and Mitsubishi.
You trade when you want something, you invest when you trust someone, and these great Japanese business houses have been investing in this country for generations. Based on the total investment figures, after the United States and the United Kingdom, no one trusts Australia more than Japan – and I want to say to you Prime Minister that trust is amply reciprocated.
On behalf of every Member of Parliament and, I’m sure, on behalf of every Australian, I congratulate you, Sir, for your heartfelt and moving address to our Parliament this morning and thank you for the talks we’ve had this afternoon. They have had the candour and comprehensiveness that befits our special relationship.
You said this morning that today marks the birthday of our special relationship. May I add in the same spirit, I hope today marks the death of old fashioned attitudes about Japan that owe everything to the 1930s and nothing to the modern Japan – the great modern Japan; the great peaceful, modern Japan of today.
Of course, this visit occurs very close to the anniversary of the signing of the 1957 Commerce Agreement which your own grandfather, Prime Minister Kishi, negotiated with Australia’s Prime Minister Menzies.
I was musing on the life and times of Prime Minister Menzies. He lost the prime ministership back in 1941 – only to regain it some years later – and went on to become arguably our greatest prime minister. Perhaps there is an omen here for our guest of honour!
Of course, Prime Ministers Menzies and Kishi were men of vision. They refused to be prisoners of the past. They chose to see the good in each other’s countries. As Sir Robert put it, “we all need friends with common interests and common ideals”.
The agreement they signed, all those years ago, profoundly changed our countries. But for the opening that was established then; but for the trust which swiftly developed from that time, there would be no iron ore industry in this country as we know it, there would be no coal industry as we know it in Australia and there would be little gas industry as we know it in Australia.
In April, I saw the impressive modern infrastructure of Japan, much of it built with Australian iron ore.
Tomorrow, it will be my pleasure to show Prime Minister Abe the Pilbara, where the iron ore that has built so much of modern Japan originated.
And of course, earlier today Prime Minister Abe and I signed the Japan-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement which will bring our countries even closer together. I thank Trade Minister Robb who has been indefatigable and tireless in promoting freer trade.
Much of the credit, though, for pushing this agreement to its conclusion, seven long years after negotiations first began, belongs of course to Prime Minister Abe himself. You, Sir, started the negotiations with Prime Minister Howard and now you have finished what you began – and Australia is the beneficiary of Japan’s first comprehensive free trade deal with a major economy.
This will be good for Japan, it will be good for Australia, and it will be good for the wider world because freer trade means more jobs everywhere and lower prices for everyone.
I should also say again tonight how much Australia welcomes Japan’s decision to contribute more to the international peace and stability on which everyone’s prosperity depends. We want Japan to take its rightful place in the community of nations.
We also thank you, Prime Minister, for your embrace of the New Colombo Plan, which I launched during my visit to Japan in April. More than 400 Australian undergraduates will shortly be studying in Japan as part of this initiative.
And I’m pleased that we have with us tonight Mr Jason Emmanuelle, the 2014 Kishi Fellow – the highest award for study….yes, Jason has won the Kishi Fellowship which is the highest award for study in Japan under the New Colombo Plan and he will go onto study linguistics at Osaka University.
Jason and the other New Colombo Plan students who have joined us this evening will help to build an even closer relationship between Japan and Australia in the years and decades to come.
Mr friends, when Prime Minister Menzies visited Japan in 1957 he said that we had “made up our minds to be friends” and he went on to say “that we will stand together to protect the things that matter to us.”
Well almost six decades later, that friendship has grown and grown. It started because we discovered a common interest and continued because we discovered everything else that we had in common: particularly a yearning for justice, freedom and peace.
We trust each other in a way that very, very few nations do. Trust, trust – that is the foundation of the special relationship that we celebrate tonight.
Thank you.
[ends]


Prime Minister Abe and Mrs Abe, Premier Barnett and Mrs Barnett, my distinguished friend and colleague Foreign Minister Julie Bishop, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
I want to say how thrilled and proud and pleased I am to be again in the presence of my friend, Shinzo Abe, at the close of what has truly been a historic visit to our country. This really has been a historic visit for us and I suspect it has been a historic visit for Japan as well.
Yes, there is the Economic Partnership Agreement that will mean more jobs and lower prices in both our countries. Yes, there is the Defence Technology Agreement which will help to deepen and strengthen our security partnership. It is not just these significant agreements – it is the sheer warmth between two, one-time adversaries; now friends and partners in trade, in defence, in democracy and above all else in peace.
Greg Sheridan, the journalist and commentator, got it right when he wrote in The Australian newspaper this morning that, “Prime Minister Abe’s speech is surely one of the most important speeches ever to have been made in the Australian Parliament”. It didn’t just signal an extraordinary, special relationship between Australia and Japan, it did signal nothing less than a new Japan – a Japan that has learnt and assimilated and acted on the lessons of the past. That is the challenge that all of us face; to learn from the past – not to be shackled by the past.
Today, Shinzo and I accompanied by Sam Walsh and a large delegation of senior leaders from the Japanese corporate world walked the red earth of the Pilbara and saw for ourselves the extraordinary development that has taken place in this great state of Western Australia. I am always conscious of the fact that I am an Easterner and, yes, I feel a little inadequate and inferior when I am here in the West. Just so that you Westerners understand that I appreciate you and what you do for the rest of us let me reiterate that while Western Australia is but 10 per cent of our population – it’s 16 per cent of our GDP and fully 50 per cent of our nation’s exports. So, I want you to know how grateful I am. Premier Barnett is looking a little glum as I say this because my gratitude is never sufficient for your Premier and that is how it should be. Prime Ministers can never quite do enough for Western Australia to keep their Premier satisfied but I am so conscious of the locomotive effect that Western Australia has for our national economy. I am also so conscious of the fact that the Western Australian economy – let alone the Australian economy – is almost unimaginable without the relationship that we have with Japan.
It was Japanese investment, Japanese partnership, that has made possible the iron ore industry and more recently the gas industry which has done so much for this state and so much for our country. We should remember the sheer scale of what has been achieved in the Pilbara in particular. The total amount of iron ore exported to Japan from the Pilbara would produce enough steel to build Japan’s current entire length of railway track more than 300 times over or to build more than 400,000 Tokyo Towers.
Just as our prosperity once rode on the sheep’s back, today just as surely it rides on those bulk carriers that steam so ceaselessly from Western Australian ports to our north. The iron ore that has gone from the Pilbara to Japan is equivalent to the weight of 10,000 fully loaded Panamax carriers. It should be noted that during this past week BHP Billiton celebrated the shipment of its one billionth tonne of iron ore to Japan. So, there are so many remarkable milestones between our two countries and so many of those remarkable milestones are here in Western Australia.
It is interesting today observing the extraordinary achievements of our great mining companies supported with the partnership of the great trading and manufacturing houses of Japan. As I saw what had been achieved I reflected on the contribution that Government had made to this extraordinary success. Government wanted to stop the export of iron ore from Australia until 1960 and then having denied the development of the iron ore industry until 1960 we then tried to control what companies would develop the resources. Then we tried to control the prices that those companies would receive for their resources – and this was a Coalition Cabinet for God sake, in Canberra, that was trying to do all of this. Then there were those arguments that we saw again and again in our country’s history that we were selling ourselves short because the buyers over there in Japan were a united front and the sellers here in Australia were disparate and divided. Well, you know, I saw the representatives of Nippon Steel Mimura-san, I saw the representatives of Mitsui Iijima-san, I have seen the representatives of Marubeni and Kobe and Mitsubishi on this trip. Sure, they are doing well, but look at Sam Walsh, look at Rio, look at BHP, and I think to myself yet again the arguments against market freedom are nor borne out of the reality of the world’s practice.
I do want to thank and congratulate those splendid businesses both Australian and Japanese which have done so much for our prosperity as a nation and as a people.
It’s interesting. You trade with people when you want something – you invest when you trust someone. I do, again, want to pay tribute to the members of Prime Minister Abe’s business delegation. You honour us with your presence – more importantly you honour us with your trust. For two generations now, for six decades, in very large numbers and in very large amounts you have been investing in Australia but in the case of Mitsui and Mitsubishi it goes back 100 years and more.
The great ideal which characterises the relationship between Australia and Japan at every level; the great bargain if you like that characterises our relationship at every level is this sense that we should always treat others as we would have them treat us. This is the foundation of the trust between our people at a national level, at a corporate level and at an individual level. I am so proud to have seen that trust, that partnership, deepen in such extraordinary ways over the last few days.
I think I can say with great confidence and certainty that Shinzo Abe is my friend; but more importantly, I can say with certainty and confidence that Japan is Australia’s true friend and that Australia is Japan’s true friend.
We should never set limits on what we can achieve. Here in Western Australia visionary people in business and, yes, in government too 50 or 60 years ago said that there were no limits to what we can achieve. We saw, with our own eyes, some of what has been achieved today. What a marvellous foundation on which to build and what a great friendship, what a great friendship, and I look forward to Australia and Japan marching together into the future.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a real thrill to be here. I want to thank Nick Varvaris for welcoming me and Luke Hartsuyker, the Assistant Employment Minister, to this electorate. I particularly want to thank Accor for making me and Luke and Nick so welcome today and also in particular for spearheading this push to ensure that we make the most of the contribution that our older people can make to the economy.
There are lots and lots of older people who don’t just want to be cultural and social contributors, they want to be economic contributors as well. Ability, not age, should be the criteria against which we are judged.
It is ability, not age, which should determine our success in the workplace.
That is why it is so important that we should work to overcome this prejudice against older workers in our economy.
For too long we have had this idea that once you have hit a certain age you are just sliding towards retirement. We’ve got to ensure that this kind of stereotype, this kind of pigeonholing is avoided in the future because we do need to boost the productivity and the participation of our economy in the years and decades to come.
As everyone knows, the average age of Australians is edging up. As everyone knows, the proportion of retirees – on current trends – is going to increase. At the moment we’ve got something like five workers for every person over 65. By 2050 – on current trends – we’ll only have three working age people for every person over 65. So, if we are to be the strong and dynamic economy in the future that we’ve always been in the past, we need to encourage older people to stay in the workforce.
And this is not a question of asking people to do what they don’t want to do, of asking people what they’re not capable of doing, it’s giving people more opportunities to realise the best that they can, to be the best that they can. That is what this is all about.
Now, in a few moments Luke Hartsuyker will talk about the details of our Restart programme to support older workers. I simply want to point out to all employers right around the country that – as of now – if you take on someone 50 and above who has been on a social security benefit for the last few months, if you take some like that on and keep that person on for two years that is a $10,000 benefit that you can get.
So, we are changing the economics of employing older people. We are making the economics of employing older people easier and that should mean that we have more older people employed, it should mean that we have better workplaces, and it should mean that we have happier and more productive and more prosperous people. And that’s the objective of good government. In the end, the objective of good government is a better society and more older people being their best selves, more older people being able to make the contribution, that they know in their hearts they can make, is going to make us a better society.
So, I’m very pleased to be here. This is a significant innovation from this Government. It’s an innovation which is already in place. It is already there available for employers who want to do the right thing by themselves, the right thing by their customers, and the right thing by older Australians to take someone on and keep them on.
So, Luke you might like to come to the podium now and extol the virtues of this programme for which you are particularly enthusiastic.
ASSISTANT MINISTER FOR EMPLOYMENT:
Well, thank you Prime Minister and thank you to local member Nick Varvaris who is a passionate supporter for creating opportunities for the people that he represents.
And I’d also like to thank Accor for their support of older workers and giving jobseekers a chance and that’s vitally important because we as a Government will do our best to get the settings right and get the right programmes in place to create employment.
But we need employers to come on board and give people a chance because the Government is absolutely committed to creating employment and opportunities and as Assistant Minister for Employment, I have been working hard to put in place the Government’s agenda that will create opportunities for employees or jobseekers, future employees, and to assist employers to work with those jobseekers to create those opportunities.
And we find that around 22 per cent of the Job Services Australia caseload is comprised of workers 50 years or older. That’s around 173,000 Australians looking for work and I must say that when older workers become employed, some make that transition relatively easily into a new job, but regrettably some find that transition very difficult. Many are becoming unemployed these days perhaps for the first time in their lives or the first time perhaps in decades. It’s a very daunting task for those jobseekers to get into work.
The reality is that older workers bring a wealth of experience to the workplace, and entities and employers benefit from having a combination of ages in their workforce; the combination of youthful exuberance plus the experience and wisdom that comes with years in the workforce. So, it’s a benefit for employers to take on older workers as well as a benefit for those jobseekers.
I’m delighted today to be able to give you some of the details of the Restart programme aimed at assisting employers to gain the benefits that those older jobseekers can bring. The Restart programme, as the Prime Minister says, involves a payment of up to $10,000 to engage older works. How it works is that if an employer takes on a jobseeker who’s been on benefits or unemployed for a period of six months or longer, at the end of the first six months of employment that employer will receive a payment from the Government of $3,000, if that arrangement continues to 12 months – a further $3,000 is payable. At the 18 month mark – a  further $2,000, and then at the two year point another $2,000 which makes up a total payment from the Government of $10,000.
In addition to that, this programme has a significant degree of flexibility in that it makes provision to support on a pro rata basis part-time employment of 15 hours or longer. So, for a person who’s perhaps employed for 20 hours a week they would receive $10,000 – or the employer would receive $10,000 on a pro rata basis.
So, I would encourage all employers to get on board, to go out and source older workers and enjoy the benefits that those older workers can bring to your organisations. I would encourage those employers to make contact with their local Job Service provider to find out more details about the programme. Or alternatively, they can go to the website and visit the website: www.experiencepays.gov.au to unlock the productive capacity of our older workers and to make Australia a place that will be more productive into the future and create greater opportunities for those workers.
So, thank you ladies and gentlemen.
[ends]


Well, it might be the coldest Brisbane morning in 103 years, but that was an extremely warm welcome!
Thank you so much, Luke, and thank you so much, ladies and gentlemen.
I was told before I came up today: don’t mention the football.
But you Queenslanders, you know, you can turn defeat into victory. I gather it was a “points win,” Campbell, on for and against! See, you can declare those things because you’ve only got one house of parliament to deal with!
My friends, we have had an interesting week in the Senate. There are many interesting weeks in the Senate, as those who have studied politics for some time would understand. But after this last week in Canberra, the fault lines in our country and in our polity could not be clearer. They could not be clearer.
On the one hand, you have a Labor Party which insists that it got nothing wrong in six years of bad government, which is in denial about the election result, which is in denial about the harm the carbon tax is doing to the Australian people, which likes to talk about the ‘light on the hill’ – but the ‘light on the hill’ costs 10 per cent more to run because of the Labor Party and its addiction to this carbon tax – still thumbing its nose at the Australian public saying, “You got it wrong last September”. That’s what you’ve got on one side, and on the other side you’ve got a Coalition which is carefully and methodically implementing the commitments that we made to the Australian people.
Look at what the Labor Party is doing to this country right now. They damaged our country in government and now they are determined to keep damaging our country in Opposition.
They are blocking not just the repeal of the carbon tax, not just the repeal of the mining tax, they are blocking not just our savings; they are blocking the savings that they promised the Australian people in the lead-up to the last election.
I heard the leader of the Labor Party in the week saying, “I just wish Tony Abbott would keep his commitments”. Well, that’s exactly what I’m trying to do.
Not only am I trying to keep the Coalition’s commitments, I’m trying to keep Labor’s commitments, too.
They’re not just blocking our Budget savings, they are blocking their own Budget savings.
So what’s crystal clear, my friends, is that all that is keeping our country from long-term economic decline, all that is keeping our country from political gridlock, is us.
I want to say congratulations and thank you to each one of you. Do not underestimate what you are doing. Do not underestimate what your representatives are doing. You and we are rescuing our country and what is obvious is that it is only us who can rescue our country right now.
Some say we’ve had a tough week. Well, I want to say this: I would much rather be defending a tough but necessary Budget than standing before the Australian people day in, day out, week in, week out, year in, year out, justifying incompetence and trying to explain away dishonesty which is what prime ministers Rudd and Gillard did for six years.
Isn’t it refreshing to have at long last in this country, in our national Parliament, a Government which says what it means and does what it says, a Government which knows what it stands for, which knows where it wants to take the country and is not put off – is not put off – by a bad headline and one or two parliamentary difficulties.
When you look at things in the Senate, sure, Mr Palmer has three senators, but Mr Shorten has 25 and we know that Mr Palmer will change his mind come Monday, but Bill Shorten will still be there come Monday, come Tuesday, come next week, come next month, come next year, supporting putting your power prices up, smiling every time your power bill increases, because that’s the modern Labor Party for you: taxes up, spending up, bigger government and smaller citizens. That’s the modern Labor Party.
Well, as I said, we are here to rescue this country from decline.
We are here to ensure that all our tomorrows are better than all our yesterdays. That is our mission.
We said before the election – you all know it – let me repeat it for your benefit: we said before the election that we would stop the boats, we would scrap the carbon tax, we wouldd build the roads of the 21st century and we would get the Budget back under control and that is exactly what we’re doing.
We also said that within 12 months we would finalise free trade agreements with Korea, with Japan and with China. We’ve got two and we have high hopes of getting the third.
I want to say that that free trade agreement that was signed between myself and Prime Minister Abe this week is good news for our country, but in particular, it’s good news for Queensland. It will secure the future of the great mining industry of Queensland. It will help the future of the great agricultural industries of Queensland and it will ensure that the people of Queensland get access, over time, to even better and more reliable consumer goods.
That’s what free trade is all about. Free trade is about more jobs and lower prices and that is what we want to deliver to the people of Queensland and to the people of Australia.
I said that we would stop the boats and I am not declaring victory, but my friends, we are stopping those boats. The most compassionate thing we could do coming into Government was to stop the boats, because not only does stopping the boats stop the Budget blowouts, not only does stopping the boats save billions in unnecessary future spending, but stopping the boats stops the deaths. That’s why the most decent and the most compassionate thing that this Government has done is to ensure that for more than six months now there has been no successful people smuggling venture to our country.
We will never waver. We will never waver in our determination to stop the boats. We will never waver in our commitment to do what we have to do to stop the boats because we must have secure borders. The sign of a sovereign country is that it has secure borders.
While we are stopping the boats, what’s the Labor Party doing? Well, the Labor Party, as we know, can never stop the boats because it is in alliance with The Greens and as far as The Greens are concerned, if you can get here, you can stay here.
Well ladies and gentlemen, this is the problem: you just cannot trust the Labor Party with border security.
We are building the roads. Here in Queensland, along with your great Premier, Campbell Newman, we are getting on with the Gateway Motorway upgrade. We will build the Toowoomba Range Crossing starting next year. We are continuing the upgrade of the Bruce Highway. Only a Coalition Government in Canberra will work with the Coalition Government in Brisbane to move the people and the goods of Queensland around this great state.
You can’t trust Labor to build roads, because, again, they’re in alliance with The Greens and The Greens and Labor suffer from what I call the BANANA syndrome: Build Absolutely Nothing Anywhere Near Anyone. That’s what they suffer from. They are the obstacles to progress, they are the enemies of progress and if you want to build the roads of the future, you have one friend and that’s the Coalition – here in Brisbane and in Canberra.
We are scrapping the carbon tax. If we have a problem in one day in the Parliament, we will work, we will regroup, we will deal with it the next day, because that’s what sensible, adult governments do.
If we have a problem, we don’t despair, we deal with it and that’s exactly what this Government is doing.
But I do give you this assurance: we won’t rest until the carbon tax is gone, because this is a toxic tax.
It’s adding 9 per cent to your power bills, it’s a $9 billion handbrake on our economy and it’s costing average Australian families $550 a year. So, it must go.
And my friends, we are getting the Budget under control. And didn’t we need to get the Budget under control.
The former government – The Rudd/Gillard/Rudd government – gave us the six biggest deficits in our history.
But they didn’t just give us the six biggest deficits in our history, they stirred up debt and deficit as far as they eye can see – $123 billion in projected future deficits, debt after a decade peaking at $667 billion; $25,000 per Australian man, woman and child. $1 billion a month right now – right now – the interest bill on Labor’s debt. That’s dead money that can’t be spent on schools and hospitals and roads because of the debt that Labor ran up.
Our mission is to fix this. Our mission is to fix this, because we know, you know, the Australian people know in the marrow of their bones that governments aren’t so different from families and households, governments have got to live within their means.
That’s exactly what happens as a result of this Budget. Within four years we get back to balance. After all the years of debt and deficit, after all the debt and deficit disaster of the Labor Party and thanks to this Budget, peak debt comes in $300 billion lower than it would under the policies of our opponents.
I know there are many tough elements in this Budget, but the Australian people want to be told the truth.
The Australian people are reasonable, decent, stoical people. Australians have faced tough times before and they know that sometimes you have to make tough decisions today to make tomorrow better.
We are deregulating our universities, because we know that if there’s one institution in the modern world which ought to be capable of running itself, which ought not need to have its hand held by government, it’s our universities, particularly the great universities here in Queensland.
We do have a strong but necessary message to the young people of Australia: when you leave school, you will be earning or learning, because no one should start their adult life on social security.
And yes, we do want to see a modest co-payment for Medicare services, not because we want to make life difficult for people, but because we want our great Medicare system, our great health system, to be sustainable for the long-term.
I congratulate Peter Dutton for the work he’s doing as Health Minister and I congratulate you in this conference for the tough and fair minded approach that you have taken to this difficult subject.
But I say this to the people of Australia: if it’s right and fair and reasonable to have a modest co-payment for PBS drugs, how can it not be right and fair and reasonable to have a modest co-payment for Medicare, especially when it is necessary to keep the system sustainable for the long-term?
Yes, we are changing the indexation system for most social security benefits, again, to make a generous social security system sustainable because our country is changing. ‘Demography is destiny’ as Peter Costello said a few years ago, and right now, there are five workers in our economy for every pensioner. If things don’t change, in 40 years’ time there’ll be just three workers for every pensioner.
So, we do need to make changes now to ensure that the system is sustainable for the long-term.
Some of the changes I announced just this week. We are determined to ensure that just as our young people are encouraged to move swiftly into the workforce, older Australians who want to work should be encouraged to work.  I know there aren’t very many older people in this audience, and all of you are working, not necessarily for pay, but you are working for our country in being here today. But the truth is that we do want to change the economics of employing other people. We do want to break through the prejudice against older workers which has bedevilled our economy for too long. That’s why, already – thanks to this Government’s Budget – if you take an older worker on and keep that worker employed for two years, there’s a $10,000 payment that’s available to you and your business.
Because what we’re doing with this Budget is not just saving, but we’re building too.
We are embarked on the biggest infrastructure spend in the Commonwealth’s history – $50 billion of new infrastructure spending as a result of this Budget.
We’re not just living within our means but we’re playing to our strengths as well. A $20 billion Medical Research Future Fund as a result of this Budget to ensure that Australia will continue to lead the world when it comes to devising the treatments and the cures of the future.
So, this is the right Budget for our country. And yes, it has to be negotiated through the Senate, as every government has had to negotiate its Budget through the Senate, but I say to the critics, what is your alternative? What is your alternative? Because if you have no ideas of your own, stop wrecking and let those who have the ideas get on with the job of building a better Australia.
Luke, thank you so much for your warm introduction. Thank you so much for remembering some of the things that I’ve said, privately and publicly, over the last four years. Because, if there is a lesson from the period of the former government, governing is not about the government, it is about the people.
Good government is not about us, it is about you. That’s the lesson that we need to learn.
Our job is to make life easier for you, the people of Australia, and to do so in a way which is consistent with our values and which reflects your values.
We are building – this Government is building – a stronger Australia with smaller government, with more choice and bigger citizens.
We know the stronger Australia that we seek – an Australia with secure borders, an Australia that lives within its means, an Australia that finds strength in our differences and unity in our diversity, an Australia where each generation can leave to its children a better life and an Australia which is a beacon of hope and optimism to people all around the world. That is the Australia that we are building.
But we don’t do it alone.
I am blessed with some extraordinary colleagues. We are blessed with a great Party. I want to thank you, Bruce and I want to thank Brad Henderson and the State Executive and all the members of the Queensland LNP for the support that you have given to my colleagues and me so consistently over the last four years.
I pay tribute to all of my parliamentary colleagues, in particular, the Deputy Prime Minister Warren Truss who was here earlier, to Julie Bishop, the Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party and the Foreign Minister – my indispensable right hand in Government.
I should particularly acknowledge my newest parliamentary colleagues, James McGrath and Matt Canavan. Welcome to the Senate. You’ve got a big job! I know you’ll do it well.
This is a critical time for our country.
All times matter, but this time matters more than most.
Our mission – our destiny – is to demonstrate to the Australian people that the last six years of division and dysfunction are not the new normal.
Our mission – our destiny – is to demonstrate to the Australian people that we are the same strength today that we are of old and that we can do even better things today than we have in the past.
My colleagues and I are determined to repay the trust that you placed in us last September.
We are honouring our commitments.
We are working for our country’s long-term betterment.
We are doing what’s right for our country and what’s right for our children.
We’re doing it for you.
So, my friends, thank you so much. As always, it’s a tremendous honour to be here in Queensland. As always, it’s a tremendous honour to bask in the support and friendship of my Queensland colleagues.
Thank you.
[ends]


The essential thing about The Australian is that it’s a paper for a nation.
Every other newspaper serves a city. The Australian alone is dedicated to our country.
It has a national perspective, not a parochial one.
This, alone, should make it uniquely influential in our nation’s life.
On any particular day, The Australian is not necessarily the most influential publication in our country.
Arguably, The Australian’s News Corp siblings, with their vast circulations and gift for story-telling both in pictures and in words, can more powerfully shape our popular culture.
And if it breaks a big enough story, any paper can shape the news.
But at least since Les Hollings’ time as editor, no newspaper has more profoundly or more consistently shaped the intellectual life of our country.
No think-tank, no institution, no university, has so consistently and so successfully captured and refined the way we think about ourselves.
As Paul Kelly put it on the weekend, through all the twists and turns of time, three themes recur in The Australian’s writing: Australia as a big country, not just physically but spiritually, wanting always to be bigger, bolder, smarter and more successful than we currently are; Australia as a globally engaged and regionally oriented power, seeking closer ties with our neighbours and with our allies; and Australia as a successful economy where everyone is equipped and encouraged to have a go.
In my judgment, no paper more closely corresponds with the true spirit of Australia.
The Australian’s tone may sometimes be light but its purpose is always serious: how can our country be better, today, tomorrow, next week, next month and always.
While the paper has long had a consistent perspective, it’s barracked for causes rather than party; it’s promoted issues rather than individuals; and the editorial “line” has never precluded well-argued dissent.
Anyone seeking arguments against – as well as for – a price on carbon; support for the monarchy as well as criticism of it; evidence against government spending as well as in favour of it; and the case for smaller rather than bigger government would have found these in The Australian and, often enough, only in The Australian.
Its main competitor, the Australian Financial Review, is a much improved paper – but mostly since it poached an editor from News Corp!
I pay tribute to all the editors of The Australian with whom I have worked and who have been substantial influences on my life:
Frank Devine, who recruited me, whose daily admonition to his editorial writing team: “What do we feel strongly about today and how will it make a difference to people’s lives?” has turned out to be an excellent template for politics;
Paul Kelly, a fine editor and Australia’s best contemporary historian of politics and government, who went way out of his way to impress upon a very green political staffer the importance of well-developed and thoroughly-articulated ideas in shaping our nation;
And David Armstrong, who first recruited me to mainstream journalism after I’d been (ever-so-politely) sacked from the Catholic Weekly because the Cardinal didn’t like being lectured to by a seminarian in his own newspaper!
Papers normally only shape events over time rather than dictate them on a day-by-day basis.
In my judgment, though, it was The Australian, late in 1995, that cleared the way for John Howard to return to the leadership of the Coalition and then become our most successful recent prime minister by putting on the front page his change of mind on Asian immigration.
To its credit, when The Australian is campaigning, it makes no bones about it and while its preferences are clear, its mind is almost never closed.
It campaigned for Gough Whitlam in 1972 and against him in 1975; it campaigned for Howard in 1996 and against him in 2007; it supported Labor when Bob Hawke and Paul Keating were economic reformers and would gladly do so again, I’m sure, if evidence of reform were ever found.
As prime minister, there’s nothing of substance written about Australia that I don’t want to read – which means that I often spend more-time-than-I-have-to-spare reading The Australian.
On our country’s media, I am not a detached observer; still, under editor-in-chief Chris Mitchell, it seems that The Australian has become one of the world’s very best newspapers.
As a former leader writer, there’s one urban myth that I believe I can and should kill: the claim that News Corp papers are ciphers for Rupert Murdoch.
It’s out of character for The Australian to support a strike but support a strike we did: the pilots’ strike of the late 1980s even though it was directed against an airline that Rupert Murdoch part-owned.
Another cheap shot is that wealthy business-people are only interested in making money.
The Australian has been supported despite oceans of red ink; it’s been Rupert Murdoch’s investment, not in his future but in his country’s.
It’s been a poor financial return for him but a priceless return for us.
He may have become an American by necessity but he’s always been an Australian by conviction.
The Australian has borne his ideals but not his fingerprints; it has been his gift to our nation.
As he memo-ed staff back in 1965: “Please note that we are not a left-wing Labor paper nor are we tied to any particular party or philosophy. We are simply in the business of reporting, interpreting and sometimes commenting on the facts – in that order”.
The paper has had its critics, often in its own pages.
In its very first week it published a letter, from Balmain, declaring: “The Australian is a real flop and unless several radical changes are made…. (I see it) folding up altogether before very long.”
Fifty years later, The Australian continues to annoy and unsettle all who imagine that they have a monopoly on wisdom or virtue.
Back in 1992, when I was an ex-journalist and somewhat disgruntled political staffer, Paul Kelly told me that I would always have a job at The Australian.
When I tried to redeem that pledge, shortly after the 1993 election, the paper was having one of its periodic budget crises.
I never went back but like to think that, in spirit, I’d never left.
Smaller government, bigger people; lower taxes, greater freedom; pride in our country and its achievements; determination to build on our strengths; support for all that may help us, individually and collectively, to come closer to being our best selves: this is what The Australian stands for.
Long ago, The Australian found its authentic voice; that has helped governments and people to find theirs.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, it is a real thrill to be here and I do want to start by thanking each one of you for coming to Australia for this B20 Summit. The G20 matters and it will matter more if it does more, and it will be able to do more because of the input that we are getting over the next two days from you. Every one of you has given up very valuable time to participate in this. You are making a contribution, not just to your business, not just to your country, but to the wider world by your participation in this gathering and I thank you so much for doing so.
If you really want to get something done, you ask someone very busy to do it. The Australian Government asked Richard Goyder to chair the B20 (the leaders of the largest businesses from the world’s 20 largest and most representative economies) because he runs one of the largest companies in Australia.  Wesfarmers, Richard’s company, employs over 200,000 people, has 500,000 shareholders and it sells almost $60 billion worth of products every year. Just the man with some spare time, we thought! Richard gets it. He gets business and he doesn’t waste time.  He knows what it’s like to make a profit and provide a return and so do you, each one of you.
I made a promise at Davos this year: I said that the G20 had to be so much more than a talkfest. Otherwise the leaders of the world’s largest and most representative economies could be accused of wasting each other’s time. The whole point of assembling leaders representing some 80 per cent of the world’s Gross Domestic Product is jointly and individually to encourage measures that will make everyone on this planet better off. This year’s G20 will focus on just a few key subjects because progress usually comes one step at a time. The G20 will deliver a three page communique in plain language because we need to talk, not at length about our good intentions, but concisely and precisely about what we will do to put good intentions into practice.
I should say what an honour it is for me to address this assembly of the world’s most influential business leaders. You have come too far to let this B20 become its own talkfest or just a box ticking exercise. You are here because you know that the G20 matters and you want this year’s G20 to mean action, not words.
The G20’s job is to promote policies that will create wealth, but you – the B20 – know more about creating wealth than government. The B20 knows more about creating wealth than the G20 – because that’s what business does every day.  You create wealth. Business values more trade and freer trade, because more access to markets creates more wealth for all. You know that freer trade means more jobs and lower prices. You know that no country has ever taxed or subsidised its way to prosperity. You know that the answer to debt and deficits is not even more debt and deficit.
As G20 chair, Australia knows that business is the primary creator of national wealth – business, not government.  Business, both big and small, is the engine room of job creation.
We know, here in Australia, that profitable private businesses are at the heart of the strong economy that’s needed for a strong and stable society. We know that making life easier for businesses to invest, to employ, to produce and to trade is what drives national growth and prosperity.
Here in Australia, we are trying to lead by example.
We are scrapping bad taxes like the carbon tax and the mining tax and we’re cutting company tax.
This year, we’ve concluded free trade agreements with Japan and with Korea and we hope to do so soon with China.
We’re establishing a one-stop shop for environmental approvals and have already approved new projects worth over $500 billion since last year’s election.
We’ve held our Parliament’s first ever red tape repeal day to cut 50,000 pages of unnecessary government regulation and legislation. We have identified for scrapping, red tape costing our citizens and our businesses over $700 million every year.
We are investing $50 billion in infrastructure and doing so in a way that invites an even bigger private sector contribution to this investment.
We’re subjecting major infrastructure investment to rigorous cost-benefit analysis and working on a rolling 15 year list of infrastructure priorities.
We’re re-establishing a tough cop on the beat to combat lawlessness in our construction industry.
Of course, we are continuing to welcome foreign investment, because foreign investment has been critical to sustaining Australia’s prosperity.
We are, I want to stress, getting our Budget back under control by reducing projected debt by $300 billion over the next ten years and bringing the Budget back to balance within four years.  We are shifting the focus of government spending from short-term consumption to long-term productive investment.
We are doing this because we know that economic growth is not given; it is earned by continual decisions to stay competitive.
Each country’s circumstances are different, but this is what we are doing here in Australia to boost our growth and to boost the world’s growth, participation and productivity.
It’s my hope that this conference – this conference that you are attending today and tomorrow – along with all the other meetings associated with the G20, will help to create a blueprint for national leaders that will take the global economy back to strong, sustainable and balanced growth. You are not here for a holiday, you are here because you want to promote and support real reform in your own countries. You are here because you want the G20 to make a difference, not just a noise.
Governments can work together to create the environment where business is empowered to do what you do best – drive growth; create jobs; and raise living standards. That’s our aim, because stronger economic growth is the key to addressing almost every global problem.  More growth makes every issue easier to fix. More growth means more revenue. More growth means more trade. More growth means higher wages. More growth means more jobs. The International Labour Organisation says that to restore employment levels to those before the crisis requires 30 million new jobs right now. Yes, the immediate economic storm of 2008 has long passed, but in too many places, the wreckage remains.
Australia’s task is to keep the G20 tightly focused on higher economic growth and to resist the temptation to deal with every ill that the world may face. Sure, many of those ills desperately do need addressing, but in other forums, not the G20 which is primarily an economic one.
Our focus will be economic growth.  Earlier this year, the IMF and the OECD released analysis outlining ambitious but realistic structural reforms in the G20 economies that could lift the G20’s combined output by more than 2 per cent within five years and in so doing, create millions of new jobs.  In February, all the G20 governments committed themselves to this agenda – to structural reforms in product and service markets, to measures to enhance trade and competition policy, to actions to increase labour productivity and participation and to steps to promote quality investment, especially in infrastructure. This matters. It really does matter because the global economy remains fragile. Output is below potential.  Business is wary. Investment is constrained. Trade growth is well down. Six years on, we are still in the shadow of the crisis. Six years on, what’s necessary is a forum focussed on private sector-led growth rather than the ‘government knows best’ responses.
The lesson of previous reforms here in Australia and elsewhere is that business must be an advocate in the court of public opinion for policies that encourage trade, strengthen the economy and adhere to sound business principles.  Business can’t legitimately ask government to introduce policies that it’s not prepared to argue for in public as well as in private. After all, business will be the beneficiaries as well as the drivers of stronger economic growth.
This commitment that the G20 made to raise collective GDP by an additional two per cent over five years is our call to action. And to date, I’m happy to say, the signs have been promising. The country growth strategies of G20 members are taking shape. They contain several hundred proposed measures, but quantity does not always equal quality. Current estimates suggest that the proposed growth strategies will deliver about half of the extra growth required to meet the 2 per cent target and to create the wealth and the jobs that we all seek. It’s vital that every one of you prosecute the recommendations that you finalise today and tomorrow.
As you know, the key to achieving our growth goal is structural reform and that’s hard and essential. Macroeconomic policy cooperation remains important and it will continue to be discussed at the G20, but we really are at the limits of what macro measures can do to drive growth. What we really need in the medium term, in fact, is macro policy returning to normality. We need to manage the exit from unconventional monetary policy and to restore governments’ fiscal position to sustainability. To do these things and still have our economies grow, we need to make these right but difficult decisions on structural reform. We need to unleash the forces of competition by opening markets for trade. We need to unlock productivity by investing in infrastructure. We need to unshackle business by reducing regulation and by accepting that some risk is unavoidable. We need to bring down barriers to our citizens participating in the workforce.
Strong action by G20 governments can deal with these issues that all too often hinder growth. For example, strengthening trade requires getting the right infrastructure in place and having people with the right skills to manage the international flow of goods.  Getting infrastructure in place requires unlocking capital and kick-starting investment, and unlocking capital means having the right regulatory conditions and incentives in place for the financial sector. These issues are interconnected and should be tackled simultaneously.
G20 countries’ growth strategies are about maximising global growth by agreeing to drive growth and reform at home.  On Saturday, G20 trade ministers will meet and they will receive your recommendations. I hope that you will remind them that the critical test of trade policy is whether it helps business in the real world. We need to lose the mercantilist view that a ‘concession’ in trade negotiations can only be granted for something given in return. Trade liberalisation is worth doing, even unilaterally, because free trade means more efficiency; more efficiency means more wealth; more wealth means more jobs.  That is the message that Australia will bring to the G20 leaders’ meeting in Brisbane in November. Production now takes place through global value chains. Products are no longer made in any one country – they are made in the world – so our approach to trade does need to adjust. The ability to import matters as much as the ability to export and the ability to move goods around matters more than ever.
As G20 host, Australia has brought policy-makers and business together to identify practical ways to increase long-term infrastructure financing. The global infrastructure gap is now about $1 trillion a year. Boosting investment in infrastructure can generate jobs in the short-term and lift the productivity of our economies in the medium to longer term. Governments can’t finance the world’s infrastructure needs on their own as we have found here in Australia and seen elsewhere. This is an area where greater collaboration between government and business is needed. Your work to date has shown that there are ways for closer collaboration between government and business can occur and I am looking forward to receiving your recommendations.
Another priority is lifting workforce participation. Strengthening our economies and our communities means making fuller use of people’s potential, because Australia and too many other economies face a future of ageing populations and declining workforces. We have to act now to prepare ourselves by making more use of the people we have. Too many young people remain unemployed right around the world. Here in Australia, we are moving to ensure that people under 30 are either earning or learning and that leaving school to go on unemployment benefits is simply no longer an option. Across the globe, workforce barriers still exist for millions and millions of women. In Australia, we are moving to introduce a standard paid parental leave scheme based on people’s actual wage to help women to have both a family and a career if that’s their choice, and we are also improving access to affordable childcare to boost participation. We’re making measured but significant change to our workplace relations system to ensure that productivity is an important factor in matters before tribunals. All G20 members want to address underemployment, informal employment and workplace safety. Again, to do that, we need business to join with us, not just in the design of the solutions, but in their implementation.
I am seeking, as I’m sure all G20 leaders are seeking, from you, practical, realistic and achievable ideas for governments to implement. Then, our work is to turn your ideas and discussions into action. I hope you’ll be specific and targeted over the next two days in your advice about what we can do to help facilitate stronger growth. I hope you’ll accept that reform is never easy.  If it were easy it would have been done already.  It does take courage to challenge entrenched ideas, even ideas that are holding our countries back. It requires government and business too to explain and promote the reforms that we all need. The beneficiaries of stronger and freer and more dynamic economies are not just households but businesses, their workers, their shareholders who will trade more, employ more people and become stronger. So, this is what the G20 is about: stronger economies, more jobs, more profitable businesses and more opportunities for the people of our countries. If change is to take place, there has to be a constituency for change.  I am relying on you to be that constituency for change. Every G20 leader is relying on you to be that constituency for change that will benefit every citizen right around the world.
I want to thank you – really thank you – for your presence and for your work in ensuring that Australia’s G20 succeeds in this vital and noble task.
Thank you.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, I claim the indulgence of the Parliament to make a statement about some very significant events that have happened overnight.
Madam Speaker, this is a grim day for our country and it’s a grim day for our world.
Malaysia Airlines MH17 has been shot down over the Eastern Ukraine it seems by Russian backed rebels.
298 people have been killed. At least 27 Australians have been killed.
Our hearts go out to the families of all the dead. Our thoughts and prayers especially are with the families of the Australian dead.
We can’t restore them to life but we can and will do everything to support them in this sad and bitter time because that is the Australian way – we help in times of trouble.
Madam Speaker, a Department of Foreign Affairs team is preparing to leave for Kiev. Next of kin and families will be notified as soon as possible. They’ll be offered counselling and assistance and bodies will be repatriated to Australia as quickly as possible.
Madam Speaker, we owe it as well to the families of the dead to find out exactly what has happened and exactly who is responsible.
As things stand, Madam Speaker, this looks less like an accident than a crime. I want to repeat this: as things stand, this looks less like an accident than a crime. If so, the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
So I can inform the House that as quickly as possible Australia will be working at the United Nations Security Council for a binding resolution calling for a full and impartial investigation with full access to the site, with full access to the debris, with full access to the black box and with full access to all individuals who might be in a position to shed light on this terrible event.
I can also inform the House that the Minister for Foreign Affairs will shortly summons the Russian Ambassador to seek a categoric assurance from the Ambassador that the Russian government will fully cooperate in this investigation.
Madam Speaker, we owe it to the dead and their families, we owe it to the peace and stability of the wider world to establish the facts and we will do all we humanly can to bring that about.
Let me conclude with this: the bullying of small countries by big ones, the trampling of justice and decency in the pursuit of national aggrandisement and reckless indifference to human life should have no place in our world.
[ends]


Excellencies, thank you so much for joining me this afternoon.
I particularly welcome the Ambassador of the Netherlands, given the horrific toll which the Netherlands has faced in MH17.
All of you, all of your countries, have lost people in this terrible, terrible event.
All of your countries are in grief and in mourning but all of your countries are understandably anxious that justice is done.
The only way for justice to be done is if we have a thorough, impartial international investigation which has full access to the site. The only way that justice can be done for the dead and for their families is if the bodies are treated with respect and dignity and are taken to a place where they can be properly handled, where things can be properly investigated, and where ultimately they can be repatriated back home.
We want to bring them home but first we have got to get them out. That is what the resolution which will be going to the Security Council at 3pm Monday, New York time is all about.
I thank you so much for being here and I do hope that all of the countries represented around this table will do everything they can to ensure that this resolution is dealt with properly and that the international community makes a strong stand for justice and decency.
[ends]


It’s terrific to be here and there is a very big crowd here this morning – as there should be – because this is a very exciting day. It is, I believe, a watershed day for indigenous people and I think it is one of those days when we very possibly strike out in a new direction for the benefit of every Australian.
I acknowledge the traditional owners on whose land we stand. I acknowledge everyone who has helped to make today possible. I acknowledge Marist Youth Services. There are so many young people here in this area that are doing so much better in their lives because of the passion and the commitment, Kate, that you and your team have brought to the work on this site.
The core of this Government’s approach to indigenous affairs can be summed up very simply: we want the kids to school, the adults to work and the community safe. That's what we want because that is at the heart of a decent civil society. They are the essential ingredients of a good life; you go to school, you get a good start, you go to work, you make a contribution, your community is safe, you and your family can get on with life as best you see it. So, that is at the very core of what we are trying to do in indigenous policy and Andrew Forrest absolutely shares that vision.
When we wanted to explore new directions to try to make that vision a reality, who better to turn to than someone who has achieved so much with his life and in achieving so much himself, has helped others to achieve their dreams. Andrew Forrest is one of Australia's most successful businessmen. He's also one of Australia's most committed and determined philanthropists. He's invested billions and he's employed thousands and he's built from nothing a business which is now on the verge of rivalling some of those household names in Australian business. He's helped to boost our exports, to boost our prosperity and to make our country the place it is today. If you want something done, you ask a busy man and there's no busier man in this country than Andrew Forrest; not only is he running our third largest iron ore producer, but as well as ending the disparity, he's ending modern slavery too. So, Andrew, you are nothing if not ambitious. Frankly, there is no more worthy ambition for our country than to end the disparity between indigenous Australians and the wider community. I want to thank and congratulate Andrew for the commitment and the passion, the time and the energy and the insight that he has brought to this task over the last seven or eight months.
What the Government is doing, what we are already embarked upon, is a campaign to ensure that we end the poison of sit-down money in remote indigenous communities, that we end the dispiriting and corrosive cycle of training for training's sake in indigenous employment programmes and we try to ensure that everywhere in in our country, but particularly in indigenous communities, every child goes to school every day.
We're doing a lot already on the ground to try to make this a reality. There's been a massive expansion of attendance officers in remote communities thanks to the leadership of Indigenous Affairs Minister Nigel Scullion. We are on the verge of introducing continuous work programmes for able-bodied adults in remote indigenous communities and obviously here at centres like this, we are trying to ensure that up to 5,000 indigenous Australians do the training, but they do the training with a guaranteed job at the end of it.
There is a lot that we already are doing, and Andrew Forrest's report challenges us to do more. He challenges us to think about an extension of welfare quarantining. He challenges us to try to avoid building houses for people in places where there are no jobs. He challenges us to try to be even more focused on outcomes-driven, employer-led, employment services across the board. These are important and meaningful challenges and I want to assure Andrew and everyone who has contributed to this report that we will meet these challenges.
Yes, at times, Andrew's recommendations run ahead of today's public opinion. But why not challenge people to think beyond their current preconceptions? Yes, some of these challenges go beyond what government currently plans, but again, why shouldn't we be challenged to think outside what is currently politically doable?
So, what we now need to do is to launch Andrew's report to the wider world, to have the debate – this is the debate that we have to have – and to constantly focus on how we can build a bigger, better, braver Australia.
Andrew Forrest is someone who has always had big dreams. Andrew Forrest is someone who has never allowed people to say, "it can't be done" and frankly, we need more of that spirit in modern Australia.
[ends]


At 11pm in London, on this day one hundred years ago, the First World War began.
The First World War was the most cataclysmic event in human history.
Up to twenty million people died, empires collapsed, boundaries were redrawn.
The world as it had been known, in important respects, ceased to exist.
It wasn’t just World War One that made such an extraordinary change to the world of those times.
World War One arguably gave rise to communism, to Nazism, to World War Two and the Cold War.
The events of a hundred years ago still reverberate around our world today and it had a shattering impact on the young Commonwealth of Australia. From a population of under five million people, more than 400,000 enlisted, more than 300,000 served overseas, more than 150,000 were wounded and more than 60,000 were killed.
Of men aged between 18 and 40, fully half enlisted and of those that went overseas, one in five never returned.
This cauldron shaped our nation. Even now, these events shape our nation.
So here we are, in these cloisters, surrounded by names.
But these names are not just a list.
There is a story behind every name and, ultimately, we wish to know all those stories, because those stories – good and not so good – can help to shape us and to shape our times.
It’s great that so many youngsters, as part of this Soundscape project, will be familiarising themselves with the lives of those who are commemorated here.
So many of them – as Dr Nelson has just pointed out – were little older than those who will be participating in the Soundscape project.
One hundred years ago they were people just like us – just like our youngsters today.
It is important to remember what it was like for them. What went through their minds as they enlisted; patriotism, love of empire, a sense of adventure. It’s important, too, to remember what went through their minds when the guns fired; fear, excitement, love of their mates.
It was a terrible war. In one sense a tragic waste but it was for a good cause.
For us at least, World War I was not a war of conquest, it was a war of freedom. It was a war for our allies, for our values. Those who died, they fell with their mates during what they honestly believed was the right thing.
So, we should, over the course of the next four years reflect on the tragedy and the magnificence of the human condition. We should remember the good, the bad, what was achieved, what wasn’t achieved.
We should always, as we reflect, dedicate ourselves to being better people, creating as best we can a better world.
I thank the War Memorial for this project. I thank the ABC and Google for their involvement.
Most of all, I thank all of the young Australians who will be involved in this.
The war shaped our country and our reflection on it will help to shape our future.
[ends]


Noel, thank you so much. It’s a great pleasure to be here to deliver the inaugural Sir William Tyree Address.
Before I do that, I guess I have to respond to the Graham Kraehe address. I dare say there’s been many Graham Kraehe addresses over the years, but the one that he gave us just a few moments ago was certainly full of interest and full of value.
Graham, I want to assure you that we are a Government which is focussed on tomorrow as well as yesterday.
We are appreciate that we’ve already done some good things to help the businesses in this room, but we also know that we are judged not on what we have done, but also what we will do. I want to assure you that while tax reform starts with the repeal of the carbon tax, it certainly doesn’t end there.
While workplace reform starts with the reestablishment of the Australian Building and Construction Commission, it doesn’t end there.
While energy reform also involves repealing the carbon tax and some work with the Renewable Energy Target, it doesn’t end there either.
This is a Government which is doing its best to purposefully and methodically address the fundamental long-term issues that our economy and our country face.
There’s always a lot of static in government – always a lot of static – but I want all of you to know that this is not a Government which is easily distracted, not a Government which is easily put off, and behind the headlines the hard work is being done to ensure that our economy is stronger and our country is safer and stronger in the months and years ahead.
But it is a great pleasure to be here to celebrate the life and work of Sir William Tyree.
It was said of him that he had “always been a thinker”.
His ingenuity started as an 8 year-old with the famous toaster made from a kerosene container and it continued throughout his long and productive life.
His legacy includes a laboratory in power engineering at Sydney University and an energy technologies building at the University of New South Wales, both of which bear his name.
He was an industrialist, a philanthropist, a brilliant engineer and, of course, a dedicated supporter of the Australian Industry Group.
He was an inventor who turned ideas into reality; he turned concepts, into plans, into products; he built businesses and he created jobs.
In doing so, he grasped the interaction – the essential interaction – between ideas, policy, competitiveness, success in business and ultimately our nation’s economic strength.
He understood that economic reform not only required direction from government but also advocacy from business.
His involvement in the AI Group was recognition that business, as the beneficiaries of economic reform, also had a responsibility to be advocates too – to be compelling, frank and fearless advocates of the policies our country needs.
I want to thank the AIG for the work it has done in recent years. I really do want to thank the AIG for the work it has done in recent years, particularly in the work that it’s done to help us with the campaign to repeal the carbon tax.
I want to thank individuals in this room, perhaps Graham Kraehe most of all, for the work he did in this area.
Sir William Tyree’s companies, specialising in transformer manufacturing, are indeed a niche manufacturing success story.
What could be more fitting, in this inaugural Sir William Tyree address, than to focus on our nation’s competitiveness?
As he often said, “My companies have never stood still.”
It’s the same with countries – we can’t sit still – because if we do, we lose.
John Howard often said that national competitiveness is like a race with an ever-receding finishing line.
That race is a race that you run, not so much governments, for it is businesses that create wealth, not governments.
It is business that innovates, invests, takes risks and employs people.
Our job – the job of Government – is to take the weights off you so that it is easier for you to compete here and in the wider world.
The Government’s Economic Action Strategy is about building a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia. We do that by creating the conditions under which businesses can best prosper.
After all, you can’t have strong communities without a strong economy to sustain them and you can’t have a strong economy without strong and profitable private businesses.
A strong economy makes everything else so much easier.
Building a strong economy, therefore, has to be at the heart of everything we do.
We know that Australia has now experienced some 23 years of continuous economic growth – most likely the longest economic expansion in our history.
This owes much to the economic reforms of the Hawke and Howard governments.
But you can’t take growth for granted, especially when government pursues policies that make growth harder.
I want to assure you that after a six year interruption, Australia is returning to the path of economic reform, for countries, like businesses must not stand still.
The key elements of our plan to improve the competitiveness of Australian business are very clear: lower tax, less red tape, better infrastructure, freer trade, higher participation and stronger productivity.
As Graham has pointed out, we have reduced costs for households and businesses alike by scrapping the carbon tax.
Labor’s carbon tax, which the Opposition still supports and very much wants to bring back, was a reverse tariff.
It made our exports more expensive.
It gave imports an advantage over locally made goods because locally made goods attracted the carbon tax while imports did not.
In fact, the more energy used to produce something, the heavier the burden.
It was a tax whose creators actually boasted of the jobs it would destroy as prices went up and up.
The aluminium industry was forecast to shrink by 60 per cent, the iron and steel industry was forecast to shrink by 20 per cent and gross national income per person was forecast to be $4,000 a year less by 2050 because of the carbon tax.
It was a $9 billion a year hit on the Australian economy and scrapping it will save the average Australian household $550 a year.
It is gone, but it could come back.
It could come back if the people were to make the wrong choice at a subsequent election.
As well as scrapping the carbon tax and keeping it scrapped, this Government is absolutely committed to abolishing the mining tax – a tax that has raised next to nothing yet has robbed an important industry, and all the other businesses dependent upon that industry, of confidence while harming our country’s reputation.
As well, from the 1st July next year, the company tax rate will be reduced by 1.5 percentage points to 28.5 per cent.
At the same time as we are lowering the tax burden, we are also tackling the costs of compliance that plague every business, because every regulation has a cost, to government and to the wider community.
For example, the Australian Taxation Office has spent over $50 million administering the mining tax, the tax that raises hardly and revenue; just 3 per cent in fact of initial revenue forecast.
The Clean Energy Regulator that administered the carbon tax was provided with $60 million a year to monitor the world’s biggest and most complex carbon tax.
The Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission, responsible for administering the red tape that charities are required to comply with, costs $15 million a year.
These are just the costs to government on top of the costs to you.
All this regulations is well-intentioned. The problem is that there has been this massive accumulation of good intentions.
This continual encroachment of regulation at Commonwealth, state and local level is not strengthening our country, it’s weakening it.
It’s stifling creativity and progress and robbing us of the risk-taking that drives successful economies.
The fault lies with governments that all too often respond to every risk, accident or mistake with the promise of yet more regulation.
Occasionally, more regulation does mitigate risk, but often it does not.
More regulation has become the default option for governments eager to be seen to be “doing something” even though knee-jerk reactions rarely provide long-term public policy benefits.
This Government is determined to change the culture of regulation in this country.
Engaging in due diligence need not mean procrastination, clearer standards do not mean lesser standards and certainty in decision making is nearly always less costly than hand-wringing and delay.
One area that’s been marked by a culture of delay, obfuscation and reluctance to say “yes” or “no” has been the provision of environmental approvals.
But that’s changing.
Since the election, Environment Minister Greg Hunt has been clearing the backlog of stalled project applications.
All up, he has made 310 decisions to approve or progress projects resulting in approvals to projects worth over $800 billion.
The end result of clearer standards and more timely decision making is more investment, more construction, more trade and more jobs.
In this area, the Government is tackling red tape by establishing one-stop shops with the states and territories for environmental approvals.
Right across government, we are cutting unnecessary red tape and changing the way we do things to guard against its regrowth.
We had the first Repeal Day in March which saw 9,500 unnecessary or counter-productive regulations and 1,000 redundant Acts of Parliament thrown out.
Part of that means that businesses will no longer be required to administer the former government’s paid parental leave scheme, saving them an estimated $48 million.
National businesses will soon be allowed to operate under one workers’ compensation scheme right around our country rather than have to operate in up to eight.
Businesses, for instance, will no longer have to re-apply to use agricultural chemicals and veterinary medicines because one approval should be enough.
But these repeal days are the start of what the Government wants to be a real and lasting change of culture – a real and lasting change of culture that we are determined to bring to every aspect of administration and programme delivery.
Every Government portfolio is auditing its regulations and estimating the compliance costs those regulations impose on businesses, community organisations and individuals.
Ministerial advisory committees are now providing a real-world assessment of what to cut and what to keep and to ensure that the balance is as right as it can be.
I would say, Noel, to you and to Innes, and to your senior leadership that if the AIG has more kindling for the next bonfire of red tape later on this year, please let me know, because our commitment is to reduce red tape costs by $1 billion, not just once, not just twice, but every single year.
To date, there’s 50,000 pages of regulation to go, and that will save hundreds of millions of dollars. But this is the low hanging fruit; this is the start, not the finish.
I want to make it clear that regulatory overreach has not only harmed business, it’s harmed government too.
Government, to be effective, must know its limits.
Also, it must live within its means.
The best way to protect Australia from the higher taxes which do damage our competitiveness is to get government spending under control.
As I hope most of you know, without policy change, Australia was on track to $667 billion in debt with interest costs rising to almost $3 billion every single month.
This Budget – the Budget that we are now negotiating through the Senate – reduces peak debt by almost $300 billion and that means more capacity, over time, to make long-term investments and more capacity, over time, to reduce tax.
Investment in infrastructure is an essential part of improving our national competitiveness, because the opportunity cost of poor infrastructure is not paid by government, it’s paid by you – it’s paid by business.
To give you perhaps the most obvious example, for 50 years, governments have procrastinated on building an airport in Western Sydney.
Sydney’s airport is the gateway to Australia’s largest city; it accounts for 40 per cent of international arrivals and 50 per cent of international air freight every year and it’s rapidly approaching full capacity.
If no action is taken on a second airport, Australia would lose 80,000 additional jobs and $34 billion in economic activity by the middle of the century.
So the Government is building a second airport for Sydney, or as I prefer to say, we are building a first airport for Western Sydney.
Western Sydney is already Australia’s third largest economy and, in its own right, would be our fourth largest city.
You here at the AIG recognise that inadequate infrastructure is one of businesses’ top frustrations.
As you know, poor infrastructure means delay, higher costs and a wider gap between business and its customers.
Transport and logistics companies and their customers pay every day for the indecision of successive state and Commonwealth governments.
But in our first Budget, this Government has committed a record $50 billion to the infrastructure of the 21st century.
New roads will cut the wait for freight and speed the movement of people and goods around and between our big cities.
It is, in fact, the biggest road building programme in our country’s history and we all know that our country really needs it.
Every infrastructure project will benefit from re-establishing the Australian Building and Construction Commission because our building and construction industry does need a tough cop on the beat to tackle lawlessness.
While it is business’ job to grasp the opportunities that markets provide, it is government’s job to improve the environment in which businesses operate.
To support businesses as you respond to market opportunities and challenges, in the Budget, the Government announced the establishment of an Industry Skills Fund.
This will be a $476 million investment to support the training needs of small to medium enterprises and it will provide up to 200,000 training places over the next four years.
It’s a fund that will prioritise small and medium enterprises, because every large business started as a small business.
Sir William Tyree started his business by scraping together £5,000 and then getting a loan for another £5,000.
This Government is working to lift apprenticeship completion rates because those dependent on skilled labour are finding it harder and harder to attract and to keep trained staff.
Only about 50 per cent, as you well know, of the people who commence an apprenticeship actually finish it.
One of the reasons young apprentices don’t complete their training is because they can’t afford the costs, especially when their workmates are earning more in less skilled jobs.
The Government will reinvigorate vocational training with a focus on the needs of industry rather than the preferences of government and bureaucrats.
We need a whole gamut of skilled tradespeople – bakers, electricians, panel beaters, locksmiths, sheet and metal workers. We need skilled workers across the whole range of Australian businesses.
They are all first class occupations and all of them are needed to underpin our future growth.
That is why the Government is now providing concessional Trade Support Loans of up to $20,000 over a four-year apprenticeship with the loans structured to encourage the completion of the apprenticeship.
And from 1 July 2016, we will remove the 20 per cent loan fee that’s applied to VET FEE-HELP for eligible full-fee paying students in higher level vocational education and training courses.
So let me go back to the basics.
On election night, I said that Australia was under new management and once more open for business.
Freer trade is central to growing a stronger economy with more jobs and more profitable businesses.
As some of you know, because some of you were on them, I have led business delegations to Korea, China, Japan, Canada, the United States and PNG over the last 11 months. 
We have new free trade agreements with Korea and with Japan to further open the door to these important markets.
Once the FTA is ratified, Korea will provide duty-free access to 84 per cent of Australia’s current exports by value, increasing to over 95 per cent within 10 years.
To illustrate what this means in 2013 – last year – Australian auto manufacturers exported $101 million worth of gear boxes and $51 million worth of engine parts to Korea and under the FTA they will do so without the burden of an 8 per cent tariff.
Korea is Australia’s second largest market for pharmaceutical products with significant potential to grow now that the tariffs on almost 90 per cent of our pharmaceutical products will be eliminated, with the remainder to be phased out within three years.
With Japan, the door to trade has also further opened and this is our second largest trading partner with two way trade of over $70 billion a year.
The Japan-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement, signed last month, is the most liberalising bilateral trade agreement that Japan has ever concluded.
It will benefit agriculture, financial services, education, telecommunications, legal services, and yes, manufacturing.
We now have free trade agreements with seven of our top ten trading partners.
And, as you know, we have accelerated talks with China which is already our largest trading partner, which I hope can be concluded later this year.
In addition, we are working to free up trade in our region, through the Trans Pacific Partnership, the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement and the Pacific Agreement on Closer Economic Relations.
All of these measures, lowering tax, cutting regulation, concluding free trade agreements and investing in Australian skills are part of our desire, as Government, to make it easier for you to grow your businesses.
We are opening the door so that you can walk through it.
We aren’t providing you with corporate welfare and that’s not what you want. What we’re giving is business a ‘fair go’ so that all of you can ‘have a go’ to run your businesses to exploit your opportunities better.
I have long said that government should be at least as interested in the creation of wealth as in its redistribution.
Governments should make it as easy as possible for people like Bill Tyree to take a chance and to create a business.
We are all on a journey; a journey to make our country stronger by doing our jobs better.
Government’s job is to get the fundamentals right so that business can do its job of being more competitive and more successful, not just here, but right around the world, because the world doesn’t stay still – and none of us can stay still either.
So thanks everyone for the chance to deliver this inaugural Sir William Tyree Address.
Yes, Noel, you gave me a challenge. The question that Bill always put at every gathering: what about nuclear power? 
Well, you know, it’s hard enough to deliver gas, let alone nuclear!
I would like us to be one of the world’s affordable energy capitals. We have an abundance of coal, we have an abundance of gas; let’s make the most of this natural advantage.
We can’t dramatically increase our population, we can’t change our geographical location and move ourselves closer to markets, but we have got the energy – let’s make the most of it.
Now, who knows one day what our energy mix might be?
Who knows one day where the market might go and what other forms of energy might come into their own?
But right now, we have massive reserves of coal, massive reserves of gas; let’s make the most of them.
I hope Sir William will be satisfied.
[ends]


It’s fantastic to be here.
I want to thank the people of Lithgow for welcoming me and my colleagues with such enthusiasm and I particularly thank the Lithgow City Band for being here to play for us.
I couldn’t help but notice that the tune you were playing when we arrived was called Count Your Blessings.
Well, I tell you I am counting my blessings having arrived here in Lithgow because it was a very long 150 kilometres I have to say.
I was told the road between Mudgee and Lithgow had a few undulations. Well, when you have got the fuel injected four-litre straight six-cylinder engine under your bonnet yes they are a few undulations but when every single kilometre has to be pedal-powered they were big, big hills indeed but it is a great thing that we are doing.
I want to thank all of my Parliamentary colleagues. I want to thank Guy Barnett, former Senator now in the Tasmanian Parliament, I want to thank Dave Gillespie the member for Lyne, I want to thank Kevin Andrews the Minister for Social Services, I want to thank Angus Taylor the Member for Hume and I particularly want to thank Senator Mitch Fifield the Assistant Minister for Social Services who has particular responsibility for people with disability.
I want to thank all of them.
Along the way they were also joined by Barnaby Joyce who is the Minister for Agriculture, they were joined along the way by Mark Coulton, who was with us this morning, Luke Hartsuyker the Assistant Minister for Employment. So, quite a big team of Members of Parliament who have been out there over the last few days raising money for carers.
Now, ‘count your blessings’ is a very good theme for this ride because there are many people in the world who are not as blessed as we are. Whether it is people in our society who are doing it tough, whether it is people in other countries who are not as fortunate as we are in Australia because anyone who is born in Australia has well and truly won the lottery of life. Wherever we look, there are people who are less fortunate and the challenge for all of us is to do what we can to help.
There are three million unpaid carers in this country; sometimes it is parents caring for kids, kids caring for parents, siblings caring for one another, spouses caring for each other, friends caring for each other but there are three million of them who spend a serious amount of time looking after someone they love.
Carers Australia represents all of those people and what we are doing today, what my colleagues have been doing for the last six days is raising the profile of carers, trying to, I guess, reconnect to parts of Australia that politicians don’t get to visit that often. Yes, we’re trying to demonstrate the importance of a healthy lifestyle but above all else we are trying to say, all of us we should count our blessings and one way of counting our blessings is to look after everyone.
That’s what Carers Australia is on about.
So, thank you so much for coming out today in such numbers to make us welcome and please when you leave this gathering today count your blessings and reach out to someone who perhaps is not quite as blessed and encourage that person to see the good in life and do what you can to help that person. That is what those three million carers do every single day, every single week, every single month, every single year. The one thing you never get is a holiday from caring when you are caring for someone you love.
So, thanks so much. Thank you.
[ends]


It’s terrific to be joining the second last day of Pollie Pedal. It is nice to swap the Royal Australian Air Force jet for the bike!
It is great to be here in Mudgee in Mark Coulton’s electorate. It is terrific to be with Kevin Andrews, with Angus Taylor, with Guy Barnett and of course with Ara Cresswell from Carers Australia.
In the end, this is for the carers of our country; the people who care for someone in need. The great thing about all of these people is that they are putting themselves out every day 24/7 for someone they love.
Obviously, there is a lot the Government does for the carers of our country but I want to thank my colleagues and everyone involved in this ride over the last few days for literally and metaphorically going the extra mile for the carers of our country; letting the carers of our country know that the commitment of at least some of their leaders in Canberra is not just official but it is personal and practical as well.
I am so sorry that I have been a bit of a Pollie Pedal absentee for the first six days of the ride.
Thank you, Kevin, for leading the ride up until now and I hope you don’t mind if I steal the baton from your knapsack.
It is terrific to be here.
I am looking forward to a very good ride but most of all, Ara and team, it is just going to be great to be with you and to be doing something for those Australians who need recognition, who need a hand, and hopefully this is part of doing just that.
[ends]


Lieutenant General Gillespie, Admiral Barrett, my parliamentary friend and colleague, David Elliott, ladies and gentlemen.
Tuesday marks 100 years since the Australian Naval and Military Expedition Force set off from Sydney bound for the first Australian engagement in the First World War.
The first shot fired by the British Empire in the Great War was by an Australian battery in Port Philip Bay and the first successful British Empire military campaign was Australia's capture of German New Guinea by an expedition that departed within a fortnight of the outbreak of war.
The soldiers who boarded the Berrima a century ago were the first Australian wave in the great tide of events that shaped our nation and which still casts a shadow over the wider world.
When Britain declared war on Germany on 4 August 1914, Australia found itself at war. There was no controversy in that. The then leader of the Labor Party Andrew Fisher pledged that Australia would stand beside the mother country to the last man and the last shilling.
The men of the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force were all volunteers and almost as diverse as the cadets marching today.
Charles Bean wrote of them, “school teacher and wharf labourer, bank clerk and bushman, shop assistant and farrier stood side by side on the Parade Ground.” As Bean said, “some were lured by a spirit of adventure, others simply answered the call of duty.”
From their first landing, the Australians swiftly overcame the German resistance. But victory came at a price as it nearly always does. Six Australians were killed and four wounded by the time the Union Jack was raised in Rabaul. These were the first of our casualties in the Great War. From a population of under five million, more than 400,000 enlisted, more than 300,000 served overseas and more than 60,000 never came back.
So many families received the terrible, terrible telegrams telling them of a loved one who would never come home. Of men aged between 18 and 40, 50 per cent volunteered. Of those who served overseas, one-fifth never returned.
We all know the Gallipoli story but the story of the Western Front where Australians played such a decisive role is better known in France than here.
I would like to say at this first centenary of ANZAC event here in Sydney, that by the time the centenary commemorations are over in four years hence we should know all our great war stories better, starting with the capture of German New Guinea which we mark today, obviously Gallipoli, the Western Front and the capture of Jerusalem and Damascus by Australian troops as part of General Allenby's army.
We are a country that has long played its part in the world's struggles. The Great War was bloody, bitter and awful – but it was a just one.
On this anniversary, and throughout the ANZAC centenary, we will honour all of those who have done what we have not and hope that we might find it in ourselves to rise to the challenges of our time as they did to theirs, should we ever be put to the test.
[ends]


It’s good to be here on the last day of the Pollie Pedal to announce that there will be National Carers’ Awards. These awards will be auspiced by Carers Australia and Life Without Barriers. Two fine organisations that have enormous experience working with carers.
We will be calling for public nominations for these National Carers’ Awards. They will be supported by a corporate sponsor and by the Federal Government to the tune of $50,000.
So, Ara and everyone else associated with these awards thank you so much. The carers of Australia do magnificent work. Most of it absolutely unsung and this is an opportunity to give the carers of Australia the recognition they deserve.
I’d also like to say thank you to all of my parliamentary colleagues; Dave Gillespie, Angus Taylor, Mitch Fifield, Kevin Andrews, Marise Payne and Stuart Ayres, the State Minister for Western Sydney is here. Stuart, good to see you.
It's a real thrill to be here at the close of Pollie Pedal 2014. The 17th annual Pollie Pedal bike ride.
For me, Pollie Pedal started in Moree, then it went to The Hague, London, Al Minhad and Singapore and Mudgee. Then it went to Lithgow, Katoomba and now Penrith.
This has been a very important part of my public life – 17 years now. Ross Cameron and Jackie Kelly and I started the thing off back in 1998 and Fiona, as you say, we have raised money for lots of good causes over the years but there has been no better cause than Carers Australia.
Ara, to you, I want to say thank you very, very much for the extraordinary enthusiasm that Carers have had for this whole Pollie Pedal exercise. You haven't been the kind of beneficiary that just said thank you very much, we are grateful for the money. You have made this a joint effort. You have been an absolute integral part of our team over the last three years. The great thing about the involvement between senior members of Parliament and Carers Australia is that not only have we, as part of this Pollie Pedal exercise, been to parts of our country that senior politicians don't often get to but we have met people and we have heard something of their life that we might not otherwise have heard.
Barbara, thank you for the experiences that you have just shared with us today; uplifting, frustrating, daunting experiences that you have shared with us today.
It's government's job to do what it can to respond sensitively and intelligently to people in the predicament that they find themselves.
Governments inevitably are rule-based. The trouble with rules, is that rules often have difficulty accommodating the real life situation that people are in. So, it's always a work in progress trying to adjust the rules to accommodate the almost infinite complexity of human life. But you have got three ministers with you today. You have got Marise Payne, the Minister for Human Services. You have got Mitch Fifield, who is the Minister responsible for disabilities. You have got Kevin Andrews, who is the senior Cabinet Minister in this area. All of them will be listening to your stories, saying how can we make our system more responsive to the real life experience of people like you, Barbara.
So, thank you for sharing something of your life with us because I believe that government is more effective when it is more engaged with people in the place that they are actually inhabiting.
I have experienced over many years now the disjunction between the world of the official briefing and the world that people actually inhabit. So often we can dwell in this world of officialdom where policy is all very marvellous but if it doesn’t actually translate into something that helps people in their own homes, in their own neighbourhoods and towns and suburbs well it is all a bit pointless.
It is listening to people like yourself which give us the real test of whether our policy is working.
So, Marise and Mitch and Kevin, you might like to have a chat to Barbara and just get some of these things as well assimilated as they can be.
Look, sadly this is the end of Pollie Pedal 2014. I haven’t really had a chance to turn my mind to Pollie Pedal 2015 other than to say – there will be Pollie Pedal 2015!
I hope to see very, very many of you on the road in 12 months time.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


Michael, thank you so much, but most of all, thank you so much, ladies and gentlemen, for being here today to show to me the strengths of this community and to share with me the issues which you’ve got.
I want to let you know that as far as I am concerned, I am very proud of your local Member. I think he’s doing an outstanding job and I know that the one thing that is uppermost in his mind is not being Canberra’s representative to you, but being your representative in Canberra and trying to bring the cares and concerns of the people of Deakin, of the people of the Maroondah district, to us in Canberra. In the end, that’s what a local Member’s job is: to represent his or her constituents to the government in Canberra, and Michael is doing a very good job of that.
I echo Michael’s comments that the strength of any community is not in its official institutions, it’s not in its official representatives, important though they are. The strength of any community is the quality of its citizens, and the great feature of Australian society is that there are networks upon networks upon networks of decent people who, when they see an issue, they band together to address it. The Rotary clubs, the church associations, the environmental groups, all of the bodies that come together to support our schools and our hospitals – this is the real life; certainly it’s the lifeblood of our community, and that’s what all of you are here to represent – the civil, the civic associations that are so much a part of the social fabric of our country and which do so much to strengthen the bonds of solidarity and community between each Australian.
I want to stress that the purpose of government is do whatever it can to make your life easier. I picked up the paper the other day and I was delighted to see that Melbourne is the world’s most livable city, and I reckon it is, in many respects, the world’s most livable city, and I say that as a self-confessed Sydneysider! But it could be more livable, and it would be more livable if we built the East West Link and that’s what this Government wants to do, working with the Victorian Government to build the East West Link.
It would be easier to live if we kept the pressure off everyone’s cost of living and that’s why we were so keen to abolish the carbon tax, because we wanted to see cost of living pressures reduced. As a result of abolishing the carbon tax, every household’s cost of living should go down, on average, by about $550 a year.
As many of you would know, this Government is coming up for its first anniversary. I don’t pretend for a second that it’s all been smooth sailing and I don’t pretend for a second that every single thing that the Government has done would be greeted by applause, even from people in this room. I’ve just been talking to some of the students of Melba College, and I said to one of the captains – Madison – “Have you got any issues that you want to raise with me as your Prime Minister?” And her response was, “Where do I start?” It’s good that the young people of Australia are questioning and curious of their leaders, because that is how our country has advanced, because we have not been satisfied with what is. We are constantly asking ourselves ‘what can be?’ That is the genius of our civilsation. We are constantly asking ourselves, ‘what can be’? ‘How can we do things better and be our best selves?’ That’s such a marvelous feature of life in Australia.
But I do want to say to you that the commitments that we made to the Australian public a year ago – to stop the boats, to scrap the carbon tax, to get on with building the roads of the 21st century and to bring the Budget under control – they are all substantially underway. The carbon tax is gone, the boats are stopping, road building, particularly the East West Link here in Melbourne, will shortly commence, and while we’re having our issues from time to time in the Senate, roughly half of the Budget savings and efficiencies are already in place and we will keep working with the Senate that we have to try to ensure that we get the best possible deal.
I know that there are some features of the Budget which not everyone likes. Unfortunately, it’s not easy to tackle a debt and deficit disaster. A lot of people have asked questions about the fairness of the Budget – well, I want to say that the most unfair thing that any government can do for you, the people of Australia, is saddle you with an ever-increasing debt burden. We will pay down this debt, we will get back into budget balance and then into surplus so that we’re paying off debt rather than running it up, because as all of you know, having looked at your household budgets, in some cases having to run business budgets or school budgets, or community organisation budgets, you can’t spend what you haven’t got. While it’s nice for the government to say, “We’re going to give you this handout and that handout”, if it’s borrowed money that we’re handing out, eventually everyone pays the price.
So, our challenge is to build a stronger economy so that there’ll be more wealth, more prosperity, more fairness for everyone, and that’s what we’re doing. We’re not doing it for us, this isn’t about government; this is about you, the people of Australia. Everything that we do in Canberra should be about a better life for you, the people of Australia, and certainly, that’s what I pledge myself to do my damndest to deliver – a better life for you, the people of Australia.
So, thank you so much. It’s lovely to be here and I look forward to meeting as many of you as I can in the next 40 minutes or so.
[ends]


It’s an honour to be this year’s Sir John Downer lecturer.
Sir John was a premier of South Australia and a delegate to the colonial conferences that produced the constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Australians’ reluctance to support referenda that change the constitution testifies to the strength of the system of government that he helped to shape.
It’s a constitution that gives people their due by keeping government in check. Sir John described himself as a Tory.
He was a genial, humane conservative who sought to extend traditional rights and privileges as widely as possible.
He was a supporter of female property rights and intervened to ensure that the new Commonwealth constitution did not disenfranchise Aboriginal people who could vote in South Australia from voting in federal elections too.
He championed the interests of South Australia but was not a provincialist.
He was an Australian patriot but understood the ties of history, kinship, trade and affection between Australia and the United Kingdom.
He also helped to establish a dynasty that has made an enduring contribution to the country he helped to found.
His son, Sir Alexander Downer, was one of our longest serving immigration ministers.
His grandson, also Alexander Downer, was our longest serving foreign minister and is now – of course – as his father was before him – our high commissioner in London.
Great things are not usually achieved by people with small ambitions.
Successive generations of Downers didn’t underestimate themselves or the country they served and neither should we.
That’s my theme for this lecture: don’t underestimate Australia.
We count for more than Australians are often inclined to think.
We shouldn’t imagine that we can change the world on our own; but neither should we doubt the difference we can make.
After all, we are the world’s 12th largest economy, have the world’s fifth most traded currency and are home to four of the world’s eleven top-rated banks.
We’re the world’s largest exporter of metallurgical coal and iron ore and will soon be the world’s largest exporter of liquefied natural gas.
Around the world, we have many friends and few critics.
We’re big enough to be useful but not so big that we’re intimidating.
Throughout our history, we’ve been an utterly dependable ally; a reliable trading partner; and a swift responder to people in need.
It’s often forgotten that the Australian army was a central part of the battles that decided World War One.
Our exploits on the Western Front are much better remembered in France than in Australia.
Australian soldiers captured Jerusalem and Damascus as part of General Allenby’s army.
The centenary commemorations – that started this week with the 100th anniversary of the expedition to German New Guinea should remind us that Gallipoli was not even the beginning, let alone the end, of Australians’ part in the Great War.
When President Wilson chipped Prime Minister Hughes at the Versailles conference, the Australian reminded the American that he was speaking on behalf of 60,000 dead.
A generation later, the Australian 7th division helped to capture Syria from the Vichy French and the 9th division had a decisive role in the Battle of El Alamein.
Under the Colombo Plan, many of the leaders of post-war south-east Asia were educated at Australian universities.
Sir Robert Menzies was the chief British negotiator after the Suez crisis.
John Howard and Alexander Downer put together the UN Security Council resolution and despatched the force that gave East Timor its freedom.
With the assistance of New Zealand, the Howard government assembled the police and military team that stabilised the Solomon Islands.
Australia was the first to help Indonesia after the Indian Ocean tsunami and among the first to help Japan after their earthquake and the Philippines after their typhoon.
We’re still scouring the deep ocean for the wreck of MH370.
Foreign Minister Julie Bishop has rightly been praised for the Security Council resolution on the MH17 atrocity.
The government’s work merely renewed a long tradition of effective diplomacy – including, to give credit where it’s due, Doc Evatt’s work at the San Francisco conference.
It’s true that Australia is not a dominant power except, perhaps, in the South Pacific.
Still, we are country with global interests and some global reach.
Just last week, for instance, an RAAF Hercules joined American and British planes in the humanitarian airdrop on Iraq’s Mt Sinjar.
Last month, Australia was able swiftly to deploy 200 police and more than 250 military personnel to Europe to support Operation Bring Them Home.
As our record shows, Australia has long been prepared to play our part in the world’s struggles.
We will do what we reasonably and prudently can to advance our interests, protect our citizens and uphold our values.
We will do what we reasonably and prudently can to encourage American leadership because that’s provided the global security and stability that’s allowed Japan, Korea, China and India to achieve the greatest and swiftest advances in material welfare in human history.
Australia needs to manage three overlapping foreign policy imperatives: to maintain stability and prosperity in our neighbourhood; to promote trade and investment, especially with North Asia where our biggest economic partners are; and to help preserve global security in conjunction with like-minded countries.
Since last year’s election, I have travelled – in this order – to Indonesia and PNG (to keep regional relationships in good repair); to Japan, Korea and China (to boost trade); and to the United States and Canada and now Britain (to deepen security and intelligence cooperation).
We are about to conclude a joint understanding on intelligence cooperation that should fully restore the trusted partnership with Indonesia that had been unsettled by the Snowden allegations.
We are continuing to work with PNG on measures to boost development and improve public safety.
Comprehensive free trade agreements have been concluded with Korea and Japan and are well-advanced with China.
Australia’s consistent message is that the countries of our region will all advance together or none of us will advance at all because the consequences of serious conflict would be catastrophic.
One reason for guarded confidence that the territorial disputes in our region will, in fact, ultimately be settled peacefully and in accordance with international law is the cost to everyone of the alternative.
John Howard used to say that Australia didn’t have to choose between our history and our geography.
In like vein, this government has pointed out that you don’t win new friends by losing old ones; and you don’t make some friendships stronger by weakening others.
So far, by focussing on areas of mutual interest and common values, we’ve managed to strengthen all our relationships.
By being clear about where we stand, while respectful towards others’ perspectives, there’s every chance that we can continue to make a constructive contribution to world affairs.
We are ready to continue our existing, training-focused military contribution to Afghanistan, in partnership with our allies and under the right legal framework.
This should help to preserve the gains so painfully made at such cost by so many countries since the fall of the Taliban.
We are ready to continue humanitarian involvement in the Middle East, particularly Iraq, where Australian troops tried to help build a more civil society after the fall of Saddam Hussein.
There would have to be a clear and achievable overall purpose, a clear and proportionate role for us, a careful assessment of the risks, and an overall humanitarian purpose.
We are talking to our partners about how we might contribute to international efforts to protect people against the advances of ISIL terrorists.
There is a world of difference between attempting to create a new polity and a new society and helping to prevent the slaughter of innocents at the request of the existing government.
The geo-politics of the Middle East is a witches’ brew of complexity and danger.
It is much more often a case of choosing the least evil rather than the greatest good.
Still, watching preventable genocide is not a credible option either.
President Obama has wisely resisted taking sides in Iraq’s numerous conflicts but is prepared to help a credible government and is ready to protect innocent people; and, in proportionate ways, Australia, too, should be prepared to help where we reasonably and prudently can.
Consolidation of ISIL rule in Eastern Syria and in Western and Northern Iraq would be a disaster for the wider world as well as a humanitarian catastrophe in the region.
The declaration of a caliphate shows ISIL’s ambitions for universal dominion and claims to the allegiance of Muslims everywhere.
It’s natural to scoff at such seemingly medieval aspirations but ISIL takes them seriously and has been disconcertingly successful against more sophisticated opponents.
Entrenched as a terrorist state in parts of Iraq and Syria, ISIL could do at least as much damage to the wider world as the Taliban in Afghanistan and export at least as much terrorism.
Peaceful, pluralist democracies naturally shrink from reaching out to such conflicts but these conflicts, alas, reach out to us.
The ISIL eruption in Syria and Iraq – along with the parallel growth of Al Nusra, and the appearance of Al Shebab in the horn of Africa and Boko Haram in Central Africa – are grounds for profound concern but not despair.
Not all the signs are bad.
Countries such as Saudi Arabia and Turkey, that might once have been ambivalent towards extremist movements, are now deeply alarmed.
Some Muslim countries are even prepared to cooperate with Israel against terrorist movements whose immediate enemy are moderate Muslim governments.
After all, ISIL threatens all countries and all peoples who don’t share its particular brand of extremism.
Energised and augmented terrorist networks are once more planning attacks against western targets.
Thanks to the many hundreds of Westerners fighting with ISIL and Al Nusra (including at least 60 Australian fighters and about 100 facilitators in Australia), there are now more potential home-grown terrorists than ever before.
Australia is boosting border security with biometric screening to be installed at airports and increased funding for security agencies.
New laws against unjustified travel to designated terrorist hot spots will make it much easier to arrest, prosecute and gaol returning fighters.
Laws requiring the retention and availability of limited telecommunications records will maintain our ability to monitor terrorist plotting and prevent terrorist crime.
As well, the government is reassuring Australian Muslims that our concern is to prevent terrorist crime, not to single out any particular community.
Extremism is the enemy; not Islam.
Terrorism is being targeted; not the members of any religion.
It may be that terrorists’ tendency to justify themselves in religious terms is driving Muslims to rethink and rearticulate the real nature of their faith.
From the Saudi king to the president of Indonesia, Muslim leaders are categorically affirming that the slaughter of innocents is always a crime in the eyes of God.
Paradoxically, the growth of religiously inspired terrorism may spur mainstream Islam to become more attuned to individuals’ rights.
Certainly, there has been no shortage of Australian Muslims ready to condemn ISIL and its killings.
Samir Dandan, to take just one of many examples, said that he found such acts “utterly repugnant…both as a Muslim and a human being”.
While some of the Islamic leaders who have met recently with the government claim we too readily justify Israel, none have tried to defend ISIL.
Perhaps this will turn out to be the moment when Australians come to appreciate that the Muslims among us much more often have our perspectives than those of the protagonists in foreign wars.
Perhaps this might turn out to be the time when Islam, like Christianity before it, finally dissociates religion from the use of force.
The alternative, deepening religious divisions between well-armed states locked in existential conflict, should be too horrible to contemplate.
Certainly, Australia has long been an exemplar of how people of different faiths and cultures can not only live harmoniously together but find unity in diversity.
Migrants from the four corners of the earth have come to this country, not to change us but to join us.
They have all voted with their feet for Australia.
No one has been expected to abandon their heritage or conform to any particular ideal of “Australian-ness”.
Multiculturalism has turned out to mean people becoming Australian – joining our team if you like – in their own way and at their own pace.
One of the participants in my Muslim leaders’ round tables this week rather exuberantly declared: “we are all part of Team Australia team and you are our captain” – suggesting that he had yet to assimilate Australians’ habitual scepticism towards politicians!
In our own way, Australia has long sought to showcase this easy-going approach to cultural and religious differences.
Sixty years ago, with the Colombo Plan, the future leaders of the sub-continent and South East Asia began coming here to study at Australian universities.
More recently, this has become a massive export education industry also focussed on our region.
Some of these students have so appreciated their Australian experiences that they have built a life for themselves here.
The vast majority return home as fans of Australia.
Providing an Australian education has not only been of benefit to the overseas individuals and the local institutions concerned but it’s become a very effective exercise in soft power.
It’s become a form of advertisement for Australia: our opportunities, our values, and our way of life.
The government has recently begun the New Colombo Plan, which will complement the hundreds of thousands of overseas students in Australia with tens of thousands of Australian students overseas, mostly in our own region.
The New Colombo Plan is already underway with hundreds of Australians now studying as awardees and scholars in Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong and Indonesia.
As part of their award, some New Colombo Plan students will work as interns in overseas businesses and institutions.
Partly, this is overdue acknowledgement that the countries of our region have as much to teach us as we have to teach them.
Partly, it’s an opportunity for bright young Australians to be ambassadors for their country among their regional peers.
This will be a learning experience for everyone.
Plainly, Australians will come home with a better understanding of the languages and cultures of Asia.
Over time, I suspect, a greater Australian presence will reinforce our region’s existing and increasing attachment to democracy, the rule of law, pluralism and individual rights and responsibilities.
Our regional partners are likely to become freer societies as well as stronger economies.
Australia’s international engagements have rarely been so multi-facetted.
As well as our security, trade, and cultural relationships, there’s also the multi-national economic and financial policy networks associated with Australia’s presidency of the world’s top economic forum, the G20.
A richer world is likely to be a safer and more secure world because there’s scarcely any problem that couldn’t use more resources to address it.
The G20 countries have already agreed to the target of an extra two per cent in global growth above business-as-usual over the next five years.
This is to be achieved through more trade, less regulation, and more opportunities for private business.
Australia is seeking to lead by example by concluding freer trade agreements, by abolishing useless hits to our standard of living and to jobs like the carbon tax and the mining tax, by cutting red tape, by getting the budget under control, and – at the same time – by boosting economic infrastructure.
We’re reducing spending on short term consumption so we can increase it on long term investment.
We’re aiming to build a consensus in favour of private sector-led growth.
If there is a renewed global effort towards stronger international tax rules, more representative economic governance, and freer trade it will be, in part, the result of Australia’s consistent diplomacy.
The first requirement of leadership, after all, is knowing what you want to achieve.
From negotiating free trade agreements, to operation sovereign borders, to operation bring them home and even operation budget repair, there has been a clarity of purpose to all this government has been trying to achieve.
Internationally at least, there has been a measure of recognition for this.
We can and are making a difference.
At the height of the international search for missing flight MH370, I went to Pearce airbase to thank the personnel involved: from Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and the United States; and also from China, Japan and Korea.
It was a fine and fragrant example of international cooperation in a very good cause.
Anticipating my North Asia trip, I sought a photo with the Japanese, Korean and Chinese aircrew – and overcame the reluctance of the Chinese and Japanese to be too close together by coming between them and placing my arms firmly on their shoulders.
A few weeks later, the US, Chinese and Japanese ambassadors sat next to each other on the floor of the Australian parliament to listen to Treasurer Joe Hockey’s budget.
It would be presumptuous to declare “only in Australia”.
Still, these are small but significant straws in the wind for what might be achieved with sustained effort, constant goodwill, and a consistent point of view.
Our characteristics as a nation, reflect our characteristics as a people.
We are instinctively neighbourly.
We judge people by their actions.
We respond to events and needs in a way that’s practical and effective.
We’re among the first to lend a hand and the last to say enough.
We don’t dwell on past enmities and, once a fight is over, strive to turn enemies into friends.
Keeping commitments, valuing human life, and extending freedom are universal aspirations, not just Australian ones, and where those values prevail the world is safer for everyone.
That’s our objective: a stronger Australia in a safer world and our determination is to work purposefully to bring it about.
[ends]


As a minor MUP author it is terrific to be here to help launch the work of a major MUP author.
It is a real honour to be involved with the launch of Paul Kelly's book. Paul and I go back quite a long way. Back in the late 1980s I was a relatively young editorial writer at The Australian. Paul, even then, was the guru in chief of the press gallery and I was often instructed by editor, Frank Devine, not to write our editorial of the day without first discussing it with Paul Kelly.
I was, as I said, relatively young and quite junior. Paul, even then, was the sage of Canberra. He was unfailingly courteous, unfailingly patient with the precocious colleague in Sydney and he kept talking to me even though from time to time I had the temerity not to agree with the Kelly line.
This is the thing about Paul Kelly, you never read a Kelly column, you never have a conversation with Kelly which is not utterly instructive. I have benefited enormously, not just from Paul's friendship but from his wisdom.
I recall as a neophyte political staffer, having moved from The Australian to the office of the then Leader of the Opposition  John Hewson, very early on in my time, receiving a special visit from The Australian's political correspondent in chief. It was about 5.30 one Friday afternoon. It was quite an unusual thing for a person of such gallery seniority to pay a special visit to the then Opposition Leader's press office but Paul came in. He sat me down and he said "I have a little test for you. Who is the most successful Opposition Leader of the post war period?" It was an easy question. I said, Gough Whitlam. He said, “Here is a harder question for you – why was Gough Whitlam such a successful Opposition Leader?" And I scratched my head for a few moments and said, “Look, I just don't know.” Paul said, "He was a successful Opposition Leader not just because he won elections but because he set agendas and he set agendas by making considered, powerful, thoughtful speeches from time to time which helped to shape the whole political culture in which he operated and indeed all of us operated".
I am not sure that I have been able to follow Paul's advice but I certainly accept his advice as sage. It is important to set the agenda and if you don't set the agenda, you can't successfully run a government.
The tragedy, if I may say so, and this will be the only party political comment that I will make today. The tragedy, if I may say so, of the former Government, which is chronicled in Paul's book; the tragedy for itself, because I think in the end it was at the heart of its failure, the tragedy for our country, because it is in our national interest for all our governments to succeed, regardless of their political persuasion, the tragedy of the last Government was that it was much better at politics than government. It wasn't able, in the end, to set the agenda even though it was very good, at least early on, at generating headlines.
Over 40 years, Paul Kelly has been perhaps our foremost political commentator but certainly our finest historian of contemporary politics. Triumph and Demise reinforces his standing as our finest historian of contemporary politics.
Everyone who is interested in public life, everyone who is interested in Australian politics, should read this book – not just read the book, they should consume the book, they should assimilate the book, they should learn from the book.
This is the first considered draft of the history of these times.
There’s been an abundance of journalism about the last six years, but, inevitably, daily journalism lacks perspective.
We’ve even seen some books written about the last six years. Inevitably, by partisans – by participants – and I have to say that it’s been advocacy, it’s been partisanship, sometimes it’s been score settling; it hasn’t been history. Paul has given us the first considered draft of the history of these times.
Today, as I said, I wish to leave the judgements of those times – the judgements on the Rudd/Gillard era – to Paul, the author, and to his readers.
Yes, Paul is critical – very critical at times – of the former government. What shines through though, even when he is critical, is his generosity to all of the participants in our parliamentary and public life.
Even when Paul is being critical, he sees the strengths as well as the weaknesses of the participants in our national drama. He sees their qualities as well as their flaws, and it’s this generosity of spirit as well as perceptiveness of judgement which sets Paul part from so many of his fellow contemporary journalists.
Not for Kelly, the sourness which so often contaminates so much commentary. Not for Kelly, the shallowness which is sometimes the subject matter of so much commentary. He is interested in the big picture, in what really matters, not in just the gossip of the day or of the week.
I should say, though, that there is one substantial issue with which I do take issue with Paul. Paul suggests, in a very important final chapter of the book, that our system is in trouble and because our system is in trouble, our country might be in trouble.
Paul suggests that the relentless negativity of our contemporary conversation, the culture of entitlement that he thinks has sprung up over the last decade or so, means that good government has become difficult, perhaps impossible.
There is no doubt that good government today is harder than ever before, in part, because of the 24/7 media cycle, which politicians inevitably need to feed.
It’s difficult to avoid trivialising what shouldn't be trivialised when it has to be spoken about and spoken about differently one hour from the next.
I was watching Sky just the other day, as you do, and at about 5.50 there was David Speers interviewing Stan Grant about the events of the day, and then shortly after 6 o'clock we had Stan Grant interviewing David Speers about the events of the day. Now I have to say, as a political junky it is riveting television! I have to say, as a political tragic, everything that they said to each other was worth listening to. But, it’s easy to lose sight of the fundamentals that shape our nation when we are this immersed in commentary on what’s happened on any particular day.
The system that produced the Rudd/Gillard government is the same system that produced the Hawke government, the same system that produced the Howard government. The Hawke government was undoubtedly the best Labor Government in our history, and along with the Menzies government, the Howard government can lay claim to being the best conservative government in our history.
If this system could produce, in the recent past, two outstanding governments, there is no reason why it can't, in the near future, produce other outstanding governments.
It’s not the system which is the problem; it is the people who, from time to time, inhabit it.
Our challenge, at every level, is to be our best selves. The challenge for all of us and everyone in this room today as part of the system, is to lift ourselves so that we see the system at its best, not the system at its worst.
The mission, if I may say so, of the current Government, is to demonstrate, through its action, ultimately through its record, that the last six years – the six years between 2007 and 2013 – is not the new normal; that it was in fact just a passing phase.
Our challenge – the challenge of the current Government – is to show that the age of reform has not ended, it was merely interrupted.
I believe it is absolutely critical for our country that we succeed in this task, and if we do succeed in this task, I am sure that no one would be happier than Paul Kelly himself.
[ends]


It really is great to be here to help launch Defining Moments and to commemorate the bicentenary of the death of Governor Arthur Phillip.
It’s fitting that we today launch the Defining Moments Project and also mark the 200th anniversary of the death of Governor Arthur Phillip because the arrival of the First Fleet was the defining moment in the history of this continent. It was the moment this continent became part of the modern world. It determined our language, our law, and our fundamental values.
Yes, it did dispossess, and for a long time marginalise, indigenous people. As Noel Pearson frequently reminds us, modern Australia has an important indigenous and multicultural character. Still, it is British settlement that has most profoundly shaped the country that we are. It has provided the foundation for Australia to become one of the fairest and most prosperous societies on the face of the earth. So Arthur Phillip is as significant to modern Australia as George Washington is to the modern United States.
On the 26th January 1788, Governor Phillip raised the Union flag at Sydney Cove, drank to the King’s health and success to the settlement, and I quote from the official record, “With all that display of form, which on such occasions is esteemed propitious, because it enlivens the spirits and fills the imagination with pleasing presages.”  He encouraged all the new settlers, including the convicts, to work hard for the benefit of the community and promised the reward of land upon emancipation. His instructions from the British Government were to build amity with the local inhabitants, and Phillip tried hard and faithfully to carry these out. Most notably, he declined to order punishment after himself being speared.
He was a man of his times. He was a man of courage, decency, moderation, and vision; characteristics which should and usually do mark the nation he helped to found. Yes, he was a man of his times, he was a man who embodied the best of his times and may this country embody the very best.
Any attempt to nominate defining moments will inevitably be contentious. For instance, I hope that the defining moments of World War One might include the capture of Jerusalem and the achievements of General Monash as well as the landing at Gallipoli.
I hope that the defining moments of 1964, for instance, might include the launch of The Australian newspaper, as well as the publication of The Lucky Country.
Australia may not be the most important country in the world, but it is the most important to us and it’s our duty to enlarge our country, not to diminish it. Actually, I rather envy those who choose the defining moments that will tell the story of our nation on these walls. After all, it’s what we choose to define ourselves by that does indeed help to define us.
But, there is a further defining moment that I hope one day will certainly have a plug here at the National Museum and that’s for the constitutional amendment recognising Aboriginal peoples that I hope will soon take place.
In any event, the Defining Moments Project will be an opportunity to popularise important episodes in our history. It will be a chance to honour our forebears and preserve what is best about us for future generations.
May it remind us that in history’s page, every single stage, should Advance Australia Fair.
[ends]


Many Australians are understandably apprehensive about the risk of becoming involved in another long and costly conflict in the Middle East.
The situation in the Middle East is indeed a witches’ brew of complexity and potential danger.
Doing anything involves serious risks and weighty consequences.
But doing nothing involves risks and consequences too.
As things stand, doing nothing means leaving millions of people exposed to death, forced conversion and ethnic cleansing.
So far this year, more than a million Iraqis have been driven from their homes.
We have all seen on our screens the beheadings, the crucifixions and the mass executions.
Peoples and cultures that have existed for millennia are faced with extermination.
Thousands of women have been forced into sexual slavery.
President Obama has labelled what is happening at the hands of the ISIL movement as a potential genocide.
I refuse to call this hideous movement “Islamic State” because it’s not a state; it is a death cult.
In good conscience, Madam Speaker, Australia cannot leave the Iraqi people to face this horror, this pure evil, alone or ask others to do so in the name of human decency what we won’t do ourselves.
It is right to do what we prudently and proportionately can to alleviate this suffering, to prevent its spread and to deal with its perpetrators.
So far, Australian aircraft have participated in humanitarian airdrops to people trapped on Mount Sinjar and, just yesterday, to the besieged inhabitants of the town of Amerli.
Yesterday’s airdrop was mounted in conjunction with American, British and French aircraft.
In coming days, Australian aircraft will join an airlift of supplies, including military equipment, to the Kurdish regional government in Erbil.
American, British, French, Canadian and Italian aircraft will also be involved.
This involvement has been at the request of the Obama administration and with the support of the Iraqi government.
So far, we have met requests for humanitarian relief and for logistical support.
So far, there has been no request for military action itself.
Should such a request come from the Obama administration and supported by the government of Iraq, it would be considered against these criteria: is there a clear and achievable overall objective? Is there a clear and proportionate role for Australian forces? Have all the risks been properly assessed? And is there an overall humanitarian objective in accordance with Australia’s national interests?
Like President Obama, Australia has no intention to commit combat troops on the ground.
But we’re not inclined to stand by in the face of preventable genocide either.
Australia is not a country that goes looking for trouble but we have always been prepared to do what we can to help in the wider world.
Madam Speaker, many Australians, understandably, will shrink from reaching out to this conflict on the other side of the world but this conflict is reaching out to us.
At least 60 Australians are fighting with terrorist groups across Iraq and Syria.
They are supported by about 100 more.
And we know – or at least should prudently assume – that many of them will seek to return to Australia.
They will return accustomed to kill.
Around two thirds of Australians who returned from fighting with terrorist groups in Afghanistan a decade or so back subsequently became involved in terrorist activities here.
A number are still serving long jail sentences.
The Australians and their supporters who have joined terrorist groups in the Middle East are a serious and growing threat to our security.
That’s why the Government is boosting counter-terrorism funding by $630 million and updating our laws so they keep pace with evolving technologies and the developing threat.
At the same time we have stepped up engagement with community groups here in Australia.
I want to stress now, as I always do, that the threat is extremism – not any particular community.
The target is terrorism – not religion.
We need to understand that people who kill without compunction in other countries are hardly likely to be law abiding citizens should they return to Australia.
They have come to hate us no less than they hate their victims in Iraq and Syria.
The don’t hate us for what we do; but for who we are and for how we live.
They hate us because we let people live and worship in whatever way they choose and I thank God that we do.
I am grateful that the Government’s actions so far have been fully supported by the Opposition Leader.
This is as it should be when our nation faces threats to its national security.
Obviously, Madam Speaker, the Parliament will have a chance to speak to this statement and that of the Opposition Leader in coming days.
That, too, is as it should be in a free and fair democracy such as ours.
[ends]


Today, 113 years ago, the Australian flag flew for the first time on top of the Royal Exhibition Building in Melbourne.
Today is the very first time that the national Parliament has officially commemorated Australian National Flag Day.
I want to acknowledge the work over many years of Mr John Vaughan, now the head of the New South Wales branch of the National Flag Association, for everything he has done over the years to bring about National Flag Day.
I also want to pay tribute to a former Governor of New South Wales, Sir David Martin, who was one of the early movers behind National Flag Day. In 1989, Sir David Martin said, and I quote, “I can understand the wishes of many Australians to have more light-hearted symbols to wave on certain occasions, and I share their feelings. I’m a happy admirer of kangaroos, koalas, wattle, waratahs, broad-brimmed hats and cans of beer. By all means, let’s make happy, slick, wonderful emblems for use on particular occasions. But in the midst of such light-hearted cheering, I’m comforted to know that the Australian flag remains at the masthead, proclaiming our maturity, continuity and stability as a nation. In the short history of Australia, our people have been involved in many activities and events of great turmoil, anguish, strife, pressure, anxiety, unhappiness, hopelessness, but also, and most particularly, success, joy and jubilation. And on almost all of these occasions, this flag has been a rallying point. It’s become associated with Australians and our great deeds, strong victories and some gallant defeats. It’s become identified with our proud history and our fine traditions”.
They were fine words of Sir David Martin and I am pleased and proud to adopt them today.
I also wish to recall the words of my friend and former colleague, our former Prime Minister John Howard, who in 1996 said, and I quote, “My government seeks to reinforce Australian values and to create a secure and stable environment for our national institutions and trust between government and the people. Protection and respect for our national symbols is an important part of this. Our national flag is a unifying force, is a familiar and a powerful image and a focus for national pride”.
So, today, my friends and fellow Australians, we salute this flag of ours that has been with us almost every step on our national journey.
It’s a flag of stars and crosses. The crosses represent our history and our heritage. The stars under which indigenous people have roamed for tens and tens of thousands of years, represent our dreams, past, present and future.
As Australians we are proud to say that we were born under this flag, have fought under this flag, have cheered for this flag and many of us wish to be buried under this flag.
We live in challenging times and it’s right that we should have a public and formal celebration of our national flag. Fittingly, today also marks the 75th anniversary of the commencement of Australia’s involvement in the Second World War, when on this day, Britain declared war on Nazi Germany.
We are a creative and a capable people who have always faced the future with confidence. This was the spirit of those who designed our flag. This is the spirit that encourages and embodies the values and the principles which have made Australia strong and prosperous.
I encourage everyone to fly the Australian national flag proudly and to celebrate our flag’s day.
Thank you.
[ends]


Mr Howard, Mrs Heather Henderson, distinguished parliamentary colleagues – past and present – ladies and gentlemen. It is good to be here in this historical and characterful building surrounded by people from former prime ministers to former parliamentary attendants who knew this building and who loved our system of government.
This is a most fitting day to launch the Menzies: By Howard exhibition because it is 75 years ago this day that Sir Robert Menzies declared war.
It is of course the job of history to revisit every conflict, to search for reasons, to question assumptions and to pass judgment on the actions of the protagonists. History’s verdict is close to unanimous – that war was a battle between good and evil, it was a conflict where civilisation itself hung in the balance. The role of our wartime leaders should be remembered and today through this exhibition we remember Sir Robert Menzies and his prime ministership from 1939 to 1941.
When Menzies first visited the then Governor General, Lord Gowrie, the former Government, the Governor General asked him, “If I commission you, how long do you think you will last?”
Menzies thought for a moment and replied, “Six weeks, your excellency.”
The Governor General smiled and said, “That will do for a start.” And as we know Menzies lasted for much longer than six weeks and accomplished much.
He is a figure so worthy of remembrance for his wartime leadership, for founding the Liberal Party and for presiding over our long golden age of post-war expansion.
When Menzies took over the prime ministership in April 1939 he found himself as Anne Henderson puts it, “leading an unwilling nation towards the second global conflict in the space of just two decades and at the helm of a fractious political team.”
Preparing a country still scarred by World War One to deal with a world sliding toward war, not confined this time to distant shores but with danger on our doorstop preoccupied Menzies at the expense of political management and yes it did cost him his prime ministership.
Yet, as he himself later acknowledged, it was the lessons of his first prime ministership that laid the foundations for his second. These lessons resulted in him honing his political philosophy and developing his political skills and he wrote about that time, a quarter of a century later,  “I was still in a state of mind in which to be logical is to be right and to be right is its own justification. I had yet to learn that human beings are delightfully illogical but mostly honest and to realise that all black and all white are not the only hues in the spectrum.”
And certainly his political exile paved the way for his subsequent success.
Sir Robert Menzies did not simply govern Australia for a long time. He shaped it according to an enduring set of values and principles; support for the family and small business and respect for traditional values and institutions.
All of us, in our own way, are Menzies children.
In this exhibition, John Howard expertly chronicles his first prime ministerial term. I want to congratulate the Museum of Australian Democracy for inviting our second longest serving prime minister to bring his unique perspective to our longest serving one.
Giants, both, in whose extraordinary foot prints I am proud to follow.
Both touched by political adversity and both triumphing magnificently over it.
Included in the exhibition is the correspondence between John Curtin and Robert Menzies; men with different world views but with a bond founded in genuine respect for each other and deep love of our country.
The life and times of Sir Robert Menzies warrant constant study because from his life and times we better understand our own.
I am honoured to declare Menzies: By Howard open and I hope it enjoys the largest possible patronage.
[ends]


Thank you so much, Andrew. It’s lovely to be here at the Taj Hotel, one of the truly magnificent hotels of the world. And yes, I have been here before. Back in 1981 I spent three months as a backpacker roaming around India – this mysterious, fascinating, enthralling sub-continent, this world in one country – and I spent a lot of time in third-class compartments of railway carriages, I’d spent a lot of time in two rupee a night hotels and I thought, “I’m going to have to treat myself”. So, I came here to the Taj Hotel and I had the best lunch this hotel could provide and I’m sure that the breakfast we’re about to enjoy will be no less splendid than the lunch I had here 33 years ago.
India has changed enormously over the last 33 years. I can remember on my first day in Mumbai watching a bullock cart take material into a nuclear power station. Well, 33 years on, there aren’t that many bullock carts left in urban India, and the power stations – the nuclear power stations – are more sophisticated than ever.
Australia still doesn’t have nuclear power stations, but the fact of the matter is this is a country which has amazed the world over the last few decades with its growth and its development – the world’s second most populous country; on purchasing power terms, the world’s third largest economy, clearly, the emerging democratic superpower of the world and a country with which Australia has long and warm ties.
The purpose of this trip, as far as I’m concerned, is to acknowledge the importance of India in the wider world, acknowledge the importance of India to Australia’s future, to let the Government and the people of India know what Australia has to offer India and the wider world for our part, and to build on those stronger foundations.
Prime Minister Modi has said that India is open. He hasn’t used the phrase ‘Open for Business’, but he said, “Come, make in India”, and I think that that phrase, “Come, make in India”, is very close in spirit and in intent to the phrase I have used of our country, Australia, that we are ‘Open for Business’.
So there is a lot to do – a very great deal to do. I think there have been times when we have focused on opportunities elsewhere in our region. I’m not saying that there aren’t lots of opportunities elsewhere in our region, but there is an abundance of opportunities here in India. I am determined to make the most of them, I know all of you are determined to make the most of them and I look forward to working very closely with you and with our Indian interlocutors over the next two days. Let’s enjoy our breakfast and enjoy our company.
[ends]


It is lovely to be back here in India some 33 years after, as a student between a stint at the University of Sydney and a stint at the University of Oxford I spent three months here in India, including a fortnight here in the great city of Mumbai.
Professors, distinguished guests, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, I do feel very honoured to be here in this great hall of learning to help launch in India the New Colombo Plan. I say this great hall of learning because there are very few institutions of learning anywhere in the world which have done as much to spread the light of knowledge as this great University of Mumbai.
As I said a moment ago, I was a student at the University of Sydney – some 20,000 students in those days. I then went to the University of Oxford – some 8,000 students in those days. Well, 700,000 students here at the University of Mumbai – what a mighty institution. It is my hope in a small, but significant way those numbers can be augmented in the years ahead by more students from Australia.
Some of you may be aware that back in 1950 the then Australian Government instituted what became known as the Colombo Plan. It was a scheme under which the best and the brightest of the students of our region came to universities in Australia to live, to learn, and then to return to their home countries with the benefits of that education and that life that they’d had in Australia.
It was a marvellous scheme and between 1950 and 1985 some 40,000 people came from the subcontinent, from South-East Asia, from the Pacific, to the universities of Australia, and they returned in large measure to their countries the better for that experience.
But I want to say this to you: it was a one-way street and what we now want in Australia is a two-way street. We want to return the compliment to our region by sending our best and brightest to the great universities of our region so that they can live, can learn, can speak the local languages, and come back to our country enriched by that experience.
We have much to offer the world; the world has much to offer us. Australia has much to offer India; India has at least as much to offer Australia. Indian people have been coming to Australia for many years. There are now some half a million people of Indian background living in Australia. In any one year, there are some 40,000 Indian students studying in Australia. Regrettably, right now, there are just a few tens of Australian students studying in India. That must change and that will change as a result of the New Colombo Plan that I launch this day, here at the University of Mumbai.
From next year, there will be hundreds of Australian students in India. In the years to come, those numbers will mount and mount and mount so that there will be thousands of Australian students here in India, experiencing the richness and the depth of the learning and the culture that this great country has to contribute to us and to the wider world.
There is so much that we can learn from each other. The motto of my first university, Sydney University – sidere mens eadem mutato – different skies, the same learning. And I want to pay tribute to this university for preserving the universal wisdom of mankind, for doing what it can to spread the knowledge, the truth, the wisdom, and the decency, which is at the heart of our common humanity. You have been doing that since 1857. This candle that we lit at the start of this ceremony stands for that light of learning – stands for that light of learning – the light of learning that we want to shine bright, right around the world and that will shine all the brighter because of the New Colombo Plan that we launch today.
Thank you so much. It is a real honour to be here.
[ends]


It is a thrill to be here in Mumbai. It’s great to be back in India after 33 years, but the three months that I spent in India 33 years ago was, as Andrew has just suggested, quite a formative time in my life.
Back then, as Andrew reminded us, here in Mumbai there were nuclear power plants that were being supplied by means of bullock carts. Well, there aren’t too many bullock carts any more, but by gee, there are nuclear power plants, and not just nuclear power plants, because this country – India – has become one of the IT and technological powerhouses of the world in the 30 years since that time.
Since that trip, I have always thought that this country – India – had enormous potential – enormous potential – and it has been very encouraging watching, from afar, to see India increasingly grasping that potential over the last three decades.
A lot of countries have come a long way over the last three decades. China – obviously – Korea – obviously – Indonesia – increasingly, but perhaps no country has gone as far and as fast as India, surprisingly unnoticed until quite recently in Australia. If there is one thing that I would like to do on this visit to India is remind my fellow Australians back home of just how far and how fast India has come over the last 30 years and just how much potential it has for our country as well as for its own citizens and the wider world.
Yes, India is the second most populous country in the world. In purchasing power terms it is the world’s third largest economy already. As I have said repeatedly in recent times, India is the world’s emerging democratic superpower. And, there is so much which India is doing economically that we need to be more conscious of in Australia. The Adani mine, should it go ahead as I hope it will, will be the largest single coal mine Australia has ever seen. The Tata Company has vast interests in Australia and apart from anything else, Tata has finally delivered to the world a reliable Jaguar motorcar – whoever would have thought that you could get into a Jaguar, turn the ignition and find that it goes? Well it does now, thanks to an Indian organisation and Indian know-how!
So, there is so much that India can offer the world and Australia and I am confident that with a new Prime Minister, with a renewed sense of optimism and potential, India is once more on the verge of another economic leap forward.
I think there is considerable potential for partnership between Australia and India. As some of you might recall, on election night in September last year, I said that Australia was under new management and, once more, open for business. I was delighted to see that shortly after his election, Prime Minister Modi said to the wider world, “Come, make in India”. So, I think there is a very similar spirit with the Government of India and the Government of Australia. Both governments want to unleash the creativity and the potential of their people.
Certainly, over the last 12 months – I say this for the benefit of our Indian friends today – substantial progress has been made. The carbon tax is gone. The mining tax is gone. New projects to the value of $800 billion have received environmental approval. We have substantially achieved a situation of a one-stop shop for environmental approvals of major new projects in Australia. A free trade agreement has been concluded with Korea, another with Japan. I gave Andrew Robb a third big task and that was to finalise the free trade agreement with China. He’s well on the way to doing that. But, I now give you a fourth task, Andrew: finish the free trade agreement with India, please! It would be well worth the investment because whenever Australians and Indians get together, we instantly feel comfortable in each other’s company.
There is much history – much history which sadly has been forgotten. Not too many Australians remember that more than half a million horses for the Indian army between the 1860s and the 1930s came from Australia. They were known as ‘walers’ because they left our country from New South Wales. Not many Australians remember that there were thousands of Indians at Gallipoli. In fact, the donkey which Simpson used was supplied to him by an Indian unit serving on the Gallipoli Peninsula. There were more Indians who passed into captivity at the fall of Singapore than there were Australians. Indians served with Australia in the Middle East in both World Wars.
So, there is this abundance of history. There is a similar commitment to democracy, to the rule of law. There is a heritage of language and sport that we can build on. The pity is that for too long India was off to one side; our attention was elsewhere. Now, I’m thrilled that Australia has been focused for a long time on North Asia because strong friendships, strong economic partnerships, have been built as a result of that focus. But as I keep saying, you don’t win new friends by losing old ones. Likewise, it is possible to keep your old friends while building strong and deep new friendships and between Australia and India, it’s not so much a new friendship, as a friendship rediscovered, a friendship rekindled, a friendship revitalised. That’s what I wish to do on this trip.
Now, as Andrew has been reminding people all morning, two-way trade at the present time between Australia and India is about $15 billion a year – a substantial amount. India is our fifth largest merchandise export market, our fifth largest export market for goods. It’s a substantial market, but compared to two-way trade between Australia and China of $150 billion, it’s comparatively tiny. And yet we’ve been focused on the China market for the best part of three decades. Just think what could be achieved between Australia and India if there had been the same focus here as there has been there.
Now, I’m not saying for a moment that we should take our eye off that ball, but I do think there is another opportunity that we have at long last woken up to, and my hope is that this visit will well and truly awaken Australians and Indians to the potential that each of us offer the other. That’s my hope, because I know that when Australians and Indians sit down to talk to each other the conversation flows easily, the jokes are well-understood, the stories and the parallels are all there, we get each other, and if we get each other, we can work with each other, and if we work with each other, our countries will be vastly the better off and the world will be a better and happier place.
So, it is a real thrill to be here. I apologise to our Indian friends today that it’s taken me 33 years to come back from that three month trip all those years ago. This is more like a three day trip than a three month trip, but I hope in its own way it will have just as much impact.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


It is a real pleasure and an honour to be here today and I want to thank everyone for being here in such numbers and with such enthusiasm to support the relationship between Australia and India.
I particularly thank Minister Sitharaman for her presence and for her words, I thank Mr Kapoor for his words and I hear, I hear, more importantly I am sure that some of the people sitting at these tables here as well.
Lindsay, Sam, Anthony, Peter more investment please – that is the message that is coming.
But it is a real honour to be here as Australia’s Prime Minister.
This is not my first visit to India. As a student, I spent three months travelling around much of northern India.
I was conscious of the historical links: the Indian soldiers who’d been with us at Gallipoli and in Palestine and who, in a later war, had passed with our own into captivity at Singapore.
I was excited by this land of contrasts; of the most ancient spirituality with the most modern technology.
I was fascinated by a country that was both exotic and familiar.
Not only was that a formative period in my life; it also left me with an abiding sense that India would soon make its mark in the wider world.
The India of today is the world’s second most populous nation; for most of the past three decades it’s grown at more than 5 per cent a year and, in purchasing power terms, it’s already the world’s third largest economy.
In short, India is the world’s emerging democratic superpower.
In India, as elsewhere in Asia, hundreds of millions of people are moving from poverty into the middle class; as successive governments have dismantled regulatory shackles and unleashed the flair and the drive that’s so obvious in the Indian diaspora.
I salute India’s achievement.
India has proven that economic transformation is quite compatible with robust free speech, independent courts, and democratic checks and balances on government.
My instinct is that India’s well entrenched democracy, commitment to the rule of law, and habit of lively debate will turn out to be its greatest intangible assets.
The purpose of this visit, as soon as possible in the life of the new governments here and in Australia, is to remind Australians never to neglect any of the emerging Asian great powers; and to reassure Indians that Australia is acutely conscious of all that our two countries might achieve together.
The election of new governments opens new possibilities for both our countries.
Australia is “open for business” – Prime Minister Modi is inviting the world to, “come, make in India”.
In Australia, over the past year:
the carbon tax has been scrapped;
the mining tax is gone;
one-stop shop approvals for environmental permits are coming into place;
$800 billion worth of big new projects have received the environmental go ahead;
free trade agreements are being concluded; and
the Budget is coming back under control.
India, for its part, has, so to speak, a new CEO, determined to bring to the whole country the problem-solving approach he brought to revitalising an important state.
As countries that believe in private sector-led growth, both Australia and India will be in a position to lead-by-example at the coming Brisbane G20 leaders’ summit, in committing to policies for an extra 2 per cent growth over the next five years.
Both Prime Minister Modi and I wish to be known as “infrastructure prime ministers” and the G20, fittingly, will focus on mobilising private capital to address the world’s infrastructure deficit.
Both India and Australia want to boost two way trade and investment and I hope that the comprehensive economic partnership – or free trade – negotiations between our two countries will be concluded, at the latest, by the end of 2016.
That way, top-quality Australian coal, for instance, will be available to power Indian households and businesses at the lowest price to consumers.
There has never been a better time to revitalise this friendship that has usually been warm but has often been under-developed.
We both need to be more ambitious.
These days, India is our largest or next-to-largest source of immigrants and our largest or next-to-largest source of overseas students.
As my CEO delegation attests, some of the half million Australians of Indian background are already very senior in business, culture, education and administration; and as I discovered yesterday, Australian cricketers are at least as revered in this country as at home – and this will only increase now that Brett Lee is to become the latest Bollywood star in a new Indian-Australian film co-production.
In a sign of the mutual trust and confidence that our two countries have in each other, Prime Minister Modi and I will today sign a nuclear co-operation agreement that will, finally, allow Australian uranium sales to India.
This was originally an initiative of the Howard Government; now brought to fruition by the Abbott Government.
Yesterday, I launched the New Colombo Plan in Mumbai which will mean, over time, hundreds of Australian students coming each year to India to complement the thousands of Indian students who come every year to Australia.
My Government is streamlining student visa arrangements and working visa arrangements to make it easier for Indians to study and to work in Australia.
If all goes to plan, next year, an Indian company will begin Australia’s largest ever coal development which will light the lives of 100 million Indians for the next half century.
But, as we have been reminded earlier today, last year, two-way trade between Australia and India was only $15 billion and Indian investment in Australia is well under $20 billion and the less said about Australian investment in India the better.
Trade and Investment is substantial – but it’s not what it should be – given our countries’ level of comfort with each other, our comparative proximity and the complementarity between our economies.
By contrast, two way trade between Australia and China is already running at $150 billion a year.
A reason for that is that Australia has spent three decades promoting trade with China while only recently re-discovering India’s economic potential.
So, with comparable time and effort, there’s no reason why the economic relationship between Australia and India should not resemble that between Australia and the major economies of North Asia.
Australia will not and should not neglect the economic gains to be made in North Asia; but we should not and must not pursue these at the expense of the mutual economic benefits to be had here in South Asia, especially as India’s GDP grows strongly.
My predecessor, John Howard, once said in respect of our historical ties and our economic ones, that Australia did not have to choose between its history and its geography.
Likewise, I’ve said of Australia’s relationships with the United States and with China, that you don’t make new friends by losing old ones.
I should add, in respect of our relationships with China and with India, that it’s possible to have more than one friend at the same time.
Over the past half century, Australian coal, iron ore and gas has powered the economic transformations of Japan, Korea and China.
We have been an utterly dependable source of energy security, resource security and food security.
My hope is that we can become an utterly reliable source of energy, resource and food security for India too.
Australia and India already have a formally-negotiated strategic partnership.
We already have an educational partnership comprising formal links between many institutions – mostly they’re Australian universities and institutes with campuses in India but a two-way street is starting to develop.
My hope is to develop an economic partnership commensurate with our countries, our two countries’ history and heritage and our people’s easy rapport with each other – a rapport that is evident today – mines and minds, if you like.
This doesn’t require governments to decree particular outcomes; more central planning is, I suspect, the last thing that either of our countries need.
The vital step is for more and more of our senior people to spend more time in each other’s company.
That’s why I’m so pleased to have with me a CEOs delegation from resources, finance, logistics, education, culture and sport.
We will discover, I’m sure, countless ways in which enterprises in one country could work well with enterprises in the other.
Furthermore, we’d also discover countless ways in which we share much the same approach to all the issues our countries’ face.
My business delegation likes Prime Minister Modi’s determination to ease the cost of doing business; for their part, our Indian business partners are looking forward to the $1 billion a year, every year, cut in Australia’s red tape costs.
The fundamental principle that we both live by is “treat others as you’d have them treat you”.
It’s not, get away with whatever you can, or do whatever it takes.
No, it’s the fundamentally ethical principle that every cricketer is supposed to assimilate – play by the rules and accept the umpire’s decision.
And it is this which explains why we can so easily work together and our two countries are so ready to trust each other on issues like uranium safeguards.
Around the world, Australia has many friends and few critics because we’re a strong ally, a reliable partner and among the most ready to help whenever trouble strikes.
Likewise, as a nation, India has always behaved scrupulously in accordance with international law.
We both deplore terrorism in all its forms and cooperate against it wherever it occurs.
We both take a dim view of border violations and believe that territorial disputes should be settled peacefully in accordance with international law.
The past 35 years have been a period of unparalleled material progress in the life of the world.
Especially in Asia, more people have come further, faster economically than at any other time in human history.
Nearly everywhere, including in countries without a democratic tradition, people’s lives are freer as well as richer.
Still, the further that countries and peoples advance, the more that’s at risk should there be conflict between nations.
Ultimately, we will all advance together or none of us will advance at all.
So, as economic weight shifts to the Indo-Pacific region, the strategic balances moves too.
I acknowledge India’s “look east” policy and I also acknowledge Prime Minister Modi’s very successful visit to Japan.
All the time, India’s potential is becoming more apparent.
Understandably, modern India is courted by many nations; and that is as it should be.
In the years ahead, India will have many friendships but few, if any, that will be as uncomplicated and as clearly mutually beneficial as that with Australia.
So, my friends, thank you so much for being here. I really do appreciate the presence of so many leaders in both our countries.
There is a future. It is bright and golden and it is there for us to grasp.
[ends]


I suppose Laurie the only respect in which I take after Sir Robert is that I am just as hard to get to the National Press Club.
But Laurie Wilson, Tony Eggleton, Juris and Lois Greste, my parliamentary colleagues and I can see three in the room; Dan Tehan, Angus Taylor and Peter Hendy, ladies and gentlemen, it is great honour to be addressing the National Press Club to mark its 50th year.
As some of you would know, like Alfred Deakin and John Curtin, I was a journalist before eventually becoming a prime minister.
I have often said that as a journalist, I was a frustrated politician; and as a politician, I am a frustrated journalist; and while a trainee priest, I was just frustrated!
I once observed that it was my hope to raise the status of both occupations; to which a wag replied: by leaving journalism to become a member of parliament, you did!
There’s always an element of tension in the relationship between members of parliament and members of the media.
We are both deeply interested in everything that impacts on people’s lives.
We’re both committed, I hope, to advancing the national interest and to helping people to come closer to being their best selves.
The National Press Club’s roll call of guest speakers – national and international leaders, thinkers and doers who have changed Australia and the world – testifies to that.
Yet the media’s job is to sit in judgement on politicians.
For our part, we must put up with it but we don’t usually like it!
In the end, though, our country and our world are stronger thanks to a media that speaks truth to power.
On my very first day as an MP, I walked proudly through the House of Representatives entrance.
“Where’s your pass?” said the attendant.
“I didn’t think I needed one anymore,” I said.
“Come on, show me your pass,” insisted the attendant.
“Look,” I said, “I’m the newly elected Member of Parliament for Warringah.”
“Sure,” said the attendant, “and I’m Paul Keating.”
Just at that moment who should walk past but the late, great Paul Lyneham, who told the attendant that I was in fact who I claimed to be.
It was, I thought, probably the only time in history that the presenter of the 7:30 Report would ever help a Liberal politician out of trouble!
So, I wholeheartedly acknowledge the media’s role in our national life and in our polity.
Indeed, the country we are owes much to the quality of our journalism.
Yet the media’s job is to improve our country as well as to report it.
The best contribution, if I may say so, the media could make right now – is not to be more right wing, or more left wing – but to be more ready to give credit where it’s due; and to acknowledge the strengths as well as the weaknesses in our country and its people.
Of course, now as 50 years ago, there is much that could be improved: our country doesn’t always seize its opportunities; too many people, as always, feel trapped and helpless in the face of life’s challenges; and governments could always be braver, surer, and more compassionate.
Still the fact that Australia is undoubtedly amongst the freest, fairest, and most prosperous countries on earth means that we must be doing something right.
It means that all of us are doing something right; and that should be acknowledged and celebrated even as we strive for more and for better.
Fifty years ago, middle class Australian families typically had one car, one bathroom, and one telephone.
The last five decades has seen the greatest explosion in material wealth in human history.
To be born Australian, as always, is to have won the lottery of life; but while the lives of many of us have gone from comfortable to luxurious, the lives of billions of people across the globe have gone from precarious to comparatively prosperous.
In Australia, lifespans have gone from under 70 to over 80; in the rest of the world, they’ve gone from under 50 to over 60.
This is the best antidote to pessimism about the future, particularly pessimism about future conflict: the fact that everyone, these days, has so much more to lose from war and conflict.
People are often irrational but governments rarely are – thanks to collective decision making, even in countries without a democratic tradition.
Of course, here in Australia, there’s more family breakdown and more mental illness and more people dependent on social security than 50 years ago.
Yet there’s also more freedom for individuals to be whoever they really are, and there’s far more sympathy for the social and cultural outsider.
There’s more diversity – sometimes challenging diversity.
Paradoxically, the assurance that Australia stands ready to give to everyone – that you can be part of our team – means that national unity has probably never been stronger.
I think it was Lord Salisbury who said that change is to be resisted to the last possible moment because change is always for the worse.
I prefer Disraeli’s view that change is to be welcomed; provided it’s change that accords with the best customs and the best traditions of our people.
Most of the past 50 years’ changes have been to make us freer to be our authentic selves – or at least, that’s been their intention if not always their outcome.
There are better and worse times; but there is no perfect time, there never has been a perfect time to which we need return.
The past is to guide us and to inspire us, not to shackle us. That, at any rate, is my idea of true conservatism.
At least in this country and in our culture – with our strong tradition of freedom – liberalism and conservatism are no more than opposite sides of the same coin.
I will, if you will forgive me Laurie, leave others to judge how far, and how well, I might have changed over the 30 years that I have been in the public eye and the 20 years I have been in Parliament.
For my part, I will admit to two significant policy areas where I am now different.
I’ve shifted from being a critic to a supporter of multiculturalism, because it eventually dawned on me that migrants were coming to Australia not to change us but to join us.
And I’ve shifted from being an opponent to an advocate for paid parental leave, because it dawned on me that if modern women were to have children they needed encouragement to be both mothers and workers.
In other words, there were good conservative reasons – liberal conservative reasons – for changing a traditional position.
Over the past 30 years, the two greatest political leaders – perhaps the greatest leaders of their Parties ever – were Bob Hawke and John Howard; both, of course, on numerous occasions, speakers at this National Press Club.
Howard and Hawke were both true to the best elements in their Parties’ tradition – Hawke wanting to give workers the best chance to get ahead; and Howard wanting to combine economic freedom with social cohesion.
Both, of course, adapted these to the realities of modern Australia.
Both were strong leaders with strong cabinets.
Both were tough minded reformers, prepared to take on vested interests – although, in Hawke’s case, he could usually rely on the support of the Opposition.
Hawke’s achievement was to overcome internal dissent; Howard’s was to overcome the initial contempt of almost the entire politically correct establishment.
And so in light of your opening vignettes, I ask, how does Menzies rate against them?
There’s a marvellous passage in Heather Henderson’s book where she quotes her father describing his three and a half weeks of the 1961 election campaign: he’s the Prime Minister, he is fighting the election campaign and this is what he does in three and a half weeks. He says there’s 13 meetings, six ten minute broadcasts, and several appearances on TV “so I will not be unemployed”, says Menzies.
You should have organised more for him Tony!
The gulf between political life then and now is so vast that comparisons are simply impossible.
Menzies was the titan of his time; Hawke and Howard are the giants of ours.
Australia’s comparative economic strength owes everything to a quarter century of reform under Hawke and Howard and almost nothing to the six wasted years that followed.
The Budget – much criticised for poor politics but not for poor economics – is a sign that the age of reform has merely been interrupted, not ended.
This Government’s mission is to demonstrate that the six years between 2007 and 2013 – the political instability and the policy retreats – were just an aberration, not the new normal.
Our success or failure will determine whether or not Australia is doomed to bad government. It is that important.
Like most politicians, I am often asked about my vision for Australia.
The last thing people should want is someone else – even a prime minister – dictating their lives and their dreams for them.
My vision for Australia is a country where every person is better able to realise his or her own vision.
Yes, my vision is better schools, better hospitals, and more productive businesses – but a government that tries to dictate this will end up wasting billions of dollars.
The best way to achieve better schools, better hospitals and more productive businesses (that employ more people and pay higher wages), is to liberate our people and our institutions so that they can do what they know must be done.
My vision is not bigger governments but stronger people:
whether it’s the Work for the Dole scheme – about giving people a chance to show what they can do, not what they can’t;
entrenching the fee for service principle in the health system – so that people will respect what they get;
establishing the Cole Royal Commission when I was the Workplace Minister into the construction industry – so the rule of law cannot be flouted;
setting up first the Green Corps, and now the Green Army – so that we can give our children a better environment than that we inherited;
or even supporting the crown in our constitution – because we should never lightly junk what’s stood the test of time.
There is, if I may say so, a consistent thread running through this public life.
People deserve a fair go – that’s the Australian way; and they need to have a go too – because that’s also the Australian way.
Everyone can be good at something.
Our challenge is to empower each person to discover what that is and to make it happen.
Finally, I want to thank you for being here at the National Press Club to celebrate 50 years of discourse on public policy.
A better life, in a better country, in a better world is the star that guides us all.
And I have to say, tonight, is my vision for the National Press Club – a speech with no questions afterwards.
Thanks very much.
[ends]


Thank you very much indeed Lord Mayor Robert Doyle, it is a real thrill to be here in Parkville, in the heart of the medical research precinct here in Melbourne, the capital of medical research here in Australia. 
Aunty Joy, Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Professor Doherty, Premier, Lord Mayor, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, we should celebrate the heroes of medical research. And we have quite a few heroes of medical research here in Australia. 
We have an extraordinary record of medical research achievement in this country, whether it's Peter Doherty, whether it's Howard Florey, Macfarlane Burnet, Ian Frazer, a long list of people who have changed our world because of their work in the field of health and medical research. 
Perhaps no Australian has changed the world in the same way that Howard Florey has. Untold millions of people who would otherwise be dead are alive because of the work of Florey and that pantheon of medical researchers from this country of ours. 
Australia is good at many things but there is nothing where we excel more than in health and medical research. We are a medical research superpower and long may that continue. Some eight of our 15 Nobel laureates are in the field of medical research with well under one per cent of the world's population; we produce approaching five per cent of the world's refereed medical research. 
I wish to do my part as Prime Minister, following on the work I was able to do as Health Minister, to keep our country at the forefront of health and medical research. While many would argue about how it might be funded, the establishment of the medical research future fund, which will build up to be one of the very largest such funds in the world, is an earnest of this Government's absolute commitment to maintaining Australia's place in this field. 
And, yes, it is happily one of those areas of bipartisan agreement. The institute, whose magnificent building we open today, is opened by this Government, was funded by the last government from an education fund that was established by the government before that. So, three Governments, one way or another, have a hand in the work that we bring to fruition today and I'm confident that all future governments of all political persuasions will continue to support it because it is so important. 
We have the World Health Organization collaborating laboratory on influenza here at the Doherty Institute. We have our high-security testing facilities here at the Doherty Institute. Should Ebola come to this country this institute, this centre, will be at the very forefront of our defences against this dreadful disease. 
I can advise that our country is prepared for any such eventuality and for some weeks now we have been screening all visitors to this country, all people coming to this country from West Africa because the last thing we want is complacency in the face of this latest natural scourge. 
But we are well placed to deal with these things because of the work of our medical researchers, because of the skill and professionalism of our health and medical community, and because of the commitment over the years of all levels of Government, of all political persuasions. 
This is a marvellous occasion. It is on occasions such as this that we can feel most proud of our country and it is fitting that on occasion such as this we salute Professor Peter Doherty – Nobel Laureate, Australian of the Year, living national treasure and inspirer of this marvellous facility which I happily declare open.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, because protecting our people is the first duty of government, it’s right that I should update the House on developing challenges to our national security.
I acknowledge the commitment of all MPs to keeping our people safe and I especially acknowledge the support that the Leader of the Opposition has given to the Government on this subject.
On questions of national security, it’s always best if government and opposition can stand together, shoulder to shoulder.
It lets our enemies know that they will never shake our resolve.
It’s a sign that hope is stronger than fear and that decency can prevail over brute force.
From me and from all ministers in this government, there will be three key messages:
First, the government will do whatever is possible to keep people safe.
Second, our security measures at home and abroad are directed against terrorism, not religion.
And third, Australians should always live normally because terrorists’ goal is to scare us out of being ourselves.
As we all know, there have been major anti-terrorist raids across Sydney and Brisbane.
Our police and security agencies will always strive to stay at least one step ahead of those who would do us harm; and, so far, thank god, they have succeeded.
I can’t promise that hideous events will never take place on Australian soil; but I can promise that we will never stoop to the level of those who hate us and fight evil with evil.
Madam Speaker, regrettably, for some time to come, Australians will have to endure more security than we’re used to, and more inconvenience than we’d like.
Regrettably, for some time to come, the delicate balance between freedom and security may have to shift.
There may be more restrictions on some so that there can be more protections for others.
After all, Madam Speaker, the most basic freedom of all is the freedom to walk the streets unharmed and to sleep safe in our beds at night.
So, Madam Speaker, creating new offences that are harder to beat on technicality may be a small price to pay for saving lives and for maintaining the social fabric of an open, free and multicultural nation.
For more than two years, Madam Speaker, the civil war in Syria, followed by the conquest of much of northern Iraq, has been sucking in misguided and alienated Australians.
There are at least 60 Australians that we know of currently fighting with terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq, and at least 100 Australians who are supporting them.
More than 20 of these foreign fighters have already returned to Australia.
As a peaceful and pluralist democracy, we naturally shrink from getting involved in conflicts on the other side of the world.
Sometimes, though, these conflicts reach out to us – regardless of anything that we might do now or might have done in the past.
Madam Speaker, I refuse to call a terrorist movement “Islamic state” because to do so demeans Islam and mocks the duties that a legitimate state bears to its citizens.
It can hardly be Islamic to kill without compunction Shia, Yazidi, Turkmen, Kurds, Christians and Sunni who don’t share this death cult’s view of the world.
Nothing can justify the beheadings, crucifixions, mass executions, ethnic cleansing, rape and sexual slavery that have taken place in every captured town and city.
To do such evil – and to revel in doing such evil – is simply unprecedented.
To demand the allegiance of Muslims everywhere, and the conversion or subordination of everyone else, is an ultimatum to the entire world.
As we all know, Madam Speaker, the Middle East is a difficult part of the world where violence is all-too-common. Indeed it’s a witches’ brew of complexity and danger.
Nevertheless, it is in the interests of Australia and the world that we here stand ready to join a coalition to help the new Iraqi government to disrupt and to degrade the ISIL movement and to regain control over its own country.
The claim that ISIL’s atrocities and threats are a response to something else is an excuse, not a reason.
Nothing remotely justifies the mass slaughter of innocents – overwhelmingly Muslims – that the ISIL movement routinely practices.
Nothing remotely justifies ISIL’s brazen pretension.
It’s important, Madam Speaker, to remember that the September 11 attack predated America’s involvement in Iraq, just as the first Bali bombing predated Australia’s.
Groups such as ISIL will cite our involvement but they would attack us anyway for who we are and for how we live, not for anything that we have done.
It’s our acceptance that people can live and worship in the way they choose that bothers them, not our foreign policy.
ISIL kills because it glories in death and because no one has yet been strong enough to stop it.
It’s ISIL’s success on the battlefield, at least as much as its absolutism, that explains its perverse appeal.
Stopping and reversing its advance will help the people of Iraq; it should also reduce its magnetism for people from around the globe who are looking to join a fight.
Madam Speaker, last week, together, the Leader of the Opposition and I helped to farewell the Australian force that’s ready to join the international coalition against ISIL.
Later this week, I’ll be in New York for discussions at the United Nations which President Obama will chair.
Subsequently, the Cabinet will again consider the use of our forces to mount air strikes and to provide military advice in support of the Iraqi government.
Last week, Madam Speaker, the Opposition Leader and I separately thanked our police and security agencies for their work to disrupt an ISIL plot to conduct demonstration executions here in this country.
For some months, operatives in Syria have been urging their Australian networks to prepare attacks against targets here.
An urgent review of the safety of Parliament House has recommended that the Australian Federal Police take control of internal as well as external security.
In this building, there will be more armed police, fewer points of access, and more scrutiny of parliamentary passes.
I thank the presiding officers, particularly you, Madam Speaker, for supporting and for beginning to implement these recommendations.
They will mean slightly more inconvenience but considerably more protection for everyone involved in our national government.
Madam Speaker, last week, an Australian ISIL operative instructed his followers to pluck people from the street to demonstrate that they could, in his words, “kill kaffirs”.
All that would be needed to conduct such an attack is a knife, a camera-phone and a victim.
Consequently, within 36 hours more than 800 police and security agents were deployed in Sydney and in Brisbane to execute 30 search warrants.
One person has been charged with serious terrorist offences and a large amount of evidence has been amassed that will now carefully be sifted so that further charges might be laid.
It was important, Madam Speaker, to respond with great strength to disrupt this imminent terrorist act.
It demonstrates that our determination equals that of those who would do us harm.
We will more than match the resolve of our adversaries in all things except malice; because our military, police and security personnel have goodwill towards everyone except those who are plotting to hurt us.
So today, I pledge that our security agencies will have all the resources and authority that they reasonably need.
In August, the government committed an additional $630 million to the Australian Federal Police, Customs and Border Protection, the Australian Security and Intelligence Organisation, the Australian Secret Intelligence Service and the Office of National Assessments.
Additional ASIO and ASIS officers are being recruited and deployed; biometric screening will start to be introduced at international airports within 12 months; and more Border Force personnel are now being deployed to international airports.
Before Christmas, the government will respond to the review of the national security apparatus that’s now underway.
Legislation on agency powers is now before the parliament.
Legislation to create new terrorist offences and to extend existing powers to monitor or to detain terror suspects will be introduced this week.
Madam Speaker, we can’t prevent from returning home Australians-born-and-bred who’ve been foreign fighters, however incompatible with our values their conduct has been.
Unfortunately, terrorists don’t reform just because they’ve returned home, as the experience with Australians returning from fighting with the Taliban shows. 
My unambiguous message to all Australians who fight with terrorist groups is that you will be arrested, prosecuted and gaoled for a very long time indeed and that our laws are being changed to make it easier to keep potential terrorists off our streets.
For one thing, it will be an offence to be in a designated area, for example Raqqa in Syria, without a good reason.
Madam Speaker, the only safe place for those who have been brutalised and militarised by fighting with terrorists is inside a maximum security prison.
As well, legislation requiring telecommunications providers to keep the metadata they already create and to continue to make it available to police and security agencies will be introduced soon.
Madam Speaker, if the police and security agencies can make a case for more resources and for more powers, the government’s strong disposition is to provide them because it’s rightly expected of us in this place that we will do whatever we possibly can to keep people safe.
Of course, any such powers would be exercised responsibly, under the watch of the Inspector-General for Intelligence and Security, the Ombudsman, and the joint standing committees of this parliament.
Madam Speaker, these are troubling times for everyone accustomed to think that terrorism happens in places other than Australia or that history has largely overtaken the use of military force.
Our Australian instinct to assume the best of everyone and our tendency to imagine that we live in the best of all possible worlds is being challenged as rarely before.
Still, Madam Speaker, even in what seem darkening times, I’m sure that we won’t lose our perspective and will continue to keep things in proportion.
Whatever happens, Australia should remain a country where people trust each other, welcome newcomers and are justifiably confident that, in most respects, our future will be even better than our past.
Our country must remain a beacon of hope and optimism that shines around the world.
If, in the weeks and months ahead, Australians come to appreciate and savour our unity as much as our diversity, we will emerge stronger from these difficulties.
Even in these times, there are grounds for hope: in the overwhelming support of Australian Muslims for strong measures against terrorism; and in the coalition of Middle Eastern countries now assembling to support the Iraqi government against the ISIL death cult.
With our own Grand Mufti, nearly all Australian Muslims believe that ISIL is committing “crimes against humanity and sins against God”
Madam Speaker, it may be too much to expect that everyone, everywhere might finally accept that every single human being has the same inherent rights and dignity.
It may be too much to expect that everyone, everywhere might finally subscribe to the principle of “treat others as you would have them treat you”.
But it is not too much, surely, to expect that our world might finally and fully grasp that it is never right to kill people because they have a different view of God.
Killing in the name of God is never right.
Mistreating others in the name of God is never right.
If the all-but-universal revulsion towards the ISIL horror has this result, good might finally emerge despite the pointless death and dislocation that confronts us now.
[ends]


I’m happy to be here at your urging, Mr President. It is the weightiest of matters that brings us together today.
Right now, thousands of misguided people from around the world are joining terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq because they claim Islam is under threat and because they are excited by the prospect of battle.
But whatever they think or say, these terrorists aren’t fighting for God or for religious faith.
At the heart of every terrorist group is an infatuation with death.
What else can explain the beheadings, crucifixions, mass executions, rapes and sexual slavery in every town and city that’s fallen to the terrorist movement now entrenched in eastern Syria and northern Iraq?
A terrorist movement calling itself “Islamic State” insults Islam and mocks the duties of a legitimate state towards its citizens.
And to use this term is to dignify a death cult; a death cult that, in declaring itself a caliphate, has declared war on the world.
So, countries do need to work together to defeat it because about 80 nations have citizens fighting with ISIL and every country is a potential target.
Last week, an Australian operative in Syria instructed his local network to conduct demonstration killings – and this week, an Australian terror suspect savagely attacked two policemen.
Now, it’s hard to imagine that citizens of a pluralist democracy could have succumbed to such delusions – yet clearly they have.
The Australian Government will be utterly unflinching towards anything that threatens our future as a free, fair and multicultural society; a beacon of hope and exemplar of unity-in-diversity.
Already, more than 60 Australians are fighting with ISIL and al-Nusra. More than 60 Australians have had their passports suspended to prevent them from joining terrorist groups in the Middle East.
Our laws are changing to ensure that foreign fighters returning home can be arrested, prosecuted and gaoled for a very long time indeed.
We aren’t just dealing with potential terrorists at home; we’re tackling their inspiration abroad.
Our combat aircraft and special forces are now in the Middle East preparing to join the international coalition to disrupt and degrade ISIL at the request of the Iraqi government.
I congratulate you, Mr President, for the leadership you’ve shown in assembling a broad coalition.
The participation of Middle Eastern countries in this week’s strike on ISIL in Syria is the clearest possible demonstration that the West can’t solve this problem alone – and won’t have to.
Our goal is not to change people, but to protect them; it’s not to change governments, but to combat terrorism. Governments that don’t commit genocide against their own people, nor permit terrorism against ours – that’s all we seek.
But even in what seem to be darkening times, there are grounds for hope: the ISIL horror has generated all-but-universal revulsion.
Muslim leaders from Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia, and President Yudhoyono of Indonesia, to the Grand Mufti of Australia, have declared that the ISIL movement is against God, against Islam and against our common humanity.
Perhaps the realisation is now dawning for all peoples, all cultures and all faiths that it can never be right to kill in the name of God.
That would be a moral victory far surpassing any military success.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, when the Government received this report about four weeks ago, I spoke briefly in this Parliament and I indicated that I would have more to say by the end of the month and thank you for indulgence to say a little more about this Royal Commission report now.
Madam Speaker, we did receive the report on 1 September, and the report from Royal Commissioner Ian Hanger AM QC does provide victims’ families with some long-awaited answers – answers that they desperately crave, given that four young men in the prime of life lost their lives as consequence of this bungled programme.
In addition to the lives lost, homes were damaged or destroy and many businesses were badly affected or ruined.
So, Madam Speaker, we do owe it to Matthew Fuller, Rueben Barnes, Mitchell Sweeney and Marcus Wilson and to their families, to ensure that this should never happen again.
If we don't learn from the past, Madam Speaker, we tend to repeat it.
So, today, I wish briefly to set out the Government's interim measures as promised.
First, I’ve asked Minister Hunt to assume responsibility to oversee the Commonwealth response and to coordinate actions across departments and Ministers and in this he’ll be assisted by the Hon. Bob Baldwin MP, Parliamentary Secretary for Industry. He’ll provide updates to me and will deliver the final comprehensive Government response by the end of this year.
Now, Madam Speaker, as you’ll probably recall, the report of the Royal Commissioner makes a series of findings about occupational health and safety. This programme was a failure of government, and it cascaded into failures in the workplace, so I've asked the Minister for Employment to examine these findings, particularly as they relate to the reliance on the Commonwealth on state and territory laws and his work will inform the Government's final response.
I intend also to raise the Commissioner's recommendations to improve safety in roof cavities at the next COAG meeting. Because, Madam Speaker, the safety of people at work is indeed a national concern, it's a concern that everyone in this Parliament and all governments should cooperate to ensure that people who go to work return safely home.
Matthew Fuller, Rueben Barnes, Mitchell Sweeney and Marcus Wilson, went to work and tragically they did never return home and the report makes it clear that their deaths could have been avoided had things been done differently. That’s why Minister Hunt and the Minister for Finance have been asked to recommend options to compensate their next of kin, because, although nothing can bring them back, the Barnes, Fuller, Sweeney and Wilson families should know that government won't walk away; that government accepts responsibility and will do its best to make amends.
Madam Speaker, while nothing can compare to the pain of losing a child, there were other families who also suffered in serious ways. Pre-existing home insulation businesses, large and small, have suffered significant losses as a result of this programme. They trusted government and were let down. So I’ve ask the Attorney-General, the Minister for Industry and the Minister for Finance, to develop options for a scheme that will compensate those pre-existing businesses who were adversely affected.
Madam Speaker, the Royal Commissioner's report provides a sobering account of the role of government in developing and delivering policy and programmes. It's a reminder of what can happen when there is a government-knows-best approach. I am confident that the processes of government have subsequently changed and improve but they can always be better. That is why I’ve asked Minister Hunt to recommend an external expert to examine and address the issues identified and the recommendations relating to the role of government in this tragic programme. This expert will examine the role of ministers and officials in the development of policy and the delivery of programmes to see what lessons can be learnt.
An external report is necessary, rather than asking government or the public service to review objectively and comprehensively their own processes.
So, Madam Speaker, the Minister for Employment in his capacity as Minister Assisting for the Public Service has been asked to consider an appropriate way to assess the report's findings about public servants against the Australian Public Service's code of conduct.
I do wish to stress, though, that this is not a witch-hunt but we do need to recognise that the home insulation programme was a tragic failure; a failure of bureaucracy and a workplace failure as well as a political failure and all of us should learn from this failure because, Madam Speaker, there will be times in the future when governments believe that urgent action is required, but even urgent action has to be prudent, cautious and wise.
Madam Speaker, just like the Royal Commission itself, this interim response is designed to work out what happened, what could have been done better and what is necessary to prevent it from happening again. All of us should work to ensure that wiser decisions and better government become the ultimate legacy of this tragic programme.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, as a peaceful democracy Australia is reluctant to reach out to conflicts thousands of miles away but as this House knows, these conflicts can reach out to us. As this House has heard, at least 60 Australians are now fighting with terrorist groups in the Middle East and at least 100 Australians are supporting them with money and recruitment. The beheadings, the crucifixions, mass executions, ethnic cleansing and sexual slavery that we have seen in northern Iraq and Syria, are only the beginning if the ISIL movement has its way.
This apocalyptic death cult has declared war on the world and it must be resisted at home and abroad.
Two and a half weeks ago the Government pre-deployed a force to the Middle East, up to eight super hornet strike fighters, a Wedgetail early warning and control aircraft, a KC-30 refueler and a special forces contingent. We have not yet made the final decision to commit our forces to combat, but Australian aircraft from today will start flying over Iraq in support of allied operations.
Madam Speaker, I stress ours are support operations, not strike missions. Australian airstrikes await final clearances from the Iraqi Government and a further decision by our own. But from today our refueler and our Wedgetail will operate over Iraq in support of United States and other coalition aircraft.
Madam Speaker, because ISIL has global ambitions, our international security and our national security are indivisible. At all times though, the Government will respond in a prudent and proportionate way. The countries that are already conducting combat operations to disrupt and degrade ISIL include the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Jordon, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands have publicly declared their intention to join combat operations.
Madam Speaker, Australia can’t change the world but we can make a difference. Our objective is to support governments that neither commit genocide against their own people nor permit terrorism against ours. Our objective is to allow people to live their own lives in their own way and to worship in whatever way they choose. I salute our armed forces in the Middle East who fight for the universal decencies of mankind.
In these difficult times the cooperation, even friendship, now growing between former rivals and the growing realisation, even in the Middle East, that there is no such thing as good terrorism should be of some comfort – and as always Madam Speaker, the Australian Government will do whatever is possible to keep our people safe.
[ends]


It is an honour and a privilege to be here to salute the industry which does so much to make our normal lives possible.
During the election, as some of you might remember, I frequently said that our hope, our intention, should we be elected, was to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia. For the first few months inevitably and rightly the emphasis was on a strong and prosperous economy. Over the last few months, the emphasis has been on a safe and secure Australia. I want to reassure you that we will never ever neglect the imperative to build a strong and prosperous economy, because without that strong and prosperous economy nothing else is really possible. We cannot be a secure country without also being an economically strong country. Our economic strength depends fundamentally on getting a better tax regime, getting a better regulatory regime, ensuring that we are fiscally responsible because you can't get taxes down if you don't also get spending under control. You can't have smaller government without a more commensurate regulatory regime. All of that is needed if you are to do as well as you can at your job of serving the Australian public, serving the world's consumers. The essential job of providing us with what we need to get on with our daily lives. So building a strong and prosperous economy is always at the heart of what this Government does.
It is good to be back here at the Food and Grocery Council and I want to say that I've always appreciated the welcome that I've had from you, both in this forum and in your businesses right around our country.  I’ve been a regular speaker at this forum for many years since I was the Minister for Workplace Relations back in the middle years of the Howard government.
In 2011 and again in 2012, I spoke at this forum and detailed our commitments to the food industry. On both of those occasions I promised to make sure life easier by scrapping the carbon tax. Well, the carbon tax is gone – and thank you for your enthusiasm. Its removal is just the start of building the stronger and more prosperous economy that we all want, with a bigger and more profitable food and grocery sector.
I also promised that we would cut red tape – and that indeed is happening. Earlier this year, we held the Parliament’s first ever Red Tape Repeal Day to cut more than 50,000 pages of unnecessary government regulation and legislation. More than 9,500 unnecessary or counter-productive regulations and fully 1,000 redundant acts of Parliament were removed. We are doing it again – there’ll be a second Red Tape Repeal Day on 29 October.
I also promised in my previous appearances before this Council, that we would help you get your products to market by building the infrastructure that you need – and we are doing that. The biggest infrastructure programme in Australian history is now underway. There is a $50 billion programme underway to build or improve major roads in our cities and national highways like the Bruce and the Pacific. We have finally resolved the question of Sydney’s second airport – or as I like to say, Western Sydney’s first airport, after 50 years of procrastination.
I promised competition reform – and Bruce Billson has just spoken to you on the progress we’re making there.
I promised that we’d improve the participation rate to make it easier for you to find the workers that you need. We’ve introduced employment incentives for older workers and for long-term unemployed young people. We’re expanding Work for the Dole. We are committed to a fair-dinkum paid parental leave scheme that should mean that more mums are participants in our economy as well as participants in our society.
When I’ve met with owners and managers of food businesses around Australia, you’ve told me how difficult it is to get job-ready employees. So we’re moving – and I’m sure Ian Macfarlane would have talked to you about this this morning – we’re moving to a new apprenticeship system that’s employer-led and outcome focused, designed to ensure that we increase the present completely unsatisfactory completion rate for apprentices.
I promised that we’d get the Budget back under control – because we need to control debt rather than let debt control us. That’s exactly what we’re doing. We are tackling the legacy of debt and deficit that we inherited.
Your State of the Industry report highlighted the need to reduce energy, transportation and regulatory costs – and that’s what we’re doing. Through our deregulation measures, through repealing the carbon tax and through building the infrastructure of the 21st century.
As we reduce your costs and improve your competitiveness – it should mean less cost of living pressure on Australian families, it should mean more jobs and more exports for our country.
So we are, as best we can, honouring our commitments to the food and grocery industry.
But keeping commitments is just the start. Our Economic Action Strategy requires constant work, constant improvements, never resting on our laurels.  Our message to you today, whether it’s me now, Bruce or Ian earlier this morning, is that we all, every single one of us as Australians have a vested interest in the success of your industry.  It is an industry with unlimited potential.  You turn-over some $114 billion dollars a year; you employ more than 300,000 people. You’re exporting more than $27 billion worth of product every year. Our job – my job – is to make it easier for you to do your jobs.
As your report points out, the best way to protect jobs in the food industry is through growth and exports. When I said on election night that Australia was under new management and, once more, open for business, I was acknowledging an iron law of public policy. You can’t have strong communities without strong economies to sustain them, and you can’t have a strong economy without profitable private businesses. Successful private businesses are central to the prosperity, to the life, to the decency, to the fairness, to the justice of the societies we live in. It was my great predecessor Sir Robert Menzies who said at the opening of an Edgell factory back in 1959 that you can’t truly understand the economic history of this country unless you go and seek to understand the life story and the life endeavours of the human beings who create their own businesses. Everyone in this room is familiar with what it takes to create businesses, either as a businessperson yourself, or as a facilitator of other businesspeople. Businesspeople take risks, they put their economic future on the line for their business. They mortgage their homes, they risk their future to help others and we need to acknowledge what they do. Gordon Edgell for instance and his sons created an Australian vegetable manufacturing giant from just three acres of asparagus.  Thousands of Australians today are following the same path – looking to the food industry to make their mark and their fortune.  It’s a tough industry – of course it’s a tough industry, the vagaries of weather, of markets, of policy, but it’s a dynamic industry too.  Your industry is a modern success story. Take Edgell – now Simplot, whose Managing Director, Terry O’Brien is your Chairman.
This Government wants to give the Gordon Edgells of 2014 a fair go because all of you out there are having a go. You are reflecting what’s best in our Australian character. We want to attract and retain big manufacturers like Simplot, because we need greater economic activity in the non-resources sector. We need greater workforce participation, better infrastructure and stronger productivity growth.  I should, Gary, thank the Council for your submissions to the Competition Policy Review and to the Agricultural Competitiveness White Paper. These are all about boosting our competitiveness, strengthening our economy, adding to our ability to have more jobs and more prosperity. The Industry, Innovation and Competitiveness Agenda is being finalised and we will as part of this agenda outline further measures to improve manufacturing competitiveness, encourage innovation and reduce regulatory costs.  I know another concern of yours, is the availability and price of gas for east coast manufacturers. I want to assure you that the Government, as part of the Energy White Paper, is looking at ways to help make the energy sector and energy prices more competitive – through a renewed focus on privatisation and deregulation. The Energy Green Paper, released last week, outlines our proposed policies to tackle this issue and I hope it allays some of your concerns and I would encourage people who are in this area to make submissions based on the Green Paper.
As you can see, we are doing everything we can to be open to the businesses of our country. We want to work with business because we know that profit is not a dirty word. We know that without profit you can’t survive. If you don’t survive you can’t employ, invest and create prosperity.  I know that our food products are the best in the world. Our reputation for quality, purity and taste means that we can compete effectively in the world market, wherever we have the opportunity to do so. That’s why we’re doing everything we can to encourage more and freer trade. We’ve have the free trade agreements finalised with Japan and with Korea and we hope to do so soon with China. We were the first big agricultural exporter to secure a bilateral agreement with Japan. It’s not about “catching up” to preferential treatment other countries have already secured, but about actually delivering to Australian exporters a first-mover advantage. It’s a market – Japan – that our food producers know – it’s our second largest, worth around $3 billion last year. Now it has more chance to grow, with tariff cuts for beef, for cheese, for sugar, for seafood and improved market access for many processed food exports. There are also big opportunities for food exporters to Korea, with beef, dairy and wine, big winners from that Free Trade Agreement and tariffs reduced or eliminated on a whole range of horticultural products. Nearly all of my overseas trips have incorporated trade missions – with hundreds of businesses, including some in this sector, travelling with me. So, in Government, we are doing everything we can to open the doors for you – but in the end you still have to walk through them if we are to maximise the benefit of these arrangements.
Now before the election, we often spoke of Australia becoming the food bowl of Asia. In recent times, Agriculture Minister Barnaby Joyce has put the case that the markets and opportunities of Asia are so vast, that even if we doubled, tripled or quadrupled our production in fruit, in vegetables, in meat and groceries, we would still only be providing a fraction of the needs for food in our region. Barnaby is absolutely right.  The markets there are so vast and the opportunities are so great – that there really is unlimited potential for this industry. Food and agriculture is not just an important part of our economic past, it is an absolutely vital part of our economic future. The only things that limit us are the physical constraints of our land and climate and our competitiveness as a country.  That is why we need to lift our vision and continue to remove the impediments to Australia.  This must be a growth industry that generates more exports, creates more jobs and feeds millions more people and I know you are up to this.
I want to thank you for your commitment to working with government to strengthen the foundations of our economy. My commitment to you is to keep working with you to remove any of the burdens that are holding you back – because I want Australia’s food and grocery industry to prosper and succeed. We all need your industry to prosper and succeed and I pledge myself to do whatever I humanly can to make that possible.
[ends]


It’s a real honour for me to be here this morning to help launch this really, really outstanding book. There are, if I may say so, three responsibilities upon those of us who are entrusted with our national security. First; to keep our country and our people safe, second; to make considered, thoughtful and wise judgements about the use of force and third; never to forget the sacrifice of those who serve in our country’s name. It is our responsibility never to forget.
Of course amongst those who went ashore on the 25th of April 1915, was the war correspondent, historian and keeper of the Anzac flame, C.E.W. Bean. The First World War, as Ashley has just reminded us, was the crucible in which the Australian identity was forged and Charles Bean was the person who first and best told us what it meant.
His spirit, as we are constantly reminded, infuses this memorial and is honoured in Anzac Treasures, the book that we launch today. In this book, Dr Peter Pederson tells the story of the Australian historical mission to Gallipoli which Bean lead in 1919. As part of that mission Bean and his men crisscrossed the peninsula searching the ground for the marks of battle and gathering the relics of Australians at war. As Bean put it: “of what high morning hopes, what grim midday obstacles and what final tragedy do those cartridge cases or that torn fragment of uniform tell?” And in this book Dr Pederson answers some of these musings.
What price could you possibly place on a watch which stopped at 4.43am as its owner leapt into the water at Gallipoli or twigs bound into a cross to mark the grave of a mate or the final message from a son to his mother. But here in the Australian War Memorial, these relics are kept safe and in this book Dr Pederson brings the Anzac Treasures and their stories out of the memorial and into the world. He tells us how and why the Australians came to be sitting in small boats in the dark off a foreign shore awaiting the call to battle. He tells us the stories of the men of Anzac, the nurses of Lemnos and those who waited anxiously at home. He tells us of the battles and the stories of the evacuation which was in the end the only unambiguously successful part of the campaign.
Now every nation has a story and every nation has its story tellers. What actually happened matters but so too does how it is perceived. A nation after all is shaped by its historians, as well as by its history. To Dr Pederson I say that you have crafted words that are worthy of the treasured artefacts of this Australian War Memorial. It’s not a dry history book of words. Everything in this book reflects the author’s love of country and his deep yearning to tell the stories of those who loved our country so much that they were willing to put their lives on the line for it.
I congratulate the War Memorial for commissioning this book. I congratulate Dr Pederson for writing it and I congratulate all involved in bringing it to fruition. As you know over the next four years Australians will commemorate the Centenary of the Great War and remember the tide of events that shaped our nation and that still cast a shadow over the wider world. We honour their sacrifice by learning from it. There is so much to be learnt in this book. It deserves a wide readership and close study and I’m very honoured to be here to help launch it today.
[ends]


Well, Brett, I was struggling to recognise myself in that introduction, I have to say. But nevertheless you have set forth some marvellous aspirations. You have set forth some marvellous goals, you have set forth, if you like, some key performance indicators for me and I really, really appreciate that.
I just want to say what a thrill it is to be here in Launceston, how great it is to be here in Tasmania, how exciting it is to be here in a great State which is once more contemplating not what it can't do but what it can do.
I don’t pretend for a moment that the whole timbre of a nation or a state or a people depends on government but I do know that government makes a difference. You can have a fearful, pessimistic, narrow government or you can have a government which wants people to be their best selves and that is what you have got here in Tasmania under Will Hodgman and that is what I believe you have got in Canberra under the government that I have the honour to lead.
We trust people, we believe people, we want the Australian people to be at our best and that is what all our policies are designed to produce. A richer, better, braver Australia with a brighter future today than it had yesterday and a brighter future tomorrow than it has today. That is what we are building.
You know here in Tasmania, a great place to live, a great place to visit, but it needs to be a great place to work, a great place to start a business, a great place to invest and that is what is happening now thanks to a change of Government in Hobart and a change of government in Canberra.
Tasmania has to be an economy as well as a national park. That is what we have got to be and everything that this government is doing in Hobart, everything my government is doing in Canberra is designed to give the people of Tasmania the strong and prosperous future that you want and you deserve.
For too long you have had our nation’s highest unemployment, our nation’s lowest gross domestic product per person, our nation’s lowest life expectancy and our nation’s lowest education attainment.
Well, I know that you are better than that and I know that under good government you will be better than that.
So, I thank and congratulate my friend and colleague Will Hodgman for everything he has done. Will had eight years as Opposition Leader. That is eight years too long, mate. But I've got to say those long years of striving, those long years of preparation are bearing fruit now in a strong and united Tasmanian Government.
I want to thank my Tasmanian parliamentary colleagues in Canberra, led by Eric Abetz, our Senate leader, supported by Richard Colbeck, the Parliamentary Secretary for Agriculture, supported by Stephen Parry, the President of the Senate, supported by David Bushby, the Senate whip. It says something about the calibre of our Tasmanian Senate team that every single one of them is a serious player in Canberra. But I particularly want to thank and congratulate my three Tasmanian House of Representatives friends and colleagues; Andrew Nikolic – the man who always beats me on a bike whenever I come down to Launceston, Eric Hutchinson who has the decency to let me beat him on a bike whenever I come to Launceston and Brett Whiteley who doesn’t even turn up. That’s not true – Brett is always there for breakfast at the end of the ride!
But you know, some people look at my ears and they think this guy played too many games of rugby in the front row. This guy's been too long in the boxing ring; well, the truth is these ears are the way they are because Whiteley, Nikolic and Hutchinson are always chewing my ear about something to do with Tasmania!
Whether it's the $400 million for the Midland Highway, whether it's the $120 million for the freight rail upgrade between Burnie and Hobart, whether it's $40 million to put the ‘international’ back in Hobart International Airport, whether it's the support for the freight equalisation scheme, the determination to keep the freight equalisation scheme and make it work, the determination to ensure that Tasmania continues to get a fair go from the Federation. Whatever it is, these three amigos from Tasmania are there making sure that the voice of this great state is heard long and loud in our national Parliament.
My friends, every day, every week, every month, every year is significant in the life of our state; in the life of our nation. But next week marks the 70th anniversary of the foundation of the Liberal Party. And in founding the Liberal Party, Sir Robert Menzies said that he wanted to change the current of Australian politics. Well, he certainly did. The current of Australian politics has been vastly different over the last 70 years for one thing, for almost two-thirds of that time the Liberal Party that Sir Robert Menzies founded has guided and shaped the destiny of our nation. But politics is not just about being in office, important though that is. As John Howard said, in the splendid Life of Menzies that he has just published, “power without purpose is pointless.” I don't know that he added but he should have - purpose without power is useless. But, nevertheless, we haven't been working for 70 years just to put ourselves in office. We have been working for 70 years to build a better Australia – that’s what we have been doing. For 70 years, we have been fixing budgets, we have been building infrastructure, we've been spawning new industries, we've been securing our borders and we've been safeguarding our nation. That is what we've been doing for 70 years. We're the party of universities, we're the Party of medical research, we're the Party of immigration as well as simply being the Party of business.
Yes, we are the builders of Australian public life. But alas often enough we have had to be the cleaners of Australian public life as well, cleaning up the mess that Labor governments leave us.
That is what Will Hodgman is doing right now here in Tassie. But it's what we have been doing for the last 12 or 13 months in Canberra as well, we have been cleaning up Labor's mess. Hasn't it been good over the last few weeks to watch the book wars of the last government?
We had Rob Oakeshott write a book, we had Tony Windsor publish a book, Bob Brown, I believe, had a book written about him. We had Julia Gillard write a book called My Story, then we have Wayne Swan publish a book called My Surplus, well, that is the book he wanted to write but he wasn’t able to. Instead his book is called The Good Fight. Well, he was half right because that is all they did. They fought for six long and dispiriting years – long and dispiriting years. Years which essentially were wasted – six wasted years. Yes, our country did its best to get on with things but we got on with things, held back, not pushed forward by the government in Canberra.
So that is our mission; to build a better Australia, to fix the mess that we inherited – and that is exactly what we have been doing over the last year. We said we'd abolish the carbon tax – the carbon tax has gone. And you know, just today to celebrate his first anniversary what do we have Bill Shorten doing? Promising to bring it back. He wants – what is the one idea he's come up with in 12 months as leader? Bring back the carbon tax! Well, nothing's changed. It’s still the same old Labor. Labor spells more pain for families and small businesses right around our country.
We said we'd abolish the mining tax and the mining tax has gone. Labor wants to bring that back too. We said we'd stop the boats and the boats are certainly stopping. Labor wants to reverse the policies that we put in place to do that.
We said we'd build the roads of the 21st century and the roads are starting but whether it's big things or relatively small things, we are getting on with the job, it's fantastic to look at the front page of the Launceston paper today. We are fixing the Tamar, we are fixing the Tamar and we said we would do it, Greg Hunt promised it would happen and it's happening because that is what Coalition governments do.

We make commitments and we get on with delivering them. We said we would be open for business. And we so need to be open for business because we understand in the marrow of our bones what Labor has hardly ever known and certainly has forgotten now that you cannot have strong economies without strong private businesses to sustain them.
So, we have to be open for business and you know, again, thanks to Greg Hunt, some $800 billion worth of new projects have been given the environmental go ahead since last year's election.
Thanks to Julie Bishop, and it's great to have my friend and deputy here with us today, thanks to Julie Bishop, under the New Colombo Plan, the best and brightest people in our country are spending some time, some serious time in the universities of our region. Yes, it's great that the best and brightest of our region come and study here including in the University of Tasmania. But we need to return the compliment. We need to be as familiar with our region as our region is with us and that is exactly what is happening, thanks to Julie Bishop's Colombo Plan.
You know, we have scrapped 10,000 pages of unnecessary legislation and regulation in our first repeal day and there's another one coming up later this month because we want to ease the burdens on you. We want to make it easier for you, the productive people of our country, to get on with doing well what you do best and what only you can do.
And, yes, we said before the election that we would bring the Budget back under control and inch by painful inch, step by difficult step, compromise by hard negotiated compromise that is exactly what we are doing. We got $7 billion worth of savings by changing the foreign aid budget. We got $10 billion worth of savings through a repeal of the spending associated with the mining tax. And just in the last sitting week, we achieved $2.7 billion worth of future savings in the social security budget. So, we are getting there. It's not easy.
Every single step has to be negotiated through a Senate dominated by our political opponents but we will never, ever give up because you cannot have a strong economy without a strong Budget. A strong Budget is the foundation of a strong economy.
Now, you have heard me say time and time again that our mission is to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia. You heard Brett Whiteley repeat the phrase just a few moments ago – and Brett, you are a very promising young Member of Parliament when you find the phrases that the Prime Minister repeats and repeat them yourself. That is a lesson to all of you out there. Find the phrases and repeat them.
But, you know, it is very important to have a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia. And because we have faced some very serious national and international security challenges over the last few months, the emphasis has been on a safe and secure Australia. We can never forget the strong and prosperous economy which is the absolute foundation of such security as is to be had in a difficult and uncertain world. That is the foundation of everything we do. That is the bedrock of all of our strivings – to build a strong and prosperous economy. So, we can never neglect the task of Budget repair. We can never neglect it. And that is why we have put so much emphasis, over the last 12 months, on our fundamental economic strength.
That Budget, that Budget which has had its ups and downs, is a Budget which was absolutely essential for our country at this time. Note that it's a Budget for building as well as a Budget for saving; the biggest infrastructure spending package in our country's history. It's a Budget to play to our strengths as well as a Budget to live within our means. The biggest medical research package in the world was part of this year's Budget. It was a Budget for reform, as well as a Budget for economising.
I know there were tough things in that Budget, but they're necessary changes for our country's long-term future. I know there's been some argument about the Medicare co-payment, first, conceived of by Bob Hawke back in the 1990s. You know if it's right and proper to have a modest co-payment on pharmaceutical drugs why is it not right and proper to have a co-payment on Medicare, particularly when every dollar is being reinvested into medical research that will give us the research and the cures of the future.
We all love our universities. We love them. We know what they have done for our country. We know that our universities are largely responsible for the 15 Nobel prize winners that Australia has produced. The best thing we can give our universities is their freedom. Surely those power houses of learning and knowledge, those hot beds of curiosity and ideas, the last thing they need is a government micro-managing every detail of their lives yet that is what they have had and we are putting an end to all of that. We are giving them their freedom.

Yes, our changes to the welfare system, particularly for young people have come under some criticism. But I tell you, what are we saying to people if we let them leave school and go straight on to the dole? What are we saying to people about our expectations of them and their expectations of themselves if we let them leave school and go on the dole. Particularly, when we have the training opportunities which are found in our country. Particularly, when we've introduced things like the trade support loans to ensure that the tradies of the future get the support that they need?
So, this was a visionary Budget. It really was – a Budget of visionary reform. The bravest and boldest Budget that this country has seen in several decades and I want to thank Joe Hockey and Mathias Cormann and all of my colleagues for the work they put in to making it happen. I say to everyone who doesn't like the changes that we have put forward – give us your alternative. Tell us what you would do because, one thing that we cannot do is go on endlessly along the path of debt and deficit where Labor put us. We just can't do it. As things stood on the day the Labor Government was swept away, as things stood, we were headed for another $123 billion of deficits in just four years. Building on the $240 billion of deficits that Labor gave us over six years. As things stood, when Labor left office we were heading within a decade to $667 billion worth of debt. That is $25,000 in debt for every Australian man, woman and child, thanks to the long spending spree, the long splurge of Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd.
We have heard a lot of talk over the last few months about fairness. Well, I say the ultimate unfairness is intergenerational theft. The ultimate unfairness is saddling our children and grandchildren with debt so that an irresponsible Government in Canberra will continue buying votes with dollars it doesn't have.
I have got to say to you, that is not how we will be. We will be different. Our character is different. Our values are different. Our policies are different. Our competence is different. If we want to have the long-term prosperity that we crave, the long-term prosperity that we need, the long-term prosperity that every generation of Australians has given to its children, the long-term prosperity that has been the gift of each generation of Australians to the future, we have got to make these tough decision and if you don't like these tough decisions tell us what your tough decisions are. We cannot avoid – we cannot avoid – if we are to be strong and secure, if we are to be prosperous into the future, we cannot avoid doing these things.
I regret the fact that it has fallen to us to meet the challenges of these times but, frankly, you elect a government to do what is necessary. That is why the people of Australia elected this government. At the heart of our Party is this profound conviction that our future can and will be better. At the heart of our Party is faith in the strength and the decency and the capacity of the Australian people.
I look at the people in this room, I look at the citizens in the street; I don't see helpless people – I see strong and creative people who don't want a hand out, they want a hand up. They don't want government to tell them what to do, they want government to encourage them to do what is best for them and for their children.
I look at the farmers and the miners and the fishermen of this country. I don't see environmental vandals. I don't see people who are out there trying to pillage our countryside and our oceans, I see the ultimate conservationists. That’s what I see and I particularly see that here in Tasmania. I see people who are wanting to do the right thing by the environment that sustains them.
I visit the businesses of our country. I don't see greedy rip-off merchants, I see people who are creating jobs for millions of Australians. I see people who are putting their houses on the line so that they can employ their staff and invest in their future. I look at the institutions of our country. I don't see entities that are out there degrading and letting us down. I see the guardians of the best traditions of our country. As a Liberal, I have faith in our people, I have faith in our institutions, and I have faith in our future.
I hope that, when people look objectively at our country today, and compare it with 12 months or so back, they are able to have a measure of pride today that was very difficult just 12 months ago. Over the last 12 months not only have we carefully and methodically set about implementing our election commitments but we have stood up for our country. We gave stood up for our best values. We have advanced our interests, we have protected our citizens and we have upheld our values.
When other countries have been in trouble Australia has been there for them. When Australians were murdered our government was there to call it for the atrocity that it was. Now that civilisation is under threat we are there with our friends and allies to lend a hand because that is the Australian way. We do not let people down. We make the most of our country and our world.
My friends, it is so good to be here with you today. I want to thank you for everything that you have done – not so much for our Party, important that it is, but by working for our Party I want to thank you for what you have done for your state and our country.
[ends]


I feel very honoured to be here, if I wasn't here I'd be riding by myself so thank you for giving me so much company, I really appreciate it.
It's quite a big ride you've got today – quite a big ride – but it's for a terrific cause. The Black Dog Institute does enormously good work and it's helping to raise awareness of mental health and mental health is probably the hidden epidemic in our community. Something like one in five Australians will have an episode of mental ill-health in any one year, it's something that is happening everywhere, but it's so often unrecognised and it's so often untreated.
That's why it's important to do things like this – not just to raise money – but also to raise awareness and as all of you who are regular cyclists would know, there are few things which are better for your own mental health than vigorous, regular exercise. I know myself if I didn't get out for a ride or a run or a trip to the gym every morning, I would feel vastly more fragile than I do. So, I think in doing this today you're raising money, you're raising awareness and you're actually engaging in a bit of marvellous therapy.
Thanks everyone, I'm looking forward to the ride. Stay safe and let's form a nice, tight, easy-paced peloton.
[ends]


It's lovely to say a few words and thank you for coming to Kirribilli House. Welcome to Carers Australia and welcome to the carers of Australia. It is very fitting that here in Carers Week, carers and their representatives should be here and it's fitting that, as your Prime Minister, I should be paying tribute to the work that carers do.
As Mitch has pointed out, there are almost three million carers – they're young, they're old, they're relatives, they're friends, they're neighbours. They are people who give of themselves for others and the point about our life is that at some point almost all of us will either be a carer or need a carer and that's why it's so important that we constantly remind ourselves of the importance of those who care and the importance of those they care for.
Obviously, government has a very important role to help those who care and those they care for and we do that through the provision of a very wide range of services and a very wide range of benefits. What we can't ever do, though, is think that it's enough to say that government is doing its bit, because in the end life is not about what government does, life is about what we do. The life of Australia is not fundamentally determined by its officialdom, the life of Australia is fundamentally determined by its citizenry.
One of the things of our country is the way that our people when they see a problem, when they see an issue, they roll up their sleeves and they do what is necessary to help. Carers quintessentially have done exactly that. They've seen a problem – an issue – with someone they love, someone they know, and they've rolled up their sleeves to help.
It's a tough life being a carer. On the other hand, it must also be an incredibly satisfying life as well – to know that you are doing the right thing by someone you love; to know that you are doing the right thing by people who are important to you should be, amidst all the difficulties and the frustrations, it should be a source of tremendous pride and satisfaction.
I have a happy duty today and that is to confirm that Carers Australia will be the beneficiary of Pollie Pedal 2015 and I also have the happy task of handing over to Ara Creswell a ceremonial cheque to mark the formal conclusion of Pollie Pedal 2014.
I just want to tell one story, and I've probably told it before, so Ara might have already heard it. Government obviously provides some funding to Carers Australia to do various good things and that's as it should be and government money, as you know, comes with all sorts of rigorous accountability requirements. But it's nice to be able to give to Carers Australia some money which doesn't come with strings attached; it just comes from the Pollie Pedal riders and the sponsors of Pollie Pedal to Carers Australia for Carers Australia to deploy in whatever way Carers thinks fit. So, I'm very pleased to be able to hand over this Pollie Pedal cheque to you, Ara.
The story I promised, the first ever Pollie Pedal, the beneficiary was Youth Insearch, a Western Sydney charity that was looking after kids in trouble with the law, with truancy authorities and we were pedalling our little hearts out and we got about half way down from Byron Bay to Sydney. I think by that stage we'd raised about $10,000 and I rang the office of the then prime minister, John Howard, and I said, "Look, you know, myself and a number of other Members of Parliament are raising money for this very good cause. Can we please have a government contribution?" So anyway, the then prime minister chipped in with $50,000. At the end of the Pollie Pedal, Youth Insearch were very grateful. A few months later I said to the guy running Youth Insearch, "How's it all going?" and he said, "That 50,000 bucks from government, can I give it back?" because he said "the paperwork, the accountability, he said it was almost more trouble than it's worth!"
Anyway, he did keep the money in the end and I believe he did many useful things with it, but there is no paperwork associated with this, Ara – it's yours from Pollie Pedal.
Thank you so much, ladies and gentlemen.
[ends]


Australians woke this morning to further confirmation that the threat to free countries and free institutions is very real indeed.
I want to express on behalf of the Australian Parliament and people our solidarity with the Parliament and people of Canada on this grim day.
I also want to assure Australians that security was upgraded at this Parliament about six weeks ago in response to credible intelligence of a possible threat to this Parliament.
We believe that we are in a good position to respond to any hostile acts in this building. We are constantly reviewing the security of this and other public buildings. We are constantly reviewing the security of our military bases and our military personnel.
I do want to assure the Australian people that this Government will do everything we humanly can to keep our country and its people safe.
All of our anti-terror activities are directed against crime and terrorism – not against religion – and I do want to assure people and remind people that they should go about their normal lives because the fundamental objective of the terrorists is to scare us from being ourselves.
I will be making a statement to the Parliament at 2pm.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for your warm welcome. It’s great to be here with Barnaby Joyce, your Federal Member; it’s great to be here with Thomas George, your State Member.
It’s great to be here at this place where history has been made, because on this day,  in this place 125 years ago Sir Henry Parkes made a speech which started the process towards creating a Commonwealth of Australia. He’d been to Queensland for a meeting, the meeting hadn’t been a great success, so he wanted to salvage – as I understand it – something from that trip.
So, after being on the train for some seven hours from Brisbane, he called in here to Tenterfield, he came into this building and he gave a galvanising speech – a speech which echoed, if not around the world, certainly around our country.
Then we had no national government. Then, as we’ve been reminded earlier this evening, we had six colonies, each of them with a prime minister. No army, no unified railway, an embryonic sense of Australian-ness, but no nation that we could call our own, no government that was our national government.
That was then – these days are different. We certainly have a national government and yet we have an unsatisfactory system of governance, because all too often wherever you look – whether it be the roads, the schools, the hospitals – it’s hard to know who is in charge.
That is what bedevils modern Australia in so many areas of our national life – who is really in charge.
So, just as here in this hall 125 years ago, Sir Henry Parkes started a process that gave us a nation, I hope tonight that we might start a process that will give us a more rational system of government. He launched from this hall the federation that was right for those times. Let us relaunch the federation tonight in a way that is right for these times.
Now I was very pleased to receive some months ago the invitation to give this address in memory of Sir Henry Parkes because for many years now I have regarded our federation as having come to a sorry pass. For many years now, as a practitioner of government, as a minister in government, I have thought that we could do better. And the Coalition I have the honour to lead said before the last election that we would start a process with the aim of trying to ensure that once more for these times, as in those times, every level of government will be sovereign in its own sphere and that process is formally begun tonight.
Let me begin tonight, not with Sir Henry Parkes, but with a contemporary now lost in his shadow who helped to make possible Parkes’ achievement as a founder of our federation.
When Parkes lost his seat in the New South Wales parliament earlier in 1882, Edward Whereat – then just elected as the member for Tenterfield – resigned his own seat in Parkes’ favour.
Whereat himself explained this extraordinary act of magnanimity by declaring that Parkes “would be listened to with more attention in one moment” than he would be “if he spoke for 20 years”.

This remarkable piece of political selflessness exemplifies the spirit that’s needed for many of our biggest issues to be resolved.
In an atmosphere of rancid partisanship, few great national questions can ever satisfactorily be decided.
It was in negotiation and compromise, as much as the dogged pursuit of principle that led to our federation and produced our Commonwealth.
The fathers of our federation were often political opponents but they worked together patiently for the greater good, on the understanding that getting something invariably meant giving something too.
The constitution they created over a decade of horse-trading entirely pleased no one but it’s served well enough to shape a nation that is as free, fair and prosperous as any on this earth.
Indeed, it’s this very readiness to give and take with opponents of good faith; this ability to understand the other person’s point of view, and to concede something to it, that has enabled us to resolve differences peacefully and to work more-or-less harmoniously together for more than a century in ways that have eluded less successful countries.
After all – at least in countries like ours – most contention is not between good and evil but between decent people arguing over the best way to achieve a better outcome.
Any debate about the future of our federation needs the same give and take if it is to produce significant change.
It needs to resemble the kind of measured debate that we can have over national security or about indigenous recognition rather than the debate we’ve had over the budget for instance or the carbon tax – because reforming the federation is not something that one person, one party or one parliament can determine alone.
Because it involves numerous governments of different political persuasion, reforming the federation will require people from across the usual political divides and from different levels of government to work together over an extended period of time.
Rethinking the conventions about which level of government is responsible for the delivery of particular services or the revenue measures to which particular levels of government should have access will require a readiness to compromise and a mutual acceptance of goodwill that’s rarely achieved in our highly partisan system.
Without a measure of consensus, any change requiring legislation is unlikely to secure parliamentary passage and the whole exercise could turn out to be futile.
Without an element of consensus, any change that’s actually achieved could be reversed at the earliest opportunity and therefore hardly worth doing.
But, reforming the federation does matter, it is worth trying to achieve and this Government is determined to make the case for change.
What’s needed now is not a final answer but a readiness to consider possibilities, to engage in debate, and shoulder our collective responsibility for making our country all that it can be.
When Parkes gave his celebrated address in this very room 125 years ago – the address that is now taken to have galvanised the federation movement – his main focus was the self-evident benefit of one national army and one national rail gauge. 
As we know, our country has now had a national army for more than a century; and a standard gauge railway line has linked our mainland capitals for fifty years.
The problem, then, was to create a nation from six colonies.
The problem now, is to create a more rational system of government for the nation that we undoubtedly have become.
It’s to realise, if possible, the self-evident benefits of less waste, less overlap, less duplication; it’s to end the blame game by trying to ensure that voters know who’s really responsible for the things they don’t like; and it’s to harvest the multi-billion dollar benefits in better services and lower costs that would come from successful reform.
Lack of “big bang” reform would not be a disaster but it would be a disappointment and it would be a failure of this generation of politicians.
The Australian people, deep down, could actually prefer the messiness and ambiguity of our current arrangements because they make it harder for governments to change what we’ve learned to live with.
The federation we have – for all its flaws – has spawned a vibrant democracy, a strong economy and a cohesive society that millions of migrants have chosen to join.
And the federation is being reformed – incrementally – all the time: through the agreements that the Commonwealth and the states make, or decline to make with each other; and the unilateral decisions that all governments make that impinge on the role of other governments.
Reform of our federation will happen. Either we will have organised reform or ad hoc reform, it will be cooperative change or it will be coercive change. But change will come and I say let’s manage it together.
After all, asking ourselves “what can be done better?” is at the heart of all progress.
We would be failing in our duty not to consider better management of the “dog’s breakfast of divided responsibilities” that characterises this Australian federation today.
It’s not entirely dysfunctional – our country couldn’t succeed if it were – but it’s plainly not optimal either which is why reform is worth striving for.
A hundred years ago the states were clearly responsible for funding and operating public schools, public hospitals, public transport, roads, police, housing and planning.
Under our constitution, the states are still legally responsible for them but a century of encroachment has left the Commonwealth financially responsible for vast services that it doesn’t actually deliver and can’t really control.
After two decades of “cooperative federalism” and any number of agreements at Council of Australian Government meetings, we still have tradesmen who cannot operate across state borders because their qualifications are not automatically recognised in other parts of Australia.
Yet there is hardly a problem that doesn’t produce calls for “national leadership” and there are few challenges the states face which don’t generate calls for Commonwealth financial help.
We do tend to see ourselves as one country rather than a collection of states and instinctively we want our governance arrangements to reflect that.
I was health minister between 2003 and 2007 and the practical experience of trying to make a coherent system from out-of-hospital Commonwealth-funded treatment, on the one hand, and largely state-funded public hospital treatment, on the other, turned me from a philosophical federalist into a pragmatic nationalist.
In those days, debate over public hospitals that the states ran but the Commonwealth funded was a constant game of pass-the-parcel with each level of government blaming the other for the system’s shortcomings.
Many conditions would indeed be better treated outside public hospitals; but that would mean the Commonwealth rather than the states funding them – so funding arrangements rather than public health considerations could end up driving policy.
Now, all of this hasn’t stopped the provision of truly world class health services: yes, people often wait longer than they should for elective procedures or pay more than they would like for them; still, the common sense and decency of treating professionals and the pragmatism of health administrators in the field mean that for most people, most of the time, it works tolerably well.
It would be better if one level of government was responsible for funding all health services – but that would mean the Commonwealth giving Medicare, the PBS and aged care to the states; or the states giving public hospitals to the Commonwealth.
Either the states would lose relevance or well-respected national service provision would be fragmented.
And so we go on, with the states providing public hospital services that the Commonwealth part-funds; the states complaining that the Commonwealth is short-changing them; the Commonwealth complaining that the states are using that as an excuse. And the people complaining that no one really knows what’s going on.
In 2005, sick of the financial straitjacket imposed by the Commonwealth-state health care agreement, the Beattie government in Queensland sought to charge a co-payment to public hospital patients.  
The Howard government, in which I served, refused to amend the Medicare agreement; it was a regrettable denial by the Commonwealth of one state’s attempt to be an adult government.
Now I remain a pragmatic nationalist – but the states exist, they have wide powers under the constitution and they can’t be abolished; so – rather than pursue giving the Commonwealth more authority over the states, as I proposed in my 2009 book, Battlelines – better harmonising revenue and spending responsibilities is well worth a another try.
Back then, my thinking was that the states should become subordinate legislatures to the Commonwealth: in a parallel to the way local councils are subordinate to the state governments.
But I now doubt that any such constitutional change could succeed; and, in any event, it’s a good principle to propose the smallest change that will actually tackle the problem – that’s why resolving the mismatch between what the states are supposed to deliver and what they can actually afford to pay for is worth another go.
That’s what my colleagues and I meant when we said repeatedly, before the last election, that we would launch a federation reform white paper was meant to make each level of government more “sovereign in its own sphere”.
Collectively, the Australian states currently spend about $230 billion a year but raise only about $130 billion from their own taxes; of the rest, about $54 billion comes from the GST, a tax that the Commonwealth collects but the states spend; and a further $46 billion comes directly from the Commonwealth under specific purpose payments or national partnership agreements.
The Commonwealth, for obvious reasons, is focussed on expenditure restraint so that taxes can come down and the economy can grow; the states, for their part, know that their various services have to keep up with greater demand and better technology.
Can a more rational and better managed system be devised; or is change more trouble than it’s worth?
Is it inevitable that Commonwealth spending restraint will produce more user-pays arrangements in state institutions?
Or, preferring a reorganisation between governments to a fight with the public, can the Commonwealth and the states better align their revenue with their spending?
To address “vertical fiscal imbalance” we could either adjust the states spending responsibilities down to match their revenues, or we could adjust their revenues up. 
The first approach involves the current spending responsibilities being redistributed so that the Commonwealth would take on more and the states would deal with less.
It wouldn’t necessarily mean the Commonwealth taking over responsibility for delivery of functions currently carried out by state and territory Governments. 
Nor does it imply a “one-size-fits-all approach” to service delivery.
It could lead to a situation where funding for such services was delivered through an individual entitlement supplied through a market – along the lines of the NDIS.
Alternatively, the Commonwealth could stop funding programmes in areas of state responsibility and stop using its financial power to influence how the states deliver services. 
In that case, the Commonwealth would be ready to work with states on a range of tax reforms that could permanently improve the states’ tax base – including changes to the indirect tax base with compensating reductions in income tax.
Then there’s the issue of “horizontal fiscal equalisation” which is supposed to give each state and territory a similar capacity to provide public goods and services.
It’s basically about giving everyone ‘a fair go’ – but it has to be fair to the states making the financial contributions as well as to those receiving them, to those who give as well as those who receive.
It should be possible to make these arrangements more equitable between the larger states with the smaller states no worse off. 
So this federation reform process is proceeding in parallel with a tax reform process which makes this a once-in-a-generation opportunity for all first ministers, all levels of government to address the issues bedevilling our federation.
Together, the Commonwealth and the states should be prepared to look at all our existing taxes to make them lower, simpler and fairer.   
Might the states be prepared to accept responsibility for broadening the indirect tax base; might they be prepared to surrender some of their responsibilities to the Commonwealth; might there be new funding formulas that wouldn’t solve the blame game but could at least give it a new and more realistic starting point?
At this stage, no one should be asked to play the “rule in or rule out” game, because that’s guaranteed to generate fear rather than hope.
This government is determined to avoid anything that increases the overall burden of tax.
We’re not going to have a pointless fight sponsoring change that the states aren’t even prepared to consider – because, if it’s to happen properly, reform of the federation has to be owned by the states as well as by the Commonwealth.
The steering group for the White Paper – the reform process – it includes the heads of all first ministers’ departments and the ALGA CEO.
Initial discussions about the scope and timing of the Federation Reform white paper dominated this month’s COAG meeting.
The states and territories have begun preparing their initial submissions. Before the middle of next year, but after the upcoming state elections, it’s my intention to meet with all the premiers and chief ministers solely to discuss reform of the federation.
I anticipate a green paper in the second half of next year and the white paper in the run up to the election so that its work can inform the proposals that this Government decides to take to the people.
Tonight, I announce a further group to guide and test the public servants’ work comprising:  former South Australian Labor premier John Bannon, former Victorian Liberal treasurer Alan Stockdale, Vice Chancellor of the Australian Catholic University, Greg Craven, Business Council CEO, Jennifer Westacott, former Western Australia Attorney-General Cheryl Edwards and Queensland Public Service Commission Chairman, Doug McTaggart.
The fundamental test that all parties and all levels of government will face over the next year is this: are we prepared to have a rational discussion about who does what; or do we think that the current arrangements, perhaps with some adjustments at the edges, are the best that can be managed under the circumstances?
Either way, it will be good for our system: we will end up with a more rational division of authority and responsibility; or we will be forced to stop complaining about a system that we’re not prepared to change.
Either way, we will have grown as a country.
Inevitably, this reform process will test the mettle of all Australia’s first ministers (and indeed alternative first ministers): obviously it will test our willingness to compromise as well as our determination to pursue important objectives; it will test our capacity to reconcile a local perspective with the national one, both of them important; and it will test our readiness to overcome institutional self-interest because this can’t be about us – it has to be for our country.
For all of us, this will be quite a challenge – but it’s worth doing to see whether and to what extent we’re up for it.
Our duty, our solemn duty is to leave behind a greater nation – now let us rise to it.
We heard earlier this evening the words of Sir Henry Parkes in this very hall calling us to rise to the greatness that was the United States of America. Well, that’s a different country, this is a different time. Nonetheless, we should put no limits on what we can achieve and surely in this great Commonwealth of ours it is possible to achieve a better system of government than we currently have.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………….……………………………………………………………
It’s an absolute thrill to be here with the leaders of the medical research sector here in Australia and because you are the leaders of the medical research sector here in Australia, you are amongst the leaders of medical research globally.
So, my duty – and it’s a very happy duty – is to say congratulations to all of you on behalf of our nation and, if I may be presumptuous, to say on behalf of people everywhere thank you for everything that you do for our country and for our world.
We are world champions when it comes to medical research. We’re not the only world champions, and it would be fair to say that we don’t win gold medals every year, but there are very few years when we are not amongst the top performers and, consistently, Australia does much better than we should on a per capita basis as a home and as a source of medical research.
We have less than one per cent of the world’s population, but we’re responsible for close to five per cent of refereed medical research. Eight of our fifteen Nobel Prize winners have been in the field of medical research. Four of the last ten Australians of the Year have been medical researchers and I’m delighted we’ve got two of them here tonight – Pat McGorry and Ian Frazer – and of course Simon McKeon is not a medical researcher himself, but he’s had a lot to do with encouraging medical research over the years.
Howard Florey was probably the man who has saved more lives than any other person in history – an Australian medical researcher.
Donald Metcalf, the father of modern haematology, is estimated to have saved some 20 million lives.
Australians invented the bionic ear, the cervical cancer vaccine, the first treatment for influenza.
So, wherever you look in the field of research, in the field of treatments and cures, Australians are there making a difference and may that always be the case.
I was looking before I came along this evening at some recent work which our medical research institutes have done. The Children’s Cancer Institute in New South Wales has doubled the survival rate from 35 per cent to 70 per cent for high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. What a marvellous way of helping humanity.
The Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute has recently developed a world first technique doubling the time a donor heart can exist outside the recipient.
The Hunter Medical Research Institute, a new clot busting drug therapy for stroke victims which has demonstrated major neurological improvement within 24 hours for two thirds of patients and 72 per cent have experienced excellent or good recovery after three months.
The Baker Institute, a world first breakthrough in the treatment of high blood pressure – a paradigm shift in fact – using catheters. This new procedure has been approved for use in Europe and here in Australia and is now being practiced in more than 10 of our hospitals.
Every day, every week, every month, every year our researchers are making a difference.
Brendan Crabb has already pointed out that thanks in large measure to medical research, someone born today can expect to live 25 years longer than his or her great-grandparents. That’s not just 25 years, that’s good years – good, healthy years – that we can expect which our great-grandparents couldn’t, largely because of the sustained work of medical researchers over the last hundred years or so.
Our life expectancy has gone from under 60 to over 80 in large measure because of the people in this room and your intellectual forebears over the last several decades.
So, that is my first job tonight: to say thank you to all of you for what you do for all of us.
I’m also here to talk about what the Government would like to do to make it easier for you in the future.
As some of you might know, when I was the Health Minister some years ago I regarded myself as the Health Minister for medical research and now I’d like to regard myself as the Prime Minister for medical research.
Pre-election we promised that we would make it easier for medical researchers through streamlining and simplifying NHMRC grant applications. My Department tells me that all this has been done. I’m always a little cautious when my Department tells me that all this has been done; I’d like to confirm with you that all this has been done! But, I am told that the application forms are very considerably shorter and I’m told that the percentage of five year grants has gone up from about six per cent to at least 20 per cent. So, that sounds to me like proof positive that at least some of our ambitions to make you researchers rather than form fillers are actually coming true.
Of course, post-election in the Budget we announced, really, a world first; a $20 billion Medical Research Future Fund that will more than double our annual spend on medical research.
This is precisely what the 23,000 or so medical researchers in our country need if they are to continue to do their world leading work.
So, I’m here to thank you, I’m here to tell you what the Government is hoping to do for you in the months and years ahead, but I also would like to put in a request.
To Brendan Crabb and to Andrew Cuthbertson, thank you so much for your words earlier tonight about the Medical Research Future Fund.
Governments propose, in some respects parliaments dispose, and you can’t have a Medical Research Future Fund without funding.
Yes, the funding mechanism is controversial; we are asking for a modest co-payment from people who are visiting their general practitioner. No one likes to pay more for anything, but it seems to me that if it’s fair and reasonable for people to make a modest contribution when they get their PBS drugs – the drugs that so many of you have made such a contribution towards – why isn’t it also fair and reasonable for this modest contribution when you visit the doctor, particularly when for quite a few years all of the proceeds are going to be invested in what will be a world changing fund, in what will help people’s lives, not just here, but right around the world?
This is history making, this is culture shifting, this is life changing.
So, my request to all of you in this room tonight: please don’t leave tomorrow without knocking on the door of a crossbench Senator and saying, “For our country’s sake – for our country’s sake, for the world’s sake – have a look at this fund”.
Thank you so much.
 
[ends]


Well, Catherine thank you so much. It is a real thrill to be here at this glittering BCA dinner in the presence of my distinguished parliamentary colleagues; Minster Macfarlane, Shadow Ministers Bowen and Wong and the leaders of Australian business and society.
It’s good to be here on the eve of the G20 which should focus the world’s mind on growth and jobs and showcase our country and even perhaps give us the chance to lead by example.
My first task tonight is to thank the BCA. Your members employ one million people, pay over $30 billion a year in company tax and generate no less than 30 per cent of our exports.
So, it is right that the Prime Minister should be here to say ‘thank you’ on behalf of our country.
Not only does the BCA help to shape our economy but you help to drive our economic debate. You have been doing this for years.
Your competitiveness report helped to shape the Government’s recent Competitiveness Agenda and its focus on lower costs, higher skills and more readiness to ‘have a go’.
The BCA and this Government share a commitment to market based economic reform.
But economic reform can never be an end in itself.
It’s the means by which we strengthen the economy, lift living standards and improve all our lives.
Economic reform is what gives us the capability to seize opportunities and respond to challenges and we know this because we have done it before. It is the foundation of our economic strength.
The period 1983–2007 – the era of Hawke and Howard, of Keating and Costello – was a golden age of economic reform.
Now, it wasn’t perfect knowledge that those governments had – it was drive and determination to change our country for the better.
Paul Keating often warned Australia that the mining industry was part of the ‘old’ economy and the mining industry would never deliver future prosperity.  Well, he was wrong on that but he was right on so much else; deregulating the finance sector, cutting tariffs and starting the privatisation process that John Howard and Peter Costello subsequently took so much further.
The policies of the Hawke and Howard Governments – the leadership of those governments – improved competitiveness, encouraged trade, paid off debt, lowered tax, encouraged participation and made economic reform a national preoccupation.
Under the Howard Government, economic reform led to more than two million new jobs, a 20 per cent plus rise in real wages and real household wealth per person more than doubled.
This Government aims to carry on that tradition and to further that example.
Our challenge is to demonstrate that the subsequent period from 2007–2013 is not the new normal. Our challenge is to demonstrate that the age of economic reform is not over, just interrupted, and has now been resumed.
The objective of the government is clear: to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe, secure Australia.
Especially in these uncertain times, the essential prerequisite of a safe, secure Australia is a strong, prosperous economy.
Our defence budget, our security budget, our aid budget, our social programmes they all depend on a strong economy to sustain them.
Regardless of what is happening in the world, the challenge is always the same: to build the strongest possible economy with lower taxes and less red tape leading to higher productivity, stronger economic growth and government spending that’s sustainable.
But the darker the times elsewhere – the more urgent it is to get things right here at home.
Of course, as you know, government doesn’t create prosperity – business does.
But it is government’s job is to create the right conditions for business to prosper.
Our job is to foster low and stable interest rates by keeping government spending under control.
Our job is to keep taxes low so our businesses are competitive.
Our job is to reduce regulations so that business is busy innovating rather than lobbying.
Lower spending, lower taxes, and less regulation – that’s this government’s core business.
We promised to abolish the carbon tax and the carbon tax is gone.
We promised to abolish the mining tax and that’s gone too.
We promised to fix the highways and the biggest infrastructure programme in Australia’s history is now underway.
We promised to cut red tape and tens of thousands of pages of unnecessary regulation and legislation have been abolished.
We promised to be open for business and we’ve signed two free trade agreements with Japan and South Korea and are working on a third with China. Many of you have been with Andrew Robb and me on trade delegations.
We promised to be open for business so we’ve ended the war on the mining industry – because millions of Australian livelihoods depend on mining and it should never be trashed by government.
We’ve stopped the demonisation of coal – because coal is the world’s lowest cost power source and affordable energy is needed to bring billions of people from poverty into the middle class.
We promised to end the hand wringing and paralysis that stopped too many big projects – and since the election, the Government has given environmental approval for major projects worth one trillion dollars; projects that will provide tens of thousands of jobs far into the future.
And step by difficult step, compromise by hard fought compromise in the Senate we are bringing the Budget back under control.
We saved almost $8 billion by reducing the growth of foreign aid; we saved $10 billion by repeal of the measures that were supposedly funded by the mining tax and we saved $2.7 billion through social services savings that – for once – were supported by the Labor Party and the Greens in the Senate.
The Budget emergency started to ease with the election of a government committed to budget repair – and, with our first Budget, we did show a credible path back to balance within four years – the only path that has been mapped out to a sustainable surplus.
I want to stress how vital it is to get spending under control. Not least to provide the capacity for future tax relief. Because without tax relief, over the next ten years, the average income tax rate for average earners will rise from 23 per cent to 28 per cent.
Without change, the average worker will pay the equivalent of $3,800 more tax every year. And that, in practical personal terms is why this year’s Budget changes are so important.
Full deregulation of higher education will actually mean more scholarships than ever for deserving students.
A modest GP co-payment comparable to the PBS co-payment will make Medicare sustainable and produce the world’s biggest medical research endowment fund.
Changing social welfare indexation means that we avoid saddling the next generation with this generation’s debts.
Insisting that school leavers either get a job or learn a trade will ensure that Australians get the best possible start in life.
Now these are all hard reforms.
To be candid they were reforms that were too hard for the Howard Government.
So, one charge that can’t be made against this Government is that we’ve put short-term politics above the long-term national interest. We certainly have not.
When we said that the age of entitlement is over, we meant it – and we proved it by saying “no” to business welfare too.
For all the difficulties of the past six years, we still have a fundamentally strong economy – but we can never rest on our laurels, because every day our competitors are seeking to do better.
Our competitors are cutting taxes, they’re reducing compliance costs, they’re building infrastructure and they’re reining in government expenditure and we need to do likewise if we are to succeed.
Hence, we are restoring the employee share rules so that workers can once more easily become stakeholders and businesses can once more be more like partnerships.
And we’re changing the regulatory culture and structures so that a product that’s approved in a trusted jurisdiction is approved here in Australia without further checking – starting with medical devices.
This Government is committed to reform because today’s reform is tomorrow’s prosperity and because we owe it to our children to leave them a better life than our parents left us.
We owe it – people in government like me – we owe it to our forebears in government – to the Hawke and Howard era ministers to be as good at our job as they were at theirs.
But let me make this point about reform.
We will have as much reform as the community lets us.
We will make the case for change – but it’s community acceptance that sets its pace.
The White Paper on Reform of Australia’s Tax System is not about extracting more revenue and the White Paper on Reform of the Federation is not about more power to Canberra.
Tax reform means lower, simpler and fairer taxes with more incentive for all Australians to follow their dreams.
Federation reform means a simpler and more efficient system of government where people know who does what and know who to blame when things go wrong.
As a conservative, I’m not inclined to force reforms on an unwilling people – so I’m inviting everyone to join the conversation to discuss how we might grow as a nation and come closer to being our best selves.
Because no reasonable person thinks that our current tax system is the best we can do. No reasonable person thinks that the current dog’s breakfast of divided responsibilities is the most efficient way to run our country.
The lesson of history is that serious reform does take time. That’s why it must start now if it is to come to fruition within the next five years.
On all these issues, I am inviting the Labor Party, the state governments to join Team Australia and think of our country and not just the next election.
When Australia last had big tax reform the BCA was leading the charge.
It was the Howard Government that introduced the legislation but it was the BCA that had helped to carry the debate.
There is a lesson here.
We will only get change if the people who believe in it are prepared to fight for it.
This Government believes in lower, simpler, fairer taxes; we believe in a federation where each level of government is sovereign in its own sphere.
I know that you do too.
Economic reform is not just a job for government – it’s a job for all of us.
We can be fans in the stands, we can be armchair critics or we can help to make it happen.
We can criticise government for not doing enough or we can enter the debate and help make the case for change.
I have to say that I draw great nourishment and find great encouragement in this audience of the most influential leaders in our country.
Reform needs to be owned by our people – not just by our government.
Economic reform is not just a job for MPs – it’s a job for all of us so let’s get on with it because there’s no time to waste.
In the original draft of this speech, I posed this question to the BCA: are you ready to argue your case to the community – not just to tell government what to do – but to tell the whole community what we need to do together.
Well, I think we all know the answer.
You are ready and you must be for our country’s sake.
Thank you.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………….………………………………………………………….
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a thrill to be amongst so many of our best minds on this evening which is a celebration of science and it’s also a thrill to be with so many of my colleagues.
It was said of Alexander the Great, when he saw the breadth of his dominion, that he wept for there were no more worlds to conquer.
Perhaps this is why Winston Churchill said “the empires of the future are the empires of the mind”.
Because that deep yearning to explore, to discover and to advance is part of the human condition – and now so much of it one way or another has to be intellectual.
The scientists in this room are the great explorers of our day.
From Professor Brian Schmidt unlocking the universe, to the workers at Cochlear providing hearing to the deaf, the scientists of our country are revealing the secrets of our world and doing the great works of our time.
Tonight, we honour Australia’s scientists who through grit and determination are continuing to tell us what we previously didn’t know and sometimes couldn’t even imagine.
And we wouldn’t have great scientists without teachers to transfer their sense of curiosity and wonder to a new generation.
Tonight, I especially honour the science and maths teachers who are with us.
I honour all these who are promoting science.
And I want to assure you that you have a fine advocate in Ian Macfarlane – the Minister responsible for science.
He is the son of a scientist.
He is the grandson of a scientist.
He is one of the most experienced members of Cabinet and he is the second longest Minister for Industry in the history of our country – over seven years so far.
And it’s good that you have as your Minister one of the steadiest and the most experienced people in the Cabinet.
Science is at the heart of this Government’s Economic Action Strategy because you cannot separate science from the advancement of our country.
It is an essential part of modern economic policy – because the commercialisation of science and the encouragement of innovation is essential for jobs, for growth and for prosperity.
And two weeks ago, Ian Macfarlane and I released what we call our Industry Innovation and Competitiveness Agenda.
This maps out a vision for science and its role in the future of our country.
The overriding themes are: investment in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, entrepreneurship, and collaboration between business and science.
Now as I’m sure you know, in our first year, we have had to bring the Budget back under control.
Living within your means always involves difficult decisions and it’s rarely popular, but it is necessary if we want our prosperity to be sustainable.
But even in a time of budget cutting, we have still made some important new investments as part of the $9.2 billion ongoing annual investment in science and research.
These new investments include $65 million to operate and maintain the CSIRO’s new marine research vessel; and $35 million for the operation and maintenance of ANSTO’s Opal nuclear reactor.
We’re promoting international science collaboration by extending the Australia-China Science and Research Fund and the Australia-India Strategic Research Fund.
And – and this is something very close to my heart – we have set out to build one of the largest endowment funds in the world for medical research.
This $20 billion Medical Research Future Fund will ensure that Australia continues to be a world champion of research and innovation.
And now that our best scientists and our greatest medical researchers are in this building, I hope you will wear out the carpet putting the case for this fund to my political colleagues in other parties because you can’t have a fund without funding.
Now, across government, our focus has been on getting maximum benefit for taxpayer dollars.
It’s what you do in your life every day – you try to get maximum value from your research grants; you try to get maximum value for the funding that the university has given you.
We are seeking to prioritise national research to the challenges that face our nation.
Because our ability to compete in global markets does depend on our ability to produce high-quality, innovative products and services.
And these products usually require the ingenuity that’s born of strong science.
As the Chief Scientist, Professor Ian Chubb put it: we have to do “all the things that we need to do well.”
That’s what our competitors are doing – and so must we.
So as part of the Competitiveness Agenda, the Government is providing $12 million more to foster school students’ interest in STEM.
There’s the ‘Mathematics by inquiry’— maths-in-schools programmes.
There’s computer coding courses.
There’s a local trial of the American Pathways in Technology Early College High School or P-TECH.
And there’s more summer schools for STEM students.
These are just some of the things we’re doing and there is more to come – including changes to employee share ownership to encourage more start-up businesses so that good ideas can be commercialised here in Australia. 
We are recognised globally for our high quality research.
In 2013, with just 0.3 per cent of the world’s population, this country of ours was responsible for over three per cent of the world’s published research.
Now, that only ranks us 9th in the OECD. So, we can do better. Especially, we must do better at translating research into practical outcomes.
We are determined as a Government to boost collaboration between science and business because Australia ranks just 29th out of 30 OECD countries on the proportion of businesses collaborating with higher education and public research institutions.  
And we rank just 23rd out of 32 countries on the percentage of total research publications that are co-authored by industry and the research sector.
We are determined to work with industry and researchers to get a better return on that $9.2 billion a year research investment.
And to this end the new Commonwealth Science Council to advise the Government on ways to improve connections between research organisations, universities and businesses will comprise five scientists and five business representatives – including Professor Brian Schmidt, Professor Ian Frazer, Catherine Livingstone and Michael Chaney. 
One of its first tasks will be to consider specific proposals raised by the Chief Scientist – for Government funding of science and research to be better targeted.
Of course we value “blue sky” or pure research, we always have and we always will, but we still need much to improve the links between science and business and to better commercialise our ideas.
Tonight is probably a good time to add something to the Prime Minister’s Prizes for Science. 
Ian Macfarlane and I have been considering the findings of a review.
The review, led by our Nobel Laureate Brian Schmidt, found that too much was being asked of one prize.
From next year, and alongside the Prime Minister’s Prize for Science, there will also be a Prime Minister’s Prize for the Commercial Application of Science.
This prize will be awarded to an Australian or Australian team for ‘the most significant technological innovation that has led to the betterment of humanity’.
It will allow a broader range of achievements from industry, defence science, rural science and engineering to be honoured.
Equal recognition should be given to those who discover and to those who innovate, because without innovation, scientific discovery may never be more than an interesting experiment.
I thank all of you in this room tonight – teachers, researchers and industry innovators.
I thank you for your dedication to a better world and to a better Australia.
On behalf of the Australian people, congratulations to all the nominees for this year’s prizes.
And as I was walking to the Great Hall this evening I was thinking to myself, what does Australia need more, who does Australia need more of? Do we need more lawyers or do we need more scientists? Do we need more politicians or do we need more scientists? I have absolutely no doubt what the answer to those questions would be – so, scientists of Australia, go out and increase!
 
[ends]


At the last election, the Coalition promised to scrap the carbon tax, to stop the boats, to get the Budget under control and to build the roads of the 21st century.
We are honouring all of these commitments – but my task today is to report on one of them, our infrastructure agenda.
I said that I hope to be the Infrastructure Prime Minister – and that part of that was delivering an annual infrastructure statement to the House of Representatives.
So today Madam Speaker, I am pleased to report progress in building the modern infrastructure that our country needs.
Infrastructure does matter.
It helps determine our quality of life as well as our country’s competitiveness, productivity and living standards.
Australia needs an Infrastructure Prime Minister because for too long, infrastructure improvements have not kept pace with population growth for the needs of our people.
Too many of us have painful, first-hand knowledge of the problems with our national infrastructure, particularly in our big cities.
People leave for work earlier now than they did a decade ago because the traffic jams just keep getting worse and worse.
Parents rack up late fines at child care centres when freeways slow to a crawl.
Businesses see their costs rise when trucks idle in traffic.
Air travel between our cities is actually slower today than it was a generation ago – because of clogged airports and surrounding road networks.
And exports can be held up at bottlenecks in key freight networks, particularly again in congested cities.
That’s why Madam Speaker building the infrastructure of the 21st century is an essential part of the Government’s Economic Strategy to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
This Budget, this Budget committed $50 billion to infrastructure.
It’s the largest infrastructure investment in our history – and it’s forecast to generate a record $125 billion of public and private investment in infrastructure over the next decade.
To help the states and territories, the Government has introduced an Asset Recycling Initiative.
It’s an incentive for them to privatise existing assets and to reinvest the proceeds into new economic infrastructure.
Asset recycling should reassure the taxpayers who paid for the assets in the first place that their investment is being preserved and their legacy built upon.
I’m pleased to say Madam Speaker that every state and territory has signed the National Partnership on Asset Recycling that will help them to build the infrastructure they need, including, it should be said, public transport infrastructure.
It is cooperative federalism at work – as is the National Partnership Agreement on Land Transport Infrastructure which will make roads safer for truck drivers and for all the vehicles that share the roads with them. This is a five year agreement and the funds will flow this year to the states that have signed up.
Madam Speaker, we promised that big new projects would be underway within 12 months of a change of government and we are delivering.
In New South Wales, Australia’s biggest road project, WestConnex, has begun, with geotechnical work already underway across Stage 1 and Stage 2.
Stage 2 of WestConnex, which duplicates the M5 East, will begin ahead of schedule because the Commonwealth will provide a concessional loan of up to $2 billion on top of the $1.5 billion we committed for Stage 1.
WestConnex will create almost 10,000 jobs during construction and, when complete it will by-pass 52 sets of traffic lights.
It will reduce travel times for the 100,000 motorists who use the motorway every day by up to 40 minutes and it will take 3,000 trucks every day off Parramatta Road.
As well Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth and the New South Wales Government are working together to complete the Pacific Highway upgrade by the end of the decade.
And in just the past year, 32 km of the highway has been duplicated, including the Sapphire to Woolgoolga upgrade, and now 397kms or 60 per cent of the final highway length is complete.
The duplication of the Pacific Highway, combined with the NorthConnex in Sydney, means that, by the end of the decade, at most there will be just two stretches of traffic lights between Melbourne and Brisbane.
In Victoria Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth is investing $3 billion toward Melbourne’s East West Link.
The East West Link will create more than 6,000 jobs during construction and it will reduce travel time by up to 20 minutes for commuters travelling from Geelong to the city and beyond.
Stage 1 alone is expected to allow 100,000 vehicles each day to bypass 23 sets of traffic lights.
And on 29th September, the Victorian Government signed the contracts to build Stage One of East West Link – the link has been inked – so there can be no turning back from this major project that will help tens of thousands of Victorians every day.
In South Australia Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth has committed $944 million to upgrade the North-South Road Corridor.
This project will crate 1,000 construction jobs and early work is already underway on Ashwin Parade.
In Western Australia Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth has committed $174 million to widen and strengthen the North West Coastal Highway, which is the main link between Geraldton, Carnarvon, Karratha and Port Hedland and construction will commence in the next month.
The Gateway WA is on track and the Commonwealth is providing $615 million for the 40km Northlink WA project. Planning is underway and construction will commence in 2016.
Planning is also underway for the $1.6 billion Perth Freight Link project funded with $925 million from the Commonwealth.
In Queensland Madam Speaker, five major projects have been completed on the Bruce Highway – at Gin Gin, Mackay, Cairns, Calliope Crossroads near Gladstone and at Burdekin and the last section of the Townsville Ring Road will start within 12 months.
Early works have begun on the Gateway Motorway upgrade and the procurement process is underway for the Toowoomba Second Range Crossing, so that major construction works can start next year. 
The Commonwealth’s commitment of up to $1.28 billion is the largest ever federal contribution to a single Queensland regional road project.
In Tasmania Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth has committed $400 million to the Midland Highway and the Westbury Road Upgrade will be completed by the end of this year.
In the Northern Territory, the duplication of the first of the sections of Tiger Brennan Drive has been completed.
The Commonwealth has committed a further $77 million towards upgrading Northern Territory highways with planning already underway.
In addition to these major road projects, the Government is spending $2.1 billion on the Roads to Recovery Programme and funding a $565 million Black Spot Programme to improve the most dangerous stretches of road throughout our country.
Then there’s the Heavy Vehicle Safety and Productivity Programme providing $248 million to increase the number of rest areas and improve connections to freight networks.
There’s also the $229 million National Highway Upgrade Programme for practical improvements such as shoulder and centreline widening, ripple strips and wire rope barriers.
And the Government is providing $300 million for the Bridges Renewal Programme to upgrade deteriorating bridges across the nation.
Madam Speaker, airports are our gateways to the world.
For more than 50 years, governments have talked about a second airport for Sydney.
Finally, and not before time, the talk is over.
We’ve taken the final decision that Badgerys Creek will be the site of Sydney’s second airport – or, as I prefer, Western Sydney’s first airport.
The Government has commenced consultations with the Sydney Airport Group.
We are working up the commercial model and the airport concept designs and construction should begin in 2016.
This airport is irrevocable – it is going ahead and construction should begin in 2016.
By mid-century, the new airport could generate a $24 billion increase in our gross domestic product and 60,000 new jobs in Western Sydney – it’s the centrepiece of our long-term vision for Western Sydney – and heeding past lessons, it will be a case of roads first, airport second: the roads will be built before the first plane has landed.
A $3.6 billion, 10 year partnership with the New South Wales Government is underway, starting with the upgrade of Bringelly Road.
So Madam Speaker, together, our road package and the airport will give Western Sydney the modern infrastructure it deserves.
In Hobart, environmental and design studies for the extension of the runway at Hobart Airport are underway.
This $38 million upgrade will help Hobart to become the gateway to the Antarctic and give the potential for direct flights to Asia.
As well Madam Speaker, planning work and consultations are currently underway on the Inland Railway between Melbourne and Brisbane which would significantly improve freight productivity compared to the coastal line via Sydney.
Importantly Madam Speaker, the Government is also getting on with the job of rolling out the NBN so that Australians will have access to very fast broadband as soon as possible, at affordable prices and the least cost to taxpayers and Madam Speaker this Government has connected more premises in just one year than the previous government did in five.
An independent Cost-Benefit Analysis of the NBN found that this Government’s multi-technology approach will deliver net economic and social benefits of almost $18 billion.
Now Madam Speaker, the Government is determined to end the dam-phobia that has largely stopped the construction of new dams for the past three decades.                                 
Water is a priceless asset especially when the vagaries of our environment make it so scarce.        
Strengthening our water storage capability is essential if our country is to grow.
We do need to build the right dams in the right places.
And Madam Speaker, most of these dams should be feasible without government support.
But we are looking at some modest seed funding to help break the anti-dam mindset.
Now Madam Speaker, just as we promised to end the analysis paralysis and get projects moving on the ground, we also promised a long-term vision for Australia’s infrastructure needs and a comprehensive plan to deliver it.
We’ve passed legislation to make Infrastructure Australia more independent, robust and transparent, with a Board appointed CEO, so that states, territories, industry and the community can be confident it’s working in the national interest, and not just the Commonwealth’s interest.
And to see our nationally significant infrastructure needs more clearly, we’ve tasked Infrastructure Australia to develop a 15 year infrastructure plan.
The plan will cover all economic infrastructure – transport, energy, communications and water.
It will evaluate projects receiving more than $100 million in Commonwealth funding to help clarify our country’s infrastructure priorities for the future.
It’s reform to build the right projects at the right time for the right price.
The work done to make costs and benefits more transparent should build deeper engagement by private investors in infrastructure.
Now, Australia, Madam Speaker, is not alone in facing a greater need for infrastructure investment.
Almost every country needs more and better infrastructure to underpin jobs and growth, and almost every government lacks the resources to underwrite that investment.
Governments do not have the money to deliver on their own.
And as this year’s G20 President, Australia has made boosting private-sector investment in infrastructure a priority.
We’re driving a Global Infrastructure Initiative for quality investment across the G20 and beyond – and part of this initiative, is a new global infrastructure hub that we hope will be based in Sydney.
Madam Speaker, this Government is committed to building the infrastructure that we need to get products to market faster, to speed up the wait for freight, and to get employees to work and home again with less time wasted in traffic.
Madam Speaker, nothing boosts confidence like cranes in the sky and bulldozers on the ground.
It’s an unmistakable sign of faith in our future.
So, next year, Madam Speaker, I look forward to reporting further progress in delivering the projects we promised in our plan to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER ABBOTT:
It’s terrific to be here with Prime Minister John Key of New Zealand, my ANZAC brother, as we prepare to travel to Albany for the centenary of the departure of the ANZAC convoy for Egypt and ultimately for Gallipoli.
One hundred years ago tomorrow four war ships, 32 transports, left Albany with 20,000 Australian and 8,000 New Zealand soldiers bound for Gallipoli. It was a heavy day in our history and it led to even heavier times to come but it established a great bond, a great partnership which has endured for a century and will last forever.
So, we go on together as brother countries and we have many challenges today and tomorrow just as we had challenges one hundred years ago but Australia and New Zealand, as always, face the future together and it is great to have John Key in Australia for this important commemoration.
PRIME MINISTER KEY:
It’s great to be back in Australia. Tony, I know we are going to see a lot of each other in the next six to eight months but maybe tomorrow will be one of the most important as we take a moment to think back and reflect on the enormous service and sacrifice of those very brave Australian and New Zealand men who went off to terrible conditions and a terrible war.
It was, as you say, the place where the ANZAC brotherhood was forged and that is a partnership that’s as strong today as it was back then one hundred years ago.
So, it’s good to be here in Perth and I look forward to some fruitful discussion tonight.
[ends]


Your Excellency, Governor, Prime Minister, Premier, Leader of the Opposition, distinguished ministerial representatives of Japan and France, service personnel and ex-service personnel, ladies and gentlemen.
One hundred years ago today, the ANZAC convoy sailed from this point for Gallipoli; 38 troop ships, four cruisers, 20,000 Australian and 8,500 New Zealand soldiers.
A passenger in that convoy, our poet, Banjo Paterson, wrote of the fleet assembled on these waters as the most wonderful sight that an Australian ever saw.
Captain Walter Bedford described it as one of the most stirring sights in the whole history of the war. As far as the eye could see, the ocean was dotted with the ships of the convoy and a large haze of smoke stretched away for miles. Some passengers would have felt fear, others anticipation, most, perhaps, a measure of both but all were sailing into history. One hundred years on, we can say with certainty that as long as there is an Australia and as long as there is a New Zealand, they will be remembered.
The First World War was the crucible in which the Australian identity was forged. In 1914, we were a country with a flag and a Parliament but little sense of nationhood. The baptism of fire that was the Great War changed all that. The scale of sacrifice and loss was beyond anything imaginable. From a population of under 5 million; 417,000 enlisted, 332,000 served overseas, 152,000 were wounded and 61,000 never came home. Of Australian men aged 18 to 42, almost one in two served in uniform. Of those who served overseas, almost one in five died on active service and of the 270,000 who returned, more than half had been wounded and others had mental scars that never healed.
It was sacrifice on a stupendous scale and it was sacrifice shared by our neighbour, New Zealand – because of it, our countries will always be brothers. On days such as this, we do not glorify war but we do acknowledge the selflessness and comradeship of shared struggle.
Charles Bean, Australia’s official war correspondent, was a passenger on the Gallipoli convoy and subsequently wrote of the original ANZACS:
“To be the sort of man who would give way when his mates were trusting to his firmness; to be the sort of man who would fail when the line, the whole force, and the allied cause required his endurance; to have made it necessary for another unit to do his own unit’s work; to live the rest of his life haunted by the knowledge that he had set his hand to a soldier’s task and had lacked the grit to carry it through-that was the prospect which these men could not face.”
At a time when war was its worst, our soldiers, serving in our name, were at their best.
Today, we also remember all those we fought with; the soldiers and sailors of the countries of the British Empire, of gallant France and of Japan – first an ally, then a foe, now the very best of friends.
We remember them all. They're all gone now – gone but never forgotten by the nation they shaped.
Thank you.
[ends]


Your Excellency, Prime Minister, Premier, parliamentary and ministerial colleagues, particularly our ministerial colleagues from France and from Japan, Opposition Leader Shorten, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Each nation is formed by its stories and each generation has to tell the stories again and make sense of them anew and to recommit ourselves to our best values.
It's great that we are now helped to do that through this new interpretive centre here at Albany. It is fitting that this centre should be placed at Albany given that Albany was the jumping off point for the original ANZACS.
I want to congratulate the city of Albany and everyone connected with this centre for what has been produced.
We've just had the opportunity to have a, regrettably brief, tour of the centre. I wonder at the heroism and I tremble at the suffering of our forebears but I marvel at what they've done for our country.
In just four months 20,000 men from every corner of this continent plus another 8,500 from New Zealand were recruited and conveyed to Albany and from here they were safely transported to the other side of the world.
Never before had Australia mustered so many troops, never before had we served so closely with New Zealanders and never before – or since – has such a large convoy of soldiers left Australia.
The people of Albany have never forgotten their special role as the last and final hosts for thousands of their fellow Australians who gave their lives for our country.
We should remember the massive logistical challenge met and conquered with the successful departure of the ANZAC convoy.
We should remember those who served on the Royal Navy’s HMS Minotaur and the Japanese cruiser Ibuki, and on the HMS Melbourne and Sydney who helped to protect the original ANZACS as they made their way to Egypt and then to Gallipoli.
We should remember the famous victory of HMAS Sydney over the German raider Emden whose destruction ensured the safety of the convoy as it sailed to Egypt.
Of course we should remember, always, the 417,000 men who enlisted, the 332,000 who served overseas, 152,000 who were wounded and the 61,000 who never came back.
As the historian Les Carlyon has said, if we remember them – if we remember what they did – they are still alive in our hearts. We should acknowledge, “the good and the bad, the greatness and the smallness” of the entire ANZAC story – the terrible victory on the Western Front, as much as the magnificent defeat at Gallipoli.
In no way should the centenary of ANZAC glorify war but it should commemorate what is best in our human character and acknowledge that the worst of times can bring out the best in us.
It is an honour for me to be in such company today – the living and the glorious dead – as we commemorate this marvellous centre.
[ends]


In just under two weeks, the leaders of the G20 will assemble in Brisbane.
This will be the largest ever gathering of world leaders in our history, and it is the culmination of Australia’s presidency of the G20.
The G20 is the world’s most important economic forum.
The countries of the G20 generate 75 per cent of all world trade and 85 per cent of the world’s Gross Domestic Product.
At this G20 Summit, our focus will be on building a stronger world economy.
Because economic growth means more jobs, higher living standards and governments that are better able to reduce tax and fund better services.
Australia has already secured an agreement that G20 countries will aim to boost their collective economic growth by 2 per cent above what is currently expected over the next five years.
Countries have been working on their action plans and collectively, we have already reached 90 per cent of our growth target.
Australia is leading by example with our Economic Action Strategy – scrapping the carbon tax and the mining tax, cutting red tape costs, signing free trade agreements and undertaking the largest infrastructure investment in our history.
The G20 focus will be on the fundamentals of the economy: trade, infrastructure, tax and banking.
Our discussions will include the $1 trillion world-wide infrastructure gap, reducing tax avoidance by global companies, and increasing participation in the workforce.
While a stronger economy won’t solve every problem; it will make almost every problem easier to tackle.
So it’s an honour to be hosting the G20.
I know there will be inconveniences in Brisbane as the leaders gather and I thank people for their patience.
It is an important event for Australia.  I’m confident that it will make a lasting difference for our country and for our world.
2 November 2014


For more than half a century, I have lived in Sydney.
I love this city: our harbour, our beaches, and our bush.
On a good day at Manly beach, just 15 minutes from where I live, you can surf among the dolphins.
On the other side of my street, is Garigal National Park.
Forestville is just 15 minutes from the CBD, at the right times, yet you can walk for two minutes, and not be able to see a single house; possums promenade along the power lines, lorikeets swarm on the balcony, and bush turkeys invade the back garden.
Much of Sydney is a city in a national park.
It’s the bush and the water that gives Sydney its unique character and should never be put at risk.
It is truly one of the very best places on earth to live – until you have to move around – when you’re often stuck in some of the world’s longest car parks.
I grew up in Chatswood, within a good walk of the railway station. Dad could walk to work, children walked to the station and mum had a short drive to the shops.
Beyond the inner city, for Sydneysiders living further than a decent walk from a railway station, you depend on a car – or an irregular bus service – and either way you need a decent road.
As a student, I struggled through clogged roads from the north shore to the inner west.
As a commuter, I braved traffic jams to reach a station without a decent car park.
And as a prime minister, like everyone else with somewhere to go at the wrong time of day, I inch through gridlock to get to the airport.
The first home I owned was in a one lane street that turned into a race way every two minutes when the lights changed at the intersection of the Princes Highway and Canal Rd.
That’s Sydney’s problem: it’s a city of over four million people – tipped to reach six million within two decades – with roads designed for two million; and the decent roads we do have still don’t actually join up.
Bad roads add hours to your day and stress to your life; bad roads mean you’re late for work and spend less time at home; bad roads mean more smog from vehicles in gridlock and more suburban streets turned into traffic canyons.
That’s why, as long as I’ve been able to travel, I’ve dreamt of a Sydney that all of us could move around much more freely.
It’s the job of state governments to plan and deliver infrastructure; it’s the job of local governments to provide municipal services and create attractive communities; and it’s the job of the national government to end the talk and to get things built.
As a citizen, I want a friendly neighbourhood that’s hard to change beyond recognition; I want a state government with a plan for my city and the determination to make it happen.
As prime minister, though, my job is to build prosperity for all of us; in part, through securing the first world infrastructure that green activism, policy procrastination, and misguided priorities have so far stopped.
As an infrastructure prime minister, my job is to work with the premiers to ensure that our national roads, freight, power, communications and water systems are no longer holding us back.
And as the infrastructure prime minister, it’s a particular honour to present this first Bradfield Oration – the first of many, I hope.
No other engineer has made such a mark on our city, on our state and on our country as John Bradfield.
As a senior public works department engineer for almost 40 years, Bradfield transformed Sydney – and ultimately Australia.
He helped to design the Burrinjuck and Cataract Dams in New South Wales, the Story Bridge in Brisbane, Sydney’s City Circle railway line, and – his signature achievement – the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
A bridge over Sydney Harbour had first been proposed to Governor Macquarie by Francis Greenway in 1815.
A century later, nothing had happened.
For over a century, politicians had talked and residents had dreamed of a bridge between Dawes Point and Milson’s Point – after all, it was only five hundred metres.
It was John Bradfield who finally supervised the bridge’s construction – from conception to completion.
The Sydney Harbour Bridge is one of the marvels of our city and one of the greatest feats of its time.
Its principal designer was a profound talent with dogged persistence, compelling eloquence and an inspiring vision.
Bradfield was the first doctor of engineering from Sydney University and won the university gold medal. 
His doctoral thesis title reflects his life’s work: “The city and suburban electric railways and the Sydney Harbour Bridge”.
In a quirk of history, his examiner was another engineer of genius: Sir John Monash.
As a former Premier Jack Lang observed of Bradfield, when Sydney’s population was scarcely one million, he was “the first man to plan for…a city of two million people”.
As we celebrate Bradfield’s vision, we should also gratefully acknowledge the civic leaders who invested in it and helped to make it happen.
Long before he had completed the Bridge, Bradfield confided to his diary: “When I visualise the future, I feel that I was born 30 years too soon because the achievement of today will be but a stepping stone for greater feats necessary for the development of this great city”.
This is our challenge: not to play catch up but, like Bradfield, to plan for the future.
In 1932, when the bridge opened, there were under 200,000 registered vehicles in the whole of NSW.
In its first year, the Bridge carried only 11,000 vehicles a day.
Bradfield did not envisage infrastructure for his time alone but for our time too.
His thinking was not for today or even for the next decade; it was for the next half century and beyond.
Our challenge is to be as forward thinking in our time as Bradfield was in his.
In his day, there were two Sydneys divided by water.
Today, there are two Sydneys divided by travelling times: one Sydney for people who can get to work within an hour; and a tougher, more stressful Sydney for people who spend over two hours a day travelling.
People in the west, the south, the central coast and even the northern beaches can feel as cut off from their destinations as those who lived on the lower north shore in the pre-bridge years before 1932.
Our challenge is to ensure that getting from one side of the metropolitan area to another is as easy as Bradfield made getting to the other side of the harbour.
The success of Sydney is fundamental to our nation’s economy.
Sydney contributes over a fifth of Australia’s GDP.
As our largest city – with leading financial services, tourism, education, health and manufacturing – it contributes more to our national wealth than any other place in Australia.
It could contribute even more if road congestion didn’t cost an estimated $6 billion a year.
Ask yourself how much has congestion cost you and your family in lost time, extra fuel, or wear-and-tear?
I don’t doubt our transport economists – but suspect that $6 billion is a very conservative figure indeed.
Congestion, of course, is not unique to Sydney.
Traffic jams plague all our big cities.
People leave earlier and earlier for work – and leave later and later for home – all in increasingly vain attempts to miss peak periods.
It’s why I am determined to be the Infrastructure Prime Minister building the roads of the 21st century – because movement is what distinguishes us from previous generations and more ease of movement, like more disposable income, is one of the litmus tests of prosperity.
In the Budget, the government committed a record $50 billion to new transport infrastructure.
Thanks to the asset recycling fund – which will add 15 per cent to any proceeds of privatisation that are reinvested in economic infrastructure, including, should the states choose, urban rail – this budget is forecast to generate a record $125 billion of public and private infrastructure investment over the next decade.
My aim is cranes in our skies and bulldozers on the ground.
Commonwealth funding is driving the East West Link in Melbourne – where stage one alone will generate nearly 4000 jobs and save the occupants of 100,000 vehicles 15 minutes a day.
There’s the full North-South Road Corridor in Adelaide within a decade.
There’s the Perth gateway project, the Swan Valley Bypass, and the Perth freight link project.
There’s the Gateway Motorway upgrade in Brisbane, the Toowoomba Second Range Crossing and major works to fix the Bruce Highway throughout coastal Queensland.
There’s the upgrade of the Midland Highway in Tasmania and key roads in the Northern Territory.
But the biggest road projects are rightly in New South Wales – because in the decade after the Olympics the state government was out to lunch, to put it at its kindest.
The work in Sydney starts with Australia’s biggest road project.
WestConnex will eliminate up to 52 sets of traffic lights from 100,000 journeys a day – giving back to each vehicle’s occupants 40 minutes that would have otherwise been wasted in traffic jams.
Then there’s the upgrade of the Pacific Highway and the completion of NorthConnex – so that by decade’s end there will be only two stretches of traffic lights between Melbourne and Brisbane.
And after 50 years of talk, a decision has now been made about Sydney’s second airport site – or, as I prefer, western Sydney’s first airport.
This airport will happen – but so will the road and rail links to make it work and they’ll be built before the first planes land.
You can tell that this government is serious because we haven’t just announced the airport, we’re already building the roads – such as Bringelly Rd where site works start soon.
It’s “roads first, airport second”.
The largely-Commonwealth funded western Sydney infrastructure plan will produce more than 50 kilometres of high quality roads with motorway standard interchanges.
The new airport is essential because the numbers flying into Sydney will almost double over the next twenty years – and they can’t all land at Mascot which is struggling to cope and has been for years.
Without another airport for Sydney, the national economy is tipped to be $34 billion smaller in 2060 and NSW will miss out on almost 60,000 jobs.
If western Sydney is to be a city in its own right rather than a dormitory for somewhere else, it needs its own airport.
The western Sydney airport should become Australia’s principal air freight hub and the centre of a massive business park.
The new airport is going to plan.
Consultations with the Sydney Airport Group are underway.
A commercial model and the airport concept designs are being worked up.
And construction should begin in 2016.
I thank all the people who have put NIMBY politics aside to focus on what our city and our country really needs.
I thank the local councils and chambers of commerce.
I thank the most-impacted members of parliament, especially Fiona Scott, Russell Matheson and Louise Markus.
I thank the shadow minister for transport, Anthony Albanese for the most important economic bi-partisanship by far of this term of parliament.
I thank the Baird government in NSW which isn’t just talking about western Sydney but delivering for it – with the north-west rail link already under construction and the M2 upgrade completed.
And, of course, I thank my ministerial colleagues Warren Truss and Jamie Briggs who have focused on getting things done, not finding excuses.
Not much that governments do matters half a century on.
The decision to build the western Sydney airport will permanently change our city and our country.
It shows that we are no less capable than our parents and grandparents of seizing the moment and shaping the future.
Of course, this Airport would not be taking shape, at least not now or in this way, without the efforts of The Daily Telegraph and its redoubtable editor Paul Whittaker.
Big decisions need strong advocates as well as strong leaders.
As western Sydney’s champion, Paul has splendidly side-stepped any editorial tendency to create a chorus of complaint.
Tonight, we remember John Bradfield for his bridges, railways and roads, but should not forget the dams he built as well.
A government determined to end the analysis-paralysis that’s delayed western Sydney’s airport should also end the dam-phobia of the past thirty years.
Dams, after all, are the cheaper, more environmentally friendly alternative to the desalination plants which Bob Carr once called bottled electricity.
We shouldn’t forget that aviation was also one of John Bradfield’s interests.
One way to sustain enthusiasm for the new airport could be to name it after a champion for Sydney and I can’t think of a better candidate than John Bradfield. I suspect that many other Sydneysiders might think so, too, and I hope that finding out might be something that the Telegraph will take up.
So, it’s too soon to say of airport decision-making that it’s all over bar the shouting.
The predictable objections might slow it down but they won’t stop it because it is so obviously an idea whose time has come.
The announcement generated far less opposition than expected.
Perhaps western Sydney’s growth has made the need for its own airport almost self-evident; perhaps people are now resolved to be larger and better this time than the last time this issue was considered; perhaps we are now readier to take the longer view and negotiate difficulties rather than be defeated by them.
In any event, it’s a new sign of purpose in our national life that this government is determined to build upon.
[ends]


The Great War which we remember today was the most cataclysmic conflict in human history, at least in military terms.
It was also the crucible in which our nation was formed.
Of a population of under 5 million; more than 400,000 volunteered, more than 300,000 served overseas, more than 150,000 were wounded and more than 60,000 never came home.
It was sacrifice on a stupendous scale.
Of those who returned, all bore the scars – seen and unseen. Our nation bore the scars. It still does.
As well as suffering, there is another legacy; a legacy of comradeship under fire, of service and sacrifice, of duty in a good cause.
Of the original ANZACs the official war historian Charles Bean said, “their example rises, as it will always rise, above the mists of ages; a memorial to great hearted-men and for their nation, a possession forever.”
And so today we remember all of them, we remember all who have worn our country’s uniform – we remember them – and dedicate ourselves to be worthy of their example.
Lest we forget.
[ends]


Prime Minister Cameron, it’s fantastic to be here with you, it’s great to be here with Premier, Mike Baird and it’s good to be talking about infrastructure as we overlook what is perhaps the world’s biggest single construction, certainly building construction, project right now – the great Barangaroo development.
It was great to hear you talk, David, about what’s happening in Britain in terms of better roads, faster trains and so on. I can remember some years ago when I was a student at Oxford, sitting on the Oxford Railway Station and looking at a British Rail poster and the British Rail poster said boldly, “The last train is later than you think”, and some wag had scored underneath, “Why is this particular train being singled out for attention?”
I can remember being given some British Rail matches back in the days when you were still allowed to smoke on trains and they didn’t work, and I thought, “God, the only thing in Britain that doesn’t strike is the matches!” A long, long time ago, at the beginning of the Thatcher era which did so much for Britain and of course over the last 30 years, with a few hiccups, Britain certainly has roared back as one of the great countries of the world. That’s good for Britain, obviously, it good for Europe, it’s good for the wider world and, in particular, it’s good for Australia because of the extraordinary partnership that our two countries have had ever since the First Fleet sailed into this magnificent harbour just over 200 years ago.
As we look around this glorious city, as we see the extraordinary development, it’s hard to think that back in 1788 it was nothing but bush and that the marines and the convicts and the sailors that straggled off those 12 ships just a few hundred yards from where we are now must have thought they’d come almost to the moon. Everything would have been so strange. Everything would have seemed so extraordinarily basic and raw and now a city which is one of the most spectacular cities on our globe and in a country which is as free, as fair and as prosperous as any. A country which is in so many ways the envy of the earth.
So, it’s great to be here with you, David, and I hope as you pay your first visit to Sydney and you think of what your countrymen did 200-odd years back, you do feel a measure of pride and satisfaction at what has been achieved here in that time.
It’s terrific to be talking about infrastructure. Mike, I’m the infrastructure Prime Minister, you’re the infrastructure Premier; together we are building a better Sydney, a better New South Wales and a better Australia, and didn’t we need to get cracking? Didn’t we need to get cracking, because for too long there had been too much money invested in short-term consumption and not enough money invested in long-term economic infrastructure and that’s exactly what’s happening right around our country now, in part because of good, strong state governments and in part because of a good, strong national government that wants to work with the state governments to give our country the 21st-century infrastructure that we must have if we are to remain at the forefront of the first world economies.
Here, in Sydney, we’re building WestConnex, the largest road project in our country; work is beginning, preparatory work is underway, work on the ground will begin early next year. There’s NorthConnex, there’s the work that we’re doing together on the Pacific Highway, there’s the work we’re doing on what some people call Sydney’s second airport, but which I like to think is Western Sydney’s first airport. We will give this country the muscle and the sinew that it needs to advance into the future and we will do it in partnership with investors from Britain and elsewhere.
There’s a long history of British investment in Australia. After the United States, Britain is by far the biggest investor in this country. It’s been a very steady consistent flow of British investment into this country ever since the very beginning of settlement here in 1788.
David and I were lucky enough to stroll down Macquarie Street towards the Opera House, and of course you swing down the end of Macquarie Street, you’re looking out onto the Opera House and of course you turn to your left and there is the Sydney Harbour Bridge – one of the great Wonders of the World when it was built and it was built as a collaborative effort between the state of New South Wales and that great British engineering firm, Dorman Long. I’m not sure that building the bridge was great for Dorman long, but certainly, it was great for Sydney and great for the world!
In those days, it was more of a one-way-street, the expertise and the capital coming from the United Kingdom to Australia. Today, it’s very much a two-way-street. It was Multiplex that built Wembley Stadium; Westfield is currently building some of the really extraordinary shopping complexes in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.
It is a two-way-street, because while Britain remains economically larger than Australia, the disparity is by no means as great as it was and that’s one of the gaps that we hope to close in the years and decades ahead. But it is a two-way-street, it’s a relationship between, if not quite equals, certainly peers and it is as warm, as intimate and as important as any relationship on this earth.
So, David, lovely to be with you today and lovely to be with so many people who want to make two great countries even greater in the years and decades ahead.


Madam Speaker, Mr President,
The arrival of the first Britons here in Australia could hardly have been less auspicious.
They’d just sailed half way round the world.
Remarkably, thanks to Governor Phillip’s good management, only 48 of 1400 had died on a journey that was an 18th century version of travelling to the moon or landing on a comet.
Of those on the First Fleet, the very best that could be said of them was that they had been chosen by the finest judges in England.
Even the soldiers were guards, not warriors.
Yet over the ensuing two centuries, the descendants of convicts have helped to create a society that’s as free, fair and prosperous as any on earth, so that to be born Australian is to have won the lottery of life.
The first Christian sermon preached in this country took as its text: what shall I render unto the Lord for all his blessings towards me.
This, indeed, has always characterised us: gratitude for what we have and a fierce determination to build on it.
Modern Australia has an Aboriginal heritage, a British foundation and a multicultural character.
There’s so much that Britain has given to us.
There’s so much, indeed, that Britain has given to everyone: parliamentary democracy, the common law, constitutional monarchy, and English – the world’s first or second language.
What would the world be without the plays of Shakespeare, the music of the Beatles, the advances of the first Industrial Revolution, the humanity of Wilberforce, and the determination of Churchill?
What would the world be without the British democratic ethos which took hold in Australia, Canada and New Zealand, as well as in the countries that broke away such as the United States and India? 
What would the world be if Britain hadn’t stood against militarism and fascism?
And what would this world be if Britain had not settled the territory that Captain Cook earlier called New South Wales?
Long ago now, Speaker, Australians ceased to regard Britain as the mother country – but we’re still family.
The relationship between Britain and Australia has changed beyond recognition but it’s still important and we still matter to each other.
Britain is by far our largest trading partner in Europe which remains the world’s largest economic bloc.
Britain is the second largest overseas investor in Australia, the source of our largest migrant community, and our oldest military ally.
Britain is the world’s sixth largest economy, the fastest growing big economy in Europe and America’s principal military partner.
So, Madam Speaker, today, we remember the 9000 Australians who died at Gallipoli; and we also remember our British brothers-in-arms who lost 21,000 in the same campaign.
We remember the 15,000 Australians who passed into captivity at Singapore; and we remember their 30,000 British comrades who were also taken prisoner.
We remember the airmen in the skies over England and Europe from 1940 to 1945 – that few to whom so many owed so much – including the tens of thousands of Australians who helped to win that battle for civilisation.
Some of you are with us in the Gallery today.
Gentlemen, we honour your deeds and we honour your comrades who did not return.
Madam Speaker, history matters because it helps us to know who we are and where we’re going.
It helps us to know what’s important and who can be relied upon.
It shapes us but it should never control us.
Inscribed on the Australian War Memorial in London are Sir Robert Menzies’ words from his time as a member of the British war cabinet:
“Whatever burden you are to carry, we also will shoulder that burden.”
Today, Britain and Australia are working together to disrupt and degrade the ISIL death cult which has declared war upon the world.
In the Middle East, and now with a new and different crisis in West Africa, Australia and Britain are asking: not “what’s in it for us” but “how can we be helpful to people in trouble?”
I can think of no two countries on earth readier to put into international practice the parable of the Good Samaritan.
We are like-minded in all the forums we share – the Commonwealth, the United Nations and now the G20 and even NATO – on practical and decent solutions to all the problems facing the world.
At home, both Britain and Australia are committed to lower tax, less red tape, freer trade, bringing budgets under control and creating more private-sector jobs.
I have to say Madam Speaker, I admire what Prime Minister Cameron has achieved.
He has cut the deficit by one third.
He has cut taxes for 26 million people.
He is creating the best corporate tax system in Europe.
A further 1.7 million Britons are in work since 2010.
And thanks to his leadership, Britain counts for more than it did five years ago.
Some time ago in this country, we had a largely sterile debate about Australia’s place in the world – which John Howard settled with the famous declaration that we don’t need to choose between our history and our geography.
Of course, Australia is located in the Indo-Pacific, but our place is wherever there is an interest to advance, a citizen to protect, a value to uphold, or a friend to encourage.
To a similar debate in Britain, Prime Minister Cameron has brought the same robust common sense: Britain is a European country with a global role.
Like people, countries don’t make new friends by losing old ones and they don’t deepen some relationships by diminishing others.
Britain and Australia are both vibrant multi-cultural democracies determined to make the most of our advantages: of our shared history, of our different geography and, more important still, of our common characteristic curiosity and innate sense that however much you have already done there is always more that is yet to do.
After two centuries in which both of us have constantly adapted to our own changing and different circumstances, it’s remarkable how similar we’ve become.
Culturally, intellectually, even economically, it’s now a relationship of peers.
In volume one, Madam Speaker, of his memoirs, Clive James has described the gravitational pull of the country of his birth in the country of his choice: As I begin this last paragraph, “a misty afternoon drizzle” he writes. “…soaks the city of London. Down…in the street I can see umbrellas commiserating with each other. In Sydney Harbour twelve thousand miles away and ten hours from now, the yachts will be racing on the crushed diamond water under a sky…of powdered sapphires…Pulsing like a beacon through the days and nights, the birthplace of the fortunate sends out its invisible waves of recollection. It always has and it always will until even the last of us come home.”
Madam Speaker, we will always be conscious of the part that Britain has played in the life of our nation and the friendship between our two countries that will never be taken for granted.
[ends]


It is an honour to be here in the Great Hall of the Parliament welcoming what is perhaps the most splendid and glittering gathering ever to meet in this building.
We’ve had quite a few sayings today – all of them interesting, many of them instructive – I want to remind you of another.
It is said that when friends meet, a thousand cups of wine cannot contain their happiness.
This is a happy night and it’s part of a historic day.
Not only do we have President Xi and Madame Peng here in Australia for the President’s fifth visit to our country, but after ten long years of negotiation we have finalised our Free Trade Agreement as a sign of the comprehensive strategic partnership between our two countries.
It’s also said that when friends gather and speak the truth, trust grows.
There is, indeed, mutual self-interest – or as the President might say, win-win cooperation based on shared goals – in the friendship between our two countries, but its foundation is respect and affection based on our experience of the Chinese people who have made their home here in Australia.
I have to say that the respect and affection that we Australians have for the people of China was reinforced by the remarkable speech that President Xi has delivered in our Parliament today.
I have never heard a Chinese leader declare that his country will be fully democratic by 2050.
I have never heard a Chinese leader commit so explicitly to a rule-based international order founded on the principle that we should all treat others as we would be treated ourselves.
One of the proverbs we heard today – an Australian one – was when you look at the sun you can’t see the shadows. Well, that was an interesting one, I have to say, Mr President, but when I listened to the President today, some of the shadows over our region and over our world lifted and the sun did indeed shine brightly and I thank you, Mr President, for this historic statement which I hope will echo right around the world.
China has been significant to us here in Australia almost from our very beginning as a settled country.
Thousands of Chinese joined the gold rushes from the 1850s.
There were Chinese ANZACs at Gallipoli and on the Western Front.
But today’s Australia has a deeper engagement with China than ever before – in education, in the arts and in entrepreneurship – and we celebrate that engagement in the inaugural Australia-China Achievement Awards.
I can announce that the winners of these awards are here tonight: Professor Max Lu from the University of Queensland, the Sydney Symphony Orchestra and Bridestowe Lavender Estate in Tasmania.
As well, to mark President Xi’s visit, Australia and China have reached agreements on infrastructure, financial services and the flow of students, researchers and academics between our countries.
Above all else, we can be proud of what our generation of Australians is contributing to this special friendship between our two countries.
Like any friendship, it occasionally is tested, but invariably it becomes stronger.
It was Deng Xiaoping who often spoke of ‘crossing the river by feeling the stones’.
Progress is like that.
Australia and China are crossing the river together.
Many years ago, a Chinese writer observed that “Chinese wedding, funeral and birthday customs may differ from those of the Western world”, but fundamentally, said our Chinese writer, “love, sorrow and happiness are the same everywhere”.
Our countries are different, our customs and system of government are different – although as we heard from the President, they are to converge – but the hearts of our people are not different, nor their hopes for their lives and their families’.
It is because we all seek prosperity and seek happiness that our governments can find so much common ground.
Now, in the year 1901, the year of Australia’s federation, the Chinese reformer, Liang Qichao, wrote about his time here in this country in a poem called Thoughts on my Return Voyage.
Fluttering seagulls see us on our way, the coral-like harbour glistening in brilliant afternoon light.
Distant waves unfurl as if a mellow lake. Islands scattered like stars in early evening skies. Sea breezes, salt air refresh body and spirit. Boisterous waves open our hearts to heaven’s melody. Good fortune indeed to have made this trip. The tides may find rest but I am lifted high. I am lifted high.
Mr President, I hope that’s how you feel about this trip.
Certainly, that is what it has meant to us.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, Mr President.
It is long overdue for an Indian Prime Minister to address this Parliament – given that the leaders of the United States, China, Indonesia, Britain, Canada, Japan and New Zealand have already done so.
But I am personally delighted that this omission is at last corrected.
It is fitting that – in the home of our democracy – we should be addressed by the leader of the world’s largest democracy.
There is so much that we can learn from a prime minister who must try to reach some 830 million voters and whose mastery of electioneering has meant that in India’s recent election he was literally beamed into dozens of different rallies simultaneously all-round the country.
Prime Minister Modi is the first in decades with an absolute majority in the lower house, the Lok Sabha – because he imbued his fellow citizens with the sure hope that tomorrow can be better than today.
He gave credit for India’s success to those who really deserved it; he told voters that their country belonged to them, not to their rulers or to their officials and even here in Australia, the Modi campaign and victory inspired hope because Australians, too, believe in work, family and community; in doing things for love, not just for money; and in living our ideals.
Our two nations have much in common.
We share an ocean.
We share a language.
We share a heritage, as Westminster democracies enjoying freedom under the law.
We even share the same national day: the 26th of January.
Above all, we share a history.
Way back in 1795, the very first cargo to be shipped out of New South Wales was mahogany and cedar bound for India.
In the Gallipoli campaign that forged our nation, 5000 Indians fought by our side and Prime Minister Modi made a splendid presentation to me at the War Memorial this morning in their memory.
The Australian army and the Indian army were brothers in arms at the siege of Tobruk.
As part of  British Empire forces, our soldiers shared the tragedy of Singapore and the triumph at El Alamein.
Australians admired the way India won independence – not by rejecting the values learned from Britain, but by appealing to them; not by fighting the colonisers, but by working on their conscience.
Through all the troubles of partition and all the subsequent dashed hopes, India has magnificently maintained its democracy.
And although India’s GDP per person is still only about half of China’s, its growth is strong, its economic prospects are bright and its population is likely to overtake China’s in the next couple of decades.
This is why people now speak of the Indo-Pacific as the focus of the world’s economic dynamism.
With China, India is the emerging superpower of Asia – the emerging superpower that is already a democracy.
Gandhi taught that the most powerful force is not weapons but good example.
I remember as a student in India reading Gandhi’s autobiography where he quotes a Gujarati  poet: “for a bowl of water give a goodly meal; for a kindly greeting bow thou down with zeal; but the truly noble know all men as one and return with gladness good for evil done.”
Mother Teresa taught that good words are next-to-nothing without good deeds.
The religions of India taught inner peace in the face of adversity.
This land of the most ancient spirituality, of the exotic and of the familiar has always made an impression on me.
That’s why 30 years ago, I spent three months backpacking from Mumbai, to Rajasthan, to Delhi, to Kashmir, around much of Bihar and back to Mumbai.
Australia’s second Prime Minister, Alfred Deakin, had also travelled to India and he wrote way back in 1893 that: “India is truly a land of wonders and extremes …. a country of contrasts and contradictions, of splendour and poverty, profusion and barrenness, vicissitude and adventure….”
One hundred years ago Deakin wanted Indian students to study in Australia – writing that Australia and India “have much to teach each other.”
And that’s exactly what’s now happening.
For over a decade, up to 40,000 Indian students in Australia at any one time.
And from next year, under the New Colombo Plan, Australia will be returning the compliment by sending thousands of our own best and brightest to study at the universities of India.
This is a sign that we are finally grasping the opportunities that India presents.
It was Prime Minister Howard who once said that Australia and India had so much in common but little to do with each other!
That must change.

Australia welcomes India’s strength in the Indian Ocean.
Australia admires Prime Minister Modi’s invitation to “Come, make in India”; which echoes our own determination that Australia is “open for business”.
But despite that, regrettably, Australia only did $15 billion worth of business with India last year – and that hardly does justice to our two countries’ potential.
We want to be a dependable source of energy security, of resource security and of food security for India.
If all goes to plan, next year, an Indian company will begin Australia’s largest ever coal development which will light the lives of 100 million Indians for the next half century.
If all goes to plan – and no one, if I may say so, has ever made the Indian bureaucracy perform as Prime Minister Modi did in Gujurat – by the end of next year, we will have a free trade deal with what is potentially the world’s largest market.
And I want to make this declaration here in this Parliament: there are two can-do Prime Minister’s in this Chamber today and we will make it happen.
And if all goes to plan, Australia will export uranium to India – under suitable safeguards of course – because cleaner energy is one of the most important contributions that Australia can make to the wider world.
Geologists believe that somewhere between 130 and 300 million years ago, Australia and India actually shared the same land mass – we were so to speak joined at the geological hip.
We cannot change continental drift, but we can ensure that we are closer friends and partners in the future than we have been in the recent past.
I have never seen any leader as rapturously received in this country as Prime Minister Modi has been – and that’s not just by the half a million Australians of Indian descent and not just because the former chief minister of Gujurat has never been a stranger to us and at least this should mean that it never again will be 28 years till the next prime ministerial visit!
The cheering crowds sense that there is a natural affinity between Australia and India, a natural partnership for peace and prosperity, and they want us, they want both of us, they want all of us to make the most of it.
[ends]


I extend the warmest of welcomes to the Prime Minister of India, Mr Narendra Modi, or as I am discovering listening to the enthusiastic crowds that greet him everywhere he goes “Modiji”.
I don’t just say welcome to Prime Minister Modi, tonight I say welcome back because this is your third visit to Australia.
It may be the first visit by an Indian Prime Minister in 28 years but as Chief Minister of Gujarat you were an enthusiastic visitor to our country.
It is a momentous occasion, not just for the Australian Government but also for the Australian people as the crowds have turned out in their thousands for Modiji in Brisbane, in Sydney, in Canberra and here in Melbourne attest.
Now, I have to say, like many Australians I first visited India as a young man.
It is an ageless land – with an ancient spirituality that touches everyone.
Yet this ageless land has been transformed over the past 20 years.
And it has been renewed over the past six months.
It is a country renewed with the deepest of democratic traditions but now with an ethos that is not about perpetuation of power or past but about the advancement of all people.
One of the extraordinary things about modern India is that while it is indeed the most ancient of civilisations it is a remarkably young nation with almost 600 million people under the age of 24 and it was my great privilege to visit the University of Mumbai in September and you know it has 700,000 students in one university alone – and I thought Melbourne University was a big place.
Now, I have to say Australia has much to offer our Indian friends and India has much to offer us but again I want to thank India for the greatest gift it could give; the gift of so many of its people – some half a million Australians of Indian background.
The people-to-people relationship, I am pleased to say, is not just a one-way street. Today, Prime Minister Modi reminded us in the Parliament in his splendid and warm address to our nation’s highest assembly. He reminded us of John Lang the Australian journalist and lawyer who defended some of India’s early freedom activists in the courts of British India. As well as John Lang, tonight, if I may Prime Minister I wish to recall Doctor Sister Mary Glowrey who founded the Indian Catholic Hospitals Association.
She was born in Birregurra about 130 kilometres from here, she became a doctor in 1910, she left for India in 1920 where she lived out the rest of her life tending to the poorest of the poor.
Now, I am pleased to say Doctor Sister Mary has passed the first steps on the road to sainthood. So, if there ever is a second Australian saint, along with Mother Mary Mackillop, it is likely that this saint will be found in India.
Now, Prime Minister, we have spoken a lot today about business. We have spoken a lot about trade. Trade is not the end of friendship but it is often the beginning. Trade creates jobs, trade creates wealth and the more India trades the stronger India will be.
In January our Minister for Trade and Investment Andrew Robb will lead a mission of 300 Australian business people to India. Australia Business Week in India will be the largest business undertaking of its kind – the largest undertaking of its kind between Australia and India. The Minister will also attend the vibrant Gujarat Summit which Prime Minister Modi founded.
Now, I have to say, having spent time with Prime Minister Modi in India and now in Australia I can attest to the fact that this Prime Minister is a veritable force of nature.
When I said let’s do our free trade agreement in 12 months, he said, “no, quicker, quicker, quicker!”
I said let’s do it in six months, he said, “surely it is possible to do it in three.”
Well, if anyone can shake up the Indian bureaucracy it is Narendra Modi, but I have to say that it is this energy as well as this tranquillity which Prime Minister Modi radiates which is so central to the current resurgence of India.
As I have often said, India is the world’s emerging democratic superpower and I hope that in the months and years and decades to come Australia can help India to realise its destiny.
[ends]


What a thrill to be here at this iconic Australian landmark, this sacred site in the city of Melbourne.
That’s what it is: a sacred site, here, in the city of Melbourne.
I acknowledge the Leader of the Victorian Opposition the Labor Party’s Dan Andrews.
I acknowledge my good friend Premier Denis Napthine – a great friend of the Indian community.
Most of all I acknowledge so many people here to support our country, to support our relationship with magnificent India.
I believe last Sunday, there was a train full of people that left Melbourne for Sydney.  It was dubbed “the Modi Express”.
I have a feeling “the Modi Express” has just come back to Melbourne!
It’s good that we are here at the Melbourne Cricket Ground because it is said that India and Australia share a great passion – we both love beating England at cricket.
It is a nice marker in our history that the first ever Test series that India played after independence was against Australia.
It was the first Test series that India played after independence against Australia and the third Test of that series was played here at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.
It was in that game that Sir Donald Bradman, who is as much a hero in India as in Australia, scored a century in both innings – very good for Donald.
In the fourth Test, The Don had to share the limelight with Vijay Hazare who became the first Indian cricketer ever to score a century in both innings of a Test match.
So, whatever the good Don could do, India – independent India – was able to trump.
Now, cricket is a wonderful game. It’s great to be here at the Cricket Ground but the relationship between Australia and India is about so much more than cricket.
We share a common heritage, we share a history, but our greatest bond – the greatest bond between our two countries – is the half million Australians of Indian background who have contributed so much to building modern Australia.
I want to say to all of you, your hard work, your commitment to family and community, your willingness to ‘have a go’ has made this great country even greater.
In any one year, there are about 40,000 Indian students studying here in Australia – many of them here in Melbourne.
Our duty – and I say this particularly here in Melbourne, Victoria – our duty is to take care of them as our own and to let all of them become ambassadors for India here and for Australia when they go home.
And with the New Colombo Plan, which is now swinging into action, thousands of Australian students will study in India – and they can be ambassadors for both of our countries as well.
I have to say I feel that I have got to know Prime Minister Modi very well here in Australia over the last few days but before that in India where I was his first overseas visitor after he became Prime Minister.
I regard Prime Minister Modi as more than a kindred spirit – as almost a brother.
He wants more trade, more jobs and more investment in infrastructure.
His commitment is to ‘red carpet, not red tape’ because he recognises that the foundation of wealth starts with the private sector.
And we both believe that the keys to our countries’ success is the power of our people.
Now, I want to say a very personal message to my fellow Australians of Indian background in closing these remarks: you have come to a magnificent country.
I say to all of my fellow Australians of Indian background: you have come to a magnificent country but you have come from a country that is led by a magnificent man and I know you will make him extremely welcome tonight.
[ends]


Mr President, it's a delight to welcome you to Parliament House. This is the first ever visit of a serving French President to Australia.
It's a real honour to be the Australian Prime Minister who receives the first ever French President here in Australia.
Our ties are long-standing and deep, they're warm and yes, they began in the fires of war, but they are new and fresh and modern as well.
It's a strong trade relationship; it's a strong security relationship.
We are in fact neighbours in the Pacific through New Caledonia and I believe that this visit is going to be an important part of renewing, extending and expanding the long-standing bonds between Australia and France.
[ends]


Mr President, Opposition Leader Bill Shorten, parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
It is, for me, a deep honour to be the first Australian Prime Minister to welcome to this country a President of France.
A few moments ago the President and I were at the Australian War Memorial; a fitting place to be with the French President given that our friendship was first forged one hundred years ago in the crucible of war.
The friendship between Australia and France has stood the test of time and I should observe Mr President that the Great War touched your own family – it touched, of course, all the families of France with both your grandfathers serving their country in uniform.
Your grandfather, Gustav, might have imagined that his regimental commander, Charles de Gaulle, would one day be President of the Fifth Republic, but I suspect he would not have imagined that one day his own grandson would be the President of the Fifth Republic.
I mention this because Australia does feel a deep connection to France.
We have defended freedom in France not once, but twice, as I'm sure the Australians here all know. We lost 46,000 on the Western Front and some of them still lie in the cemetery of St Sever in your own hometown, Mr President, of Rouen.
I hope one of the consequences of the centenary of the Great War now coming up is that we Australians will be as familiar with the story of the Western Front in the years to come as we have long been with that of Gallipoli. We will be as familiar, in part, because of the John Monash commemorative centre that our two countries are resolved to build at the village of Villers-Bretonneux which Australia did so much to defend in 1918.
This is France’s story and it is Australia’s story too.
Of course, in the Rouen Municipal Library, Mr President, there is a document that might have changed both our stories – the plan and the itinerary co-drafted by King Louis XIV of Lapérouse voyage, a journey which would eventually bring the French explorer to Botany Bay just a few days after Governor Arthur Phillip.
The suburb of La Perouse in Sydney reminds us that but for this near miss of history, Australia might have been a French colony rather than a British one.
Still, France has been an important presence in our culture. From the days of wool buyers setting up businesses in Sydney to the impact of French viticulturalists on our wine industry, there has been a French dimension to the Australian story.
Here today, in the National Gallery of Australia, we are surrounded by the works of the greatest French artists – Rodan, Monet and so many others – because to Australians, France is the epitome of culture, of beauty, of elegance.
Traditionally, the numbers of French people migrating to this country have been small, but recently there has been an increase of French travellers to our shores, many of them young people taking advantage of our working holiday arrangements and this has added a new vitality to our relationship.
During your stay, Mr President, you have spoken with French students, researchers and business people who have told you of the potential for great links between our countries.
One of the French people here in Australia who you will meet later today is Mr Jacques Adler, who joined the Resistance at 15, became the youngest sergeant in the French army, then came to this country and his daughter Louise manages and runs our most distinguished academic publisher, The Melbourne University Press.
I’m pleased that today the President and I have been able to discuss building on our strong $6 billion a year trading relationship, including through an Australia-EU free trade agreement. Because we do need to boost the $78 billion two-way trade between Australia and what is still the world’s largest economic bloc.
But our friendship, Mr President, is based on values as well as on interests. We are partners in the Pacific; indeed we are neighbours with New Caledonia. Australia deeply respects France for its work in Africa, particularly against the threat of instability and extremism. And I was proud to work with you and with France in the UN Security Council Chamber as we voted recently to take action on the threat of foreign fighters. Today, our Air Forces are working together against the ISIL death cult in the skies over Iraq.
Thank you, Sir, for being the first French President to visit Australia. Ours is a true friendship and I look forward to building on it. It is founded on the memories on the past but it flourishes on our hopes for the future.
Merci beaucoup.
[ends]


Every week this Government is focusing on how to build a stronger and more prosperous economy.
Last weekend, we made great progress in strengthening the foundations of future growth and prosperity.
With the visit of President Xi, Australia concluded negotiations for a free trade agreement with China.
This agreement with China means more growth, more investment and more jobs.
It’s a better deal for our farmers – particularly for producers of dairy, beef, wine, seafood, grain and horticulture.
Industries such as education, telecommunications, tourism, construction and health will all benefit from being able to do business in China far more easily.
And households will benefit from lower prices on whitegoods, on clothes and on cars.
This agreement builds on the free trade agreements signed earlier this year with Korea and Japan.  These agreements will set Australia up for the long term.
We’ve also accelerated free trade discussions with India – one of the largest markets in the world.
This Government is making our economy stronger with freer trade and better infrastructure.
Last weekend, we also announced the establishment of a global infrastructure hub in Sydney that will help to generate jobs and investment.
And across Australia we are investing $50 billion in the largest infrastructure programme in our history.
In Sydney, WestConnex will create almost 10,000 jobs during construction and, when complete, by-pass 52 sets of traffic lights.
In Melbourne, Stage 1 of the East West Link is expected to allow 100,000 vehicles each day to bypass 23 sets of traffic lights.
Our progress in trade and infrastructure is all part of the Government’s Economic Action Strategy to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
23 November 2014
http://youtu.be/BJQVNQrhtxQ


Welcome to the launch of the Kmart Christmas Wishing Tree Appeal which is done every year now for the last 27 years in conjunction with the Salvation Army.
What happens is that right around Australia people are encouraged to buy a Christmas present, to bring it to the Kmart Christmas Wishing Tree, to leave it under the tree and then the Salvation Army distributes the gifts to needy families right around our country.
It has been going for 27 years. Over this quarter century or more, more than 6 million gifts have been distributed. Last year about a half a million gifts were collected and distributed and the Salvos are hoping that, again, this year some half a million or more gifts will be collected and distributed.
I think this is a very good cause and I think it is so in keeping with that Australian spirit of generosity, of helping people and of looking after people at a special time.
Christmas is a special time for all of us; it is a family time, it is a time for generosity but we all know that some families are doing it tough. We all know that some families can’t be as generous to their own children as they would like and thanks to the Kmart Christmas Wishing Tree Appeal and thanks to the Salvation Army Australian families doing it tough can have a little bit of joy and life and love injected into their Christmas.
So, it is great to be here with Bronwyn Bishop, the Speaker of the Parliament, with Stephen Parry, the President of the Senate, it is great to be here with Guy Russo, with Commissioner James Condon and of course with Bill Shorten, the leader of the Labor Party and Christine Milne the leader of the Greens.
This is one of those many things on which the whole Parliament can unite. We all want every Australian family to have the best possible Christmas and that is what this Kmart Christmas Wishing Tree Appeal is all about. It is about giving every Australian family the best possible Christmas.
[ends]


It’s good to be here with our Australian and New Zealand police commissioners coming together for just the second time in history to speak out on an important subject.
It’s good to be with so many of my parliamentary colleagues, led by the Leader of the Opposition, and it’s good to be standing shoulder-to-shoulder with our Governor-General to speak out with one united voice that women and children must be safe – women and children must be safe.
I speak as the father of three daughters, as the brother of three sisters, and I say that nothing is more horrifying than the knowledge that there are women and children right around our country today who are living in fear because of some male who is in their household and instead of being the love of their life, the apple of their eye, or the hero of their being, that person has become their tormentor.
Frankly, speaking as a male, speaking as a leader, our job is to be the protector, not the oppressor, of the people who depend upon us. So, I’m really pleased to be here to add my voice to those of all of my colleagues this morning.
Nothing could be more debilitating than to live in fear of someone you love and yet we know that it happens and we know that it must stop.
The presence of the police commissioners is, I suppose, the move visible sign that violence against women and children is not just a social scourge, it is an absolute crime – a very serious crime – and perpetrators must be prosecuted and they must be punished. They must be punished with the full severity of the law.
Finally, I just want to say to any woman in our country who is feeling vulnerable, who is feeling frightened: please do not suffer in silence, please make contact with the police in the first instance. You should not suffer in silence and know from today’s event that you are never alone. All of us are there to help anyone who is being persecuted, anyone who is being oppressed, but particularly women and children who are being persecuted, who are being oppressed, who are being victimised in their own homes. It must never happen and our job is to make sure that it stops.
[ends]


It is great to see so many of my colleagues here to pay tribute to the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry and to salute the work that the Chamber of Commerce and Industry does.
Can I say at the outset to your President, Peter Hood – Peter, thank you so much for your splendid presidential address.
You made a very important comment I thought - that by any fair measure it’s been a successful year for the Government.
In politics there are no fair measures, but I am not complaining. It is an absolute privilege to be in a position to help guide the destiny of our nation and it’s also an absolute pleasure to be here amongst so many fine Australians tonight.
I speak to many people who want government to be bigger.
It’s good to speak tonight with people who want government to be better.
There are always people telling government to spend more money.
That’s why it’s so good to be with people who understand that every dollar government spends comes from taxpayers – and that’s why not a single one should ever be wasted.
This Chamber, over the course of many, many years and to successive governments, has put the case for lower taxes, greater choice and less red tape.
You understand that a nation’s wealth is produced by businesses and by people, not by government.
You understand that the foundation of a strong society is a strong economy, driven by profitable and competitive private businesses.
I applaud you for your courage and for your consistency.
You said that the carbon tax was bad for jobs and for families – and you were right.
You said that the mining tax would tarnish and damage our most profitable industry – and you were right.
You said that removing the Australian Building and Construction Commission would harm the productivity and competitiveness of the building industry – and again, you were right.
You don’t try to straddle both sides of the fence.
And like you, this Government does understand that profitable businesses are the foundation of a strong economy and a cohesive society.
We know – this Government knows – that you do speak for Australian business.
You speak on behalf of 300,000 businesses which employ over four million of our fellow Australians.
Many of your members have mortgaged their homes to employ their staff and we salute you for that.
Your members are big businesses and small business, united in the belief that free enterprise is the engine of a strong economy.
And our goal as a Government is the same as yours: to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
This year, the Government has been putting in place the foundations for a stronger economy in which all Australians can get ahead.
There’s been the Budget – government living within its means.
The Competitiveness Agenda – playing to our strengths as a nation.
The Free Trade Agreements with Japan, Korea and China – helping Australian exporters and consumers.
And the repeal of the Carbon Tax – making the average household $550 a year better off.
There’s been trade missions to eight nations and over 100,000 new jobs.
This is government putting in place the foundations of future growth and prosperity.
Our approach – this Government’s approach – starts with changing the way we govern.
We’ve had the first ever days to repeal legislation – not just pass it.
This year, we’ve scrapped over 11,000 unnecessary laws and regulations.
We’ve taken over 50,000 pages from the statute book and put them into the history book.
And since the election, we’ve cut over $2 billion in the compliance costs faced by business every year.
Nearly half a million small businesses are now exempt from pay-as-you-go tax which saves you time and money.
But this is just the start.
Next year, we aim to collect far less “nice to have” information and to get government forms down to manageable size.
The Government is prepared to trust people more because this will make it easier for people to run their lives and for managers to run their businesses.
In our DNA, we know that people are mostly trying to do the right thing rather than the wrong thing.
That’s why our instinct is always for smaller government and bigger citizens.
Now, over the past few weeks, as you all know, there’s been much international coming and going.
This is not a distraction from the main game of fixing our economy – it’s actually a vital part of it.
The G20 brought together in Brisbane leaders responsible for 85 per cent of the world’s GDP and 75 per cent of world’s trade.
And we did this understanding that you can’t have prosperity without stability and stability requires international as well as national security.
Australia shifted the focus of the G20 away from reacting to world events and towards growing the economy, strengthening jobs and encouraging growth right around the world.
We have now delivered the trifecta of trade agreements: Japan, Korea and China.
This means we now have Free Trade Agreements with ten countries that cover 73 per cent of our total exports.
And last week, in successive days, we had the leaders of the two most populous nations on earth address our Parliament.
Under the China Free Trade Agreement, tariffs will be abolished for Australia’s $13 billion dairy industry.
There will be no tariffs on Australia’s resources, energy and most manufacturing exports to China within four years.
Beef, lamb, wine, barley, horticulture and seafood will all enter China with zero tariffs.
This Free Trade Agreement gives Australian service companies room to grow into China – the world’s biggest market potentially with new access for law and financial services firms, universities and colleges, builders and aged care providers.
The Government will work closely with the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry to ensure that Australian companies are equipped and ready to take advantage of the opportunities before us.
Because increasingly, goods are no longer manufactured in any particular country, they’re ‘made in the world’.
Nutella, for instance, the chocolate spread that your kids and grandchildren probably enjoy. It’s made in Lithgow, New South Wales – but with hazelnuts from Turkey, sugar from Brazil, vanilla flavour from France, palm oil from Malaysia and cocoa from Nigeria.
That’s why our Free Trade Agreements need to make it easier for imports as well as exports if they are to increase trade and wealth.
So, yes, we have finally concluded the Free Trade Agreements that we set ourselves to do 12 months ago.
But we all know that Free Trade Agreements mean little if you, the businesses of our country are not competitive.
Our Competitiveness Agenda is about lower costs, higher skills and more readiness to ‘have a go’.
It’s about tackling the impediments which are holding our businesses back – like lifting the numbers of maths and science graduates and increasing the completion rates of apprentices.
Even 23 years of economic growth means little if you can’t make a deal because your costs are too high.
It means little if government red tape is blocking the approval of new projects.
But since the election, this Government has given environmental approval to new projects worth over one trillion dollars.
These were projects formally caught in the mire of a government that put Green preferences ahead of Australian jobs.
So, this Government is absolutely determined to make it easier for Australian businesses to grow and succeed – because when you grow and succeed there are more jobs, higher living standards, greater national wealth – and in fact better environmental protections too.
So an essential part of our Economic Action Strategy – and thank you Peter Hood for acknowledging this – is getting the Budget back under control.
We have seen what happens when countries devote more and more of their finances to paying interest.
It means less ability to pay for services and less capacity for tax relief.
And the key – the absolute foundation – of getting taxes down is getting spending under control.
Now, I have to say to you that in politics the ultimate cop out is to propose nothing and oppose everything.
Sooner or later this kind of tactic will be seen for what it is: not clever politics but economic vandalism.
Putting short term political interest ahead of long term national interest, talking down our country to score political points.
Now, everyone understands the importance of fiscal discipline – why else would Wayne Swan have begun his 2012 budget speech with: “The four years of surpluses that I announce tonight”.
But the former government monumentally failed to fix the fiscal problems when the terms of trade were at record highs.
Our challenge – this Government’s challenge – is to fix it in the face of declining export prices and political sabotage – but we’re up for it.
We didn’t create the problem, but we’re taking responsibility to fix it.
This Government is purposefully and methodically addressing the long term issues that our country and our economy face.
We’ve committed $50 billion to infrastructure – it’s the largest infrastructure investment in our history – to build the roads of the 21st century.
We’ve committed to reform because today’s reform is tomorrow’s prosperity and because we owe it to our children to leave them a better life than our parents left us.
No reasonable person thinks that our current tax system is the best that we can do.
No reasonable person thinks that the current dog’s breakfast of divided responsibilities is the most efficient way to run our country.
And this is a Government that is determined, to make real progress on tax reform and on fixing the Federation.
But it will only happen if the people who believe in it are prepared to fight for it.
Again I congratulate the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry. You have never been just a ‘fan in the stands’ – you have always been willing to enter the field and fight for reform.
And I look forward to working with you in the future, as we have in the past.
Real reform won’t be easy. It never is.
Scrapping the mining tax – and the spending it was supposed to fund – wasn’t easy.
Scrapping the carbon tax wasn’t easy.
Breakthroughs in trade with Japan, Korea and China weren’t easy.
If they were, it would have happened sometime over the last six years.
And stopping the boats was supposed to be impossible.
But they’ve all happened because this Government didn’t go for the soft option.
Now I have to say that between 1983 and 2007, Australia was well governed by both political parties and all of us are still benefiting from that quarter century of reform.
This Government’s historical mission is to prove that the political chaos and economic backsliding of the years from 2007 to 2013 are not the new normal.  Our mission is to prove that the age of reform was merely interrupted – not ended.
That’s why we’ve put our country back on the path for reform. And that’s why Peter Hood is right – 2014 has been a significant year for Australia. 
So let me wrap up by thanking you for being here in Canberra tonight.
You are here in Canberra because what happens here matters.
The decisions that parliaments and governments take – or fail to take – they impact on your businesses and ultimately on the lives of all Australians.
My hope is that you won’t just be interested but you’ll be engaged in 2015.
You matter and your voice must be heard.
Reform or stagnation.
Budget repair or endless deficits.
More tax or less.
A government that’s open to businesses or one that’s not.
On these big issues, your choices and your statements count.
Our country needs a strong business voice as much as it needs good government.
That’s what we need – and that’s what we’ll have, I’m sure, in 2015.
That’s why I’m full of confidence and hope for the future.
[ends]


Your Excellencies, parliamentary colleagues, men and women of our armed forces, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a proud day for our Navy and a proud day for our country and I am so thrilled to be on this mighty ship.
We are a nation girt by sea. So it is the Royal Australian Navy that guarantees the security of this continent, the free passage of our trade and the safety of our citizens.
While Australia always seeks to make friends rather than foes we can never know what is over the horizon.
The world remains a difficult and dangerous place. Our armed forces deserve the best possible equipment; our friends, our neighbours should know they have the strongest possible ally.
So, HMAS Canberra is our largest ever warship. It is one of the most capable and sophisticated amphibious assault ships in the world. She can also be deployed for humanitarian assistance if disaster strikes our region.
I pay tribute to my predecessor, The Honourable John Howard for initiating this project.
It is fitting that we today acknowledge the presence amongst us of Lieutenant Commander Henry Hall, a veteran of the first HMAS Canberra.
That first Canberra was the only foreign Naval vessel to give its name to a ship of the United States Navy – a sure sign that our Navy protects not only our own country but our friends and our allies too.
Canberra is the home of our democracy. The 84 who died aboard the gallant HMAS Canberra in the 1942 battle of Savo Island remind us that we owe our freedom to the courage of those who serve under our flag.
I know the crew of this Canberra will serve with equal professionalism and patriotism.
May this new Canberra serve for Queen and Country with duty and honour.
Godspeed to her and best wishes to her crew.
Long may she serve the people of this island continent.
[ends]


It’s an honour to give this lecture in memory of Neville Bonner, the first Aboriginal Member of the Australian Parliament, a member of the Foundation Council of Australians for Constitutional Monarchy, and a delegate to the 1998 Constitutional Convention to consider whether Australia should become a republic.  
There were many fine speeches at that convention but Neville Bonner’s was the one that gripped people’s soul. This is what he said:
“We have come to accept your laws. We have come to accept your Constitution. We have come to accept the present system. We believed you when you said that a democracy must have checks and balances. We believed you when you said that not all positions in society should be put out for election. We believed you when you said that judges should be appointed, not elected. We believed you when you said that the Westminster system ensures that the government is accountable to the people. We believed you when you taught us that integral to the Westminster system is a head of state who is above politics. We believed you when you said that, as with the judiciary, Government House must also be a political-free zone.”
This magnificent old man, went on to say:
“How dare you! You told my people that your system was best. We have come to accept that. We have come to believe that. The dispossessed, despised adapted to your system. Now you say that you were wrong and that we were wrong to believe you. Suddenly you are saying that what brought the country together, made it independent, ensured its defence, saw it through peace and war, and saw it through depression and prosperity, must all go.”
It was by far the most powerful speech of that intense period in our nation’s life.
As he sat down the supporters of the ‘no’ case all rose in their seats – and the republicans remained frozen in theirs. 
And then the most unlikely figure rose in his seat – it’s Neville Wran, standing to honour the dignity, conviction and wisdom of a great man.
And the rest then rose as one.
It was the only standing ovation at that convention.
Despite the many indignities that might have soured his outlook, Neville Bonner had a great love for our country, its institutions and its people.
He grasped that modern Australia has an indigenous heritage, a British foundation and a multicultural character. 
His final speech brings to mind another image from Old Parliament House.
On the day of its opening back in 1927 along with the Duke of York and numerous dignitaries there was just one indigenous man present.
He was not an official guest. 
He had no place of honour.
Yet his presence was as much a symbol of unity as that of our future King.
Although unacknowledged, uncounted in any census and not dressed in the finery of others, Jimmy Clements – for that was his name – carried with him an Australian flag.
It was his demonstration that he loved our country as much as anyone – despite not sharing in all its benefits.
As a constitutional conservative, like Neville Bonner, my instinct is to keep the constitution; to conserve the constitution exactly as is.
“Don’t fix what isn’t broken” was the rally cry of the ‘no’ campaign at the Constitutional Convention and at the subsequent referendum.
Like John Howard, my distinguished predecessor as leader of the Liberal Party and of the Liberal National Coalition, I don’t normally seek to change the constitution.
I don’t seek to remove the Crown.
I don’t seek to change the separation of powers.
I don’t seek to change our representative system of government.
These days, I don’t even seek to change the states’ constitutional role because I appreciate that we should not lightly change that which has stood the test of time.
I understand that change is often far more trouble than it is worth.
I do, however, seek constitutional recognition of Aboriginal people in a form that would complete our constitution rather than change it.
Today, I invite the friends of our constitution to suspend scepticism.
As a constitutional conservative, I would never seek change unless I was convinced that it would be change for the better.
That, after all, is what the founders of our constitution envisaged when they provided a mechanism for changing it.
Changing the constitution was meant to be hard: it requires an act of Parliament, a vote of the people and a majority of four of six states.
It is rightly much harder than changing a law but it is not meant to be impossible because our constitution’s founders never imagined that the constitution should never change.
Sometimes, after all, change is necessary for survival and sometimes change is desirable for improvement.
The opening of our constitution states that the Australian people “humbly relying on the blessings of Almighty God have agreed to unite in one indissoluble federal Commonwealth under the Crown”.
It is an acknowledgement of our British and our Christian heritage but it does not in any way hindered the development of a free, multicultural nation which gives people a fair go and encourages them to a have a go.
It is precisely because we have done so well under the constitution we have that we should be so cautious about changing it.
Our whole history, though, is one of change for the better – change that builds on what we have rather than throw it away to start again.
The challenge is to find a way to acknowledge Aboriginal people in the Constitution without otherwise changing it.
That’s the task now engaging the Government and our Parliament.
I do not underestimate its difficulty but I don’t underestimate its importance either if we are to achieve all we can as a nation.
You are rightly cautious about any change to our constitution.
So was Neville Bonner.
And so is anyone who appreciates the scale of the Australian achievement over the past century.
Still, it would be an odd constitutional conservative who cherished every single clause in our constitution except the clause allowing it to be changed.
The establishment of this lecture, in his honour, was Australians for Constitutional Monarchy’s tribute to Neville Bonner.
Today, I am asking you to consider a change that, if done well, I am sure he would have asked you to support.
If done well, acknowledging indigenous Australians in the constitution would strengthen our country, not weaken it.
Constitutional recognition can’t substitute for real action to improve the lives of Indigenous Australians – but it can complement it.
Every day, this Government is working with Aboriginal people: to get children to school, adults to work and to make communities safe – as we should, because by far the most troubling feature of our national story is the dispossession and marginalisation of Aboriginal people.
It’s not that our constitutional founders made a mistake – they simply failed to give Aboriginal people more than a passing thought.
So, in addressing this subject, our job is not to correct their work but to complete it.
Like John Howard, I have come to support the recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders in the constitution because it already recognises our British heritage and, if we are to acknowledge part of our history, we should acknowledge all of it.
My hope is that any future referendum to recognise Aboriginal people will echo the successful 1967 changes, not the unsuccessful 1999 ones, which, as you will remember, were to insert a recognition preamble as well as to become a republic.
1967 was a small change to our constitution but a big change for our country.
It was Australians’ first acknowledgement that Aboriginal people mattered.
It was the first sign that they should not be treated as second class citizens in their own country.
Like 1967 – but unlike 1999 – any future referendum campaign should be an act of affirmation rather than a political argument.
If there is to be a victory, it has to be one for all of us – as 1967 was.
Consideration of a proposal should be a conversation as much as a debate: careful, considered and civilised – because if it is to build national unity it can’t be a ‘winner takes all’ contest.
Both sides of politics, and all Members of Parliament, are now working together on a good way forward and the best possible wording to be put to the Australian people.
The bipartisan committee chaired by the House of Representatives’ first Indigenous MP, Ken Wyatt, will soon make final recommendations about the precise changes that could be made.
We should be prepared to consider and refine any proposal for some time because it is so much better to get this right than to rush it.
The worst of all outcomes would be dividing our country in an effort to unite it.
A successful referendum would be another demonstration that Australia can in every way be a beacon of hope and an exemplar of unity and decency.
As the constitution’s fiercest defenders, our temptation is to dismiss all change as constitutional vandalism – but today I invite you to consider this change more as renewal and refurbishment; as a grace note in this most serviceable of foundation documents.
Indigenous culture, after all, is part of our common heritage as Australians; as much as our language, our Parliament, our system of law and our Crown.
If all Australians are to walk forward together, the least we can do is acknowledge the first of us in our foundation document.


Madam Speaker, death is the certain end to every life but it never loses its power to shock and dismay – as we’ve all found since the passing of Phillip Hughes last week.
He was a great cricketer.
He was grand company.
He was the best of sons and the best of brothers.
His death has so affected people, because it happened in the midst of life at its most exuberant.
He was 63 not out, on his way to a century, and a return to the test team.
People are not supposed to die playing our national game.
Sport is supposed to engender pride, not grief.
Phillip Hughes’ passing is a reminder that life is both precious and fragile.
So, Madam Speaker, we mourn with his family – Greg, Virginia, Jason and Megan.
We grieve with his teammates, particularly Michael Clarke, who has shown such leadership over the past few days.
We feel for Sean Abbott, whose life can never be quite the same again.
Above all, we honour a young man who has left us too soon, but who filled every moment of his 26 years with sixty seconds’ worth of distance run.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, today is most likely the last sitting day and it’s appropriate that we should reflect on the year that’s been and offer some thoughts as to the year that’s to come.
Madam Speaker, while every year is remarkable in its own way, for many 2014 will be more memorable than most.
Now much has happened over the past year. Expected events like G20; unexpected events like the MH370 and MH17 tragedies and also the emergence of the ISIL death cult in the Middle East and elsewhere.
Madam Speaker, as the Parliament winds down for the year, it's right and proper that we all should acknowledge the families of those lost in the MH370 and MH17 tragedies.
Our thoughts are with them at this sad Christmas.
The search for MH370 continues in the Indian Ocean. It should be completed by the middle of next year. It's one of the most difficult, if not the most difficult search in human history over a vast area of the sea floor.
Nevertheless, it is being conducted with the best technology that we can muster and let's hope that we are in a position sometime before the middle of next year to resolve what is currently the most baffling and perplexing mystery of our time.
Similarly, Madam Speaker, the quest for justice for the families of the MH17 victims goes on. It is important that the perpetrators of this unspeakable atrocity be brought to justice.
I should also acknowledge the 500 plus Australian personnel who were deployed to Europe as part of Operation Bring Them Home.
They were reflecting Australia at its best.
On the same note, Madam Speaker, I should particularly thank Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston who not only coordinated our efforts in Ukraine but has been coordinating recovery efforts in the Indian Ocean in respect of MH370.
Madam Speaker, this year a new horror burst upon the world – the ISIL death cult, which swept out of Eastern Syria into Northern Iraq. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of people were uprooted and disrupted by the dreadful advance of this barbaric force.
We have all seen on our TV screens the beheadings, the crucifixions, the mass executions, the sexual slavery. This is an utterly barbaric outbreak.
The ISIL death cult, which I refuse to call Islamic State because it is neither, has declared war upon the world and Australia, to its credit, has responded.
Our thoughts, our prayers, our best wishes are with the Australian military personnel in the Middle East right now; both our air contingent, which is engaging in effective strikes against the death cult and also our Special Forces contingent working with the Iraqi security forces.
Madam Speaker, there has been much contention in this Parliament, as you'd expect.
It's right that the policies of the Government be exposed to scrutiny in this Parliament. It's right that the Government and the Opposition fiercely debate the issues in contention.
Notwithstanding all the contention, all the controversy, all the political static, I think this has been a year of delivery from this Government for our country.
The carbon tax is gone, the mining tax is gone, a massive infrastructure spend is under way and three Free Trade Agreements a decade in the making have finally been negotiated and the benefits of these agreements should shortly be flowing for our exporters and for our consumers.
As the year began, our country faced two intractable problems: the boats and the Budget.
I think we can say that the illegal boat problem has largely been addressed. I don't say that it's finally solved. No problem of this magnitude is ever finally solved.
Nevertheless, thanks to the policies of the Government, the professionalism of our armed forces, police, Customs personnel and others, we have had almost no boats over the last 12 months. Long may that continue.
Another intractable problem – the Budget – is being addressed. I can't say that this problem has been fully addressed. Far from it. Nevertheless, a good start has been made and whatever criticisms people might make of this Government, I don't think anyone could question our clarity of purpose and our strength of character when it comes to tackling this particular issue and it must be tackled – it must be tackled.
This country cannot go on living way beyond its means and this Government is determined to ensure that the task that has been begun this year is successfully prosecuted next year.
Then, of course, Madam Speaker, on a high note, there was the G20. This was obviously a great moment for the city of Brisbane. To host the most extraordinary gathering of leaders our country has ever seen.
It was a great moment for the city of Brisbane. I thank the people of Brisbane for putting up with the inconvenience over that weekend. I congratulate the officials and the police of Queensland for the way the G20 was carried off.
Just for a moment, Madam Speaker, we here in Australia had a chance to see ourselves the way the world sees us, as a country which is as free, as fair, as prosperous as any on earth. Indeed, as a country which is the envy of people all around this globe of ours.
It was a fragrant moment for our country, a fragrant moment for all of us.
Madam Speaker, it would be remiss of me to see out the year without thanking you for the work that you do.
You have a difficult job. I think you have performed it with grace and humour. I refrain from talking as to who or what might make your life harder than it would otherwise be but you do your work well.
Madam Speaker, I thank the clerks for the work they do. The clerks are the permanent guardians of the traditions of this House. I thank the attendants for keeping this place running smoothly.
The Hansard staff for recording our words, hopefully of wisdom, for posterity.
The guides who make our fellow citizens welcome and better informed about the workings of the place.
The COMCAR drivers who get us around here safely and efficiently.
And of course, the cleaners who ensure that every morning our offices are bright, sparkling and welcoming. I particularly thank Anna, Maria and Lucia who look after me as they have looked after previous Prime Ministers.
This has been a year when our threat level has risen from medium to high. The impact of that has been felt around this building. I thank everyone who keeps us safe. The Australian Federal Police in particular, our security service, everyone who enables us to do our job as well as we can.
I thank the Parliamentary library for the work they do to make us better informed and sometimes even wiser than we might otherwise be.
I do extend compliments of the season to the Leader of the Opposition and to his colleagues on the Opposition benches.
Yes, there has been plenty of contention across the table as you'd expect, Madam Speaker.
The two fundamental tasks of government: national security and economic security. On at least one of those tasks, we have received a great deal of cooperation from the Opposition, as, I trust, were the positions reversed, a different government would receive from us.
John Howard often used to say the things that unite us are bigger and more important than anything that divides us and certainly that has been abundantly demonstrated this year on national security.
I thank the Australian Public Service for their work over the last 12 months. I particularly acknowledge the work of my own department.
I should in this place pay tribute to the just retired head of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Dr Ian Watt. Dr Watt is perhaps the finest public servant of his generation.
He entered the public service 40 years ago, had a brief break in the academe before returning to spend 30 distinguished years in the Australian Public Service. Thirteen of those as secretary of four departments – communications, finance, he was the longest serving secretary of the finance department, defence and most recently Prime Minister and Cabinet.
He was the quintessential professional public servant – careful, cautious, considered but he always got things done and that’s hallmark of the Australian Public Service. They always get things done.
He leaves big shoes but I'm sure that they will be amply filled by his successor Michael Thawley, a very distinguished servant of our country who brings to the Australian Public Service the benefit of a decade in senior levels of business.
It's good to have this crosspollination between the public sector and the private sector and that's exactly what we will get from Michael Thawley.
Madam Speaker, I thank all my colleagues.
The Deputy Prime Minister who sadly is still recuperating from illness but has been a fabulous colleague and friend over the past 12 months.
The Foreign Minister and Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party who has had a stellar year.
My senior colleagues in the Senate, Senators Abetz and Brandis, who have all done well.
The Leader of the House, the Member for Sturt – who is obviously detained on pressing business – has done the kind of splendid work you'd expect of him and I acknowledge his efforts.
I thank my staff led by Peta Credlin, the fiercest political warrior I've ever worked with, for everything they've done. All of us ride on the shoulders of our staff.
I thank my family.
We should all thank our families because none of us could do any of this without the forbearance and support of those who love us.
Madam Speaker, finally, though this is the season of goodwill, it shouldn't blind us to the fact that the coming of Christmas doesn't protect people from the vicissitudes of life. If anything, life’s tragedies are more pronounced at this time of year.
This Christmas marks 10 years since the Boxing Day tsunami. It marks 40 years since Cyclone Tracy in Darwin and, of course, it is 100 years since the start of World War One.
On this centenary, I'm reminded of the work of Charles Bean, the official historian of the Great War. He was witness to the most bloody and brutal conflict in human history.
Yet the worst of times can sometimes bring out the best in people. We're all aware of the famous story of the British and the German soldiers fraternising in no man's land on Christmas Day 1914 playing soccer and singing Christmas carols together.
On Christmas Eve 1916, Charles Bean wrote these words which unite believer and unbeliever, Christian and non-Christian. He wrote, "I'm not a religious man but this day represents the birth of a very precious ideal into the world. The observance of it is a sign of our attachment to the highest ideals yet imported on earth".
So, Madam Speaker, this is a significant time, it's a significant celebration, may it be this year, as all years, a time to reflect, a time to be with family and loved ones and a time to rededicate ourselves to our highest ideals.
[ends]


It is terrific to be here. It’s great to be amongst so many people who are so important in the cultural life of our country.
I do really appreciate your presence. More than that, I really appreciate everything you do for the cultural life of our country to help shape and promote our identity.
Ladies and gentleman, in February 2012, I received what I thought was an innocuous tweet asking whether I was reading anything at that moment that I’d recommend to others.
So, I replied: “I've just read Nikki Gemmell's With My Body; a captivating successor to The Bride Stripped Bare!”
Now it’s not often that the Twitterverse comes to a standstill – but for a moment there was, it seems, a pause: perhaps an inaudible but palpable gasp of surprise.
Not least from Nikki Gemmell who wrote and “here was I thinking that the spring in his step was because of the machinations on the other side of politics!” This was in 2012, I hasten to add.
There seems to have been a shared assumption that my reading must be a dull reflection or reinforcement of views already held.
Likewise, when I respond to questions from young people about what they should read with the answer, the classics, Shakespeare and the Bible, it is seen as proof of a pre-existing world view – rather than an invitation to understand and appreciate the works that have shaped our culture and our world.
If I thought that young people had no need of such counsel – because they were already reading what’s sometimes called the Western canon – I would not offer that advice.
Our reading, after all, should challenge our thinking, not just confirm it.
And literature is at its best when it reveals to us a world not seen, a perspective not understood, or an aspect of life not yet contemplated.
Through literature, we can grasp the fullness of life without necessarily having to have lived that aspect of it ourselves.
If music is art for the ear, and art is joy for the eye, then literature is surely a delight to the mind and a light for the soul.
And my life, like that of so many in this room, has been defined by a love of words.
Like prime ministers Deakin and Curtin before me, I was a journalist before I entered Parliament.
As I’ve sometimes said: As a journalist, I was a frustrated politician; as a politician, I am a frustrated journalist – and when I was a trainee priest, for three years in my twenties, I was just frustrated.
It shouldn’t surprise anyone that most Australian prime ministers over the past half century have, in fact, written books: Menzies, Whitlam, Fraser, Hawke, Keating, Howard and most recently Julia Gillard. 
They have done so because they understood the power of the written and the spoken word.
I am reminded of a story by Sir Robert Menzies who during 1941 spent several weekends with Winston Churchill at the British Prime Minister’s retreat “Chequers".
On one evening, Menzies walked into Churchill’s study and found him pacing up and down, dictating a draft for broadcast.
Menzies offered to withdraw but Churchill would have none of it; offering the Australian prime minister a cigar and waving him to a chair.
And Menzies later recounted Churchill’s method:
“He tried every word, every phrase, for weight, for meaning, for sound. 
“He knew, of course, that a broadcast speech must come effectively to the ear and must, if possible, achieve its instant persuasion and inspiration. 
The result, said Menzies, “as we know to our advantage, was all clarity, and feeling, and inspiration.”
Every writer is willing to create meaning, to persuade, to touch and to inspire.
That’s a writer’s gift to an audience.
Now, it’s not without its risks, of course.
When asked about how he wrote best sellers, Bryce Courtenay said that no one ever sets out to write worst sellers!
To use the words of Richard Flanagan: “somewhere in that abyss between ambition and failure often lies greatness”.
So, tonight, I salute the contribution of Australia’s writers – and that of those who work with you.
Because, as an author, I know that behind every successful writer is another writer, the editor.
My first editor was the late Christopher Pearson.
I came to rely on him, almost as a medieval potentate might have relied on his food taster, to alert me to infelicities of style, non sequiturs and offences against the canons of political correctness.
It wasn't a fool-proof system.
Still, he helped to shape my public life and my political character and it is right that we collectively pay tribute to those who make and shape our literature.
So, I am proud to continue this tradition of the Prime Minister’s Literary Awards.
I thank the writers, the editors and publishers of all the nominees for their contribution to a deeper, better, more thoughtful and more inspired national life.
Because the point of writing, as Pearson often reminded me, is to draw people closer to being their best selves.
I also acknowledge the judges who have read, weighed and debated the books in every category.
I recall one of my teachers, the English master from Riverview College, Joe Castley, admonishing his class far ago in the 1970s not to waste the summer break.
You must read, he said, not play, read! “Read”, he said, “with voracious appetite”.
It’s a phrase that I’ve never forgotten after all these years and have mostly tried to live by.
Literature has always made a vital contribution to our nation’s cultural and intellectual life.
In October, when Richard Flanagan won the Man Booker prize, I wrote, as many of you would have, offering my congratulations.
And he sent me a most gracious reply – which I hope he won’t mind me sharing.
Too often, he said, in Australian politics, the arts are seen as the province of the left, ‘and arts and artists (are) therefore to be shunned by the right’.
He noted that this is not the norm in most political cultures and hoped that ‘at some time, it might cease to be (so) in ours’.
Well, that’s my hope, too.
Because every government should want to encourage all of the voices – all of the voices – in Australian life, but these voices can only be heard if they’re listened to.
To that end, I announce tonight that the Government will establish the Book Council of Australia to promote good reading as well as good writing.
Tonight’s awards acknowledge the importance of our national stories as well as the excellence of our story-tellers.
They celebrate our literature, as well as those who are creating it.
Once you tell your stories, they become our stories.
So, I congratulate everyone associated with all of the nominated works and I look forward to spending quality time with some of them over the coming Christmas break.
Thank you so much. This is a marvellous night and I’m very honoured to be amongst you.
[ends]


Petro, we first met at the Normandy commemoration in June. It was lovely to meet you there because I have a bit of a personal connection with the Ukraine through my friend from Oxford days, Ihor Fedorowycz, and we had the chance to talk about the challenges that you were facing and I really enjoyed the conversation that we had. Little did I think that just a few weeks later we would be both involved in responding to the MH17 atrocity.
In one sense the Ukraine is a distant country with which Australia has only a thin relationship, but in another sense we feel a strong bond of solidarity with Ukrainian people rising from the MH17 atrocity because you did everything you could to help in those awful circumstances and we also came to appreciate better the predicament that Ukraine finds itself in. A smaller country striving to be free and prosperous that is being disrupted by a larger neighbour.
Now, there’s only so much that other countries can do in this situation, but the very least we can do is offer moral support and some economic support and some capacity building support and I’m pleased that Australia has been able to do that over the last few months. I’m also very conscious of the fact that while Ukraine is a long way away, some 40,000 Australians have recent Ukrainian  ancestry, including people like Mathew Guy, the new leader of the opposition here in Victoria. They have become exemplary Australians as invariably our migrants do, but they add to that sense of solidarity, that sense of warmth between our two countries.
I’m pleased that since the MH17 atrocity we have moved to establish an embassy in Kiev and we’ve got both Jean and Doug, our current and our future ambassadors here and that’s good. But I hope this is the beginning of a new and stronger relationship. Ukraine has so much potential – about 40 million people, roughly the size of Poland. Poland has begun its economic take off, Ukraine is still very much at the start of that, but with the right help both domestically and internationally there is no reason why Ukraine can’t become a highly developed, sophisticated, first world economy quite quickly because that’s essentially what’s happened in Poland over the last two decades.
So, thank you for being here. This is the first ever visit by a Ukrainian president to Australia. I hope at some time in the not too distant future I might be able to return the favour and visit Ukraine. Perhaps at some time in the not too distant future we might be able to unveil a monument to the dead of M17 in a peaceful Eastern Ukraine. That would be something that I would very much hope for and in my own way would like to help you work towards.
So, thank you Petro and welcome.
[ends]


Thank you very much indeed. Thank you Aunty Donna for your Welcome to Country.
Thank you to everyone for being here tonight to support this very important cause.
I particularly welcome my Parliamentary colleagues, the Leader of the Opposition, and the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, Senator Nigel Scullion.
About two years ago, I was discussing with Noel Pearson the merits of the expert panel’s recommendations.
And I have to admit, I was expressing concern about the expert panel’s support for an anti-discrimination clause in the Constitution on the grounds that it could turn out to be a one line bill of rights.
“You know what your problem is?” said Noel.
“You have never personally experienced the reality of racial discrimination!”
And that’s true.
Anglo Australian males from middle-class families tend to have had a magic carpet ride through life.
Still, this hasn’t stopped the “whispering in my heart” that our most serious failure as a nation has been our difficulty in acknowledging the people we displaced.
It started to nag at me about the time I first entered federal Parliament.
How could I hope to help guide the destiny of our nation and not do whatever I could to reconcile the first Australians with the rest of us?
So, almost every year as a Member of Parliament, starting with trips to Alice Springs in the mid-1990s that invariably included dinner with Charlie Perkins, I have tried to spend as much time as I could with Indigenous Australians in Indigenous communities.
I do not claim to be better hearted or more insightful than any of my predecessors, all of whom, at least in recent times, have acted with abundant goodwill for this cause.
But to the best of my knowledge, I’m the first Prime Minister who’s sought to run the country from a remote location over the best part of a week talking with Galarrwuy Yunupingu and the other elders of East Arnhem Land.
Our country has many challenges.
Our people face many problems.
But there is almost nothing that this generation of Australians could do that would more impress posterity than enabling black and white Australians to walk forward together, forever, as one united people.
So, I am a supporter of constitutional recognition because I want our country to transcend the “them and us” mindset to embrace “all of us” in the spirit of generous inclusion that has always marked Australians at our best.
Not “them” and “us” anymore – just us.
Like John Howard before me – and like Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard, and at least 60 per cent of the population – I am a strong supporter of constitutional recognition.
But 60 per cent support for a principle does not guarantee success at a referendum.
I know that because I helped to defeat the republican cause that was overwhelmingly supported by the Labor Party, significantly supported by the Liberal Party, and backed by every big media outlet in this country.
So, the question, at a dinner like this, that we have to ask ourselves, is not whether we support constitutional recognition – of course we do – but whether we want it passed.
Because to be passed, constitutional change has to satisfy a majority of the people in a majority of the states.
In practice, it has to gain the support of both major political parties and all state governments and avoid the opposition of any group of substance.
A fortnight ago, I delivered the Neville Bonner Oration to my former colleagues at Australians for Constitutional Monarchy.
I invited them to suspend their scepticism.
And I told them that it was impossible to cherish every single clause of a constitution, except the provision to change it.
Tonight, I say to my friends here at RECOGNISE, we have to temper our ambitions, because nothing would set back the cause of our country and the rightful place of Aboriginal people at its heart, than a referendum that failed.
Now, I recognise your yearning for that rightful place and I recognise your impatience to get on with it.
I am pleased that my friend and colleague, Ken Wyatt, the first Indigenous Member of the House of Representatives, along with Senator Nova Peris, the first Indigenous woman in the national Parliament, and the other members of the Joint Select Committee, have put forward three options for change.
I thank Ken, Nova and the Committee for their tireless, painstaking, and conscientious work.
Their first two options, I fear, would run into the same problem as the expert panel’s recommendation.
It would subject too much legislation to judicial review of its merits.
The third option, I fear, doesn’t do enough to recognise Indigenous people – indeed, it hardly does so at all.
I appreciate the work that  Marcia Langton, Megan Davis, Noel Pearson and others have done to reach out to constitutional conservatives because – make no mistake – we will be a diminished nation if we cannot find a way to acknowledge the first Australians in our nation’s foundation document.
But we must not underestimate the “lions in the path” of this vital project.
I am prepared to sweat blood on this.
This is at least as important as any of the other causes that this Government has been prepared to take on.
I want this to happen.
I want this to happen as quickly as it can.
I hope that it might happen on the 50th anniversary of the 1967 referendum, the 27th of May 2017. That would be a richly symbolic time to complete our constitution.
But I do not want it to fail because every Australian would be the loser.
It is more important to get this right than to try to rush it through.
We will get constitutional recognition – and when it comes, I suspect, that it will take the form of a pact – a heartfelt pact – between Indigenous people and conservative Australia.
Indigenous people have to accept that any proposal put forward is worth doing because it does sufficiently acknowledge them as the first Australians.
And conservative Australia has to accept that any proposal put forward really is completing our constitution rather than changing it.
So this, it seems to me, is the way forward.
The Wyatt Committee will deliver its final report in the first quarter of next year.
Then, all the significant proposals need to be socialised among the people of our country.
To this end, I announce that the Government will provide a further $5 million to RECOGNISE.
People from all walks of life and all shades of opinion, from the city, to country and the outback, black and white, will need every opportunity to talk through their hopes and fears for our country’s future.
These consultations will accelerate and intensify in the new year.
The referendum should be held as soon as possible once we are comfortable that we have the proposal with the best chance of success.
Not a ‘guarantee of success’ because any proposal guaranteed to succeed might hardly be worth doing.
Nevertheless, a proposal that is, on a realistic assessment of any forces that might be against it, likely to succeed.
More than 100 years ago, Australians decided to unite in one indissoluble Federal Commonwealth under the Crown.
This country we created, as a matter of undisputed fact, has an Aboriginal heritage, a British foundation and a multicultural character and it is high time that this reality was highly recognised in our Constitution.
Constitutional recognition will be a victory for Aboriginal people and will be the culmination of a long, long, long fight for justice.
To succeed, though, it will also have to be a victory for all Australians: a vindication of our magnanimity as a nation whose Constitution will finally belong to all of us.
To this solemn and sacred task, I pledge myself.
[ends]


Your Excellency, I am pleased to present new members of the Ministry.
These ministerial changes will put jobs and families at the heart of the Government's agenda for 2015.
This is a Government which is committed to building a stronger and more prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
Your Excellency, we are all acutely conscious of the honour of serving our country as Ministers of the Crown and as members of your executive council.
We pledge ourselves to serve the people of Australia to the very best of our ability.
[ends]


I appreciate the sacrifice that you have made to serve our country in this way in this place.
So, compliments of the season, happy new year, your country appreciates what you do for us, what you do for our values and what you do for our interests.
I guess the other thing that I am really keen to say to you is that you are doing absolutely outstanding work. Over the last couple of days I have visited our Special Forces in Baghdad, I was at the base to the north of here where our fighter wing is operating, where our tanker and our early warning aircraft is and the work that all of you are doing is absolutely outstanding and it is a credit to you, it is a credit to the professionalism of the Australian Defence Forces and I have to say that we are winning golden opinions from our partners, from our allies and from our regional partners as well.
So, it really has been an outstanding effort by Australia over the last few months.
Obviously, it is going to continue for quite some time because the last thing any of us would want is to see the ISIL or Daesh death cult continue to embed itself in Eastern Syria and Northern Iraq.
This death cult is a threat to the people of this region, it is a threat to the whole world – including Australia. They have declared war on the world effectively and the incidents that we have seen in our own country have been inspired by people who have made Eastern Syria and Northern Iraq their headquarters.
So, this is an ongoing struggle, it is a struggle for our interests, for our values. So you are fighting for Australia at home as well as abroad.
Again, I just want to say thank you on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people. We are very proud of you.
I should finally say that it is a particular thrill to be able to do a PT session with some of you. I have to say that those that I was lucky enough to do the session with all look a lot fresher than I feel. I do note that there were some that weren’t doing it. I presume you were doing an even tougher session at a different part of the base.
I am very conscious of the fact that as Prime Minister there is much that you do that I cannot share. I regret that I cannot share some of the difficulties and dangers which you face but it is something at least to be able to sweat with you even if I can’t exactly work with you.
Certainly, while I can’t exactly work with you, I can absolutely work for you and that is what the Australian Government is determined to do to ensure that we give our armed forces all the support that you need in the vital work that you do for us, for our values, for our interests and for the wider world.
So, thank you so much and I look forward to enjoying your company over the next little while.
[ends]


Cain, thank you very much indeed. It’s really lovely to be here and I can think of no better way to begin the 2015 working year than to be at this event which acknowledges young indigenous people who are having a go and which celebrates good food, great restaurants and the best of times.
It’s often said that food keeps body and soul together and that’s so true. Food does keep body and soul together. And that expression indicates does it not that food is not just about sustaining our mortal bodies, but it’s about lifting our immortal souls because so often, the best times in life – our comradeship, our families, our achievements – are celebrated with food.
So, these graduates from the National Indigenous Culinary Institute are not just learning to be cooks, they are learning in their own way to be artists.
Now we Australians have many fine characteristics. We like to think that as Australians, we want to have a go ourselves and we want to ensure that we and our countrymen deliver to every other Australian a fair go. This idea that we have a go, this idea that we create a country that gives everyone a fair go is very much at the heart of what it means to be an Australian. And both of these characteristics of ours are embodied in this programme in this graduation which we attend today.
I want to thank everyone involved with the National Indigenous Culinary Institute for ensuring that young indigenous people get the fair go they deserve.
You are not just people who want to do the right thing – although obviously that’s what you’re doing – but you are people who, in the food and hospitality sector, are doing great things.
Bill gave us a roll call of some of the people who are behind this institute – the great chefs of our country – the finest restaurants of our country. And to see our best people doing the right thing in this way is very, very encouraging indeed.
The other thing that’s so encouraging is to see fine young indigenous people having a go – making the most of your lives. All of us are meant for something. The challenge is to find what that is and then to grasp it with both hands. And you obviously have seen an opportunity, you’ve seen something that engaged you, heart and mind and soul and you’ve had a go and I want to say how thrilling that is and how proud I am of all of you.
I want to finish with this quote from one of the graduates today, the youngest graduate in fact, Ashleigh who said “if you put your mind to it and have a dream, you can get anywhere in your life.” Well Ashleigh thank you for putting so simply something which is so important for all of us. If you put your mind to it and have a dream, you can get anywhere in your life.
Now that doesn’t mean that it’s easy because you can put your mind to things and you can have a dream – an uplifting and enabling dream – and it’s not always easy to realise that dream, but if you have a go, it’s amazing what you can achieve and that’s exactly what you and all of your colleagues have done today.
So, thank you to everyone involved in this marvellous occasion. Thank you in particular to the seven young Australians who have done so much and made the rest of us feel so proud.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


Well it's great to be here on this perfect Canberra evening and it's an honour to be in the company of Ben Robert-Smith and so many other great Australians.
Tomorrow we will celebrate the ties that bind us, the values that sustain us and the history that has shaped us. But tonight, we usher in our national day of celebration by honouring the best in our people and the best of our people.
We honour those who have dedicated themselves to building a better Australia.
All of them have had a go so that all of us might have a fair go.
The Australian of the Year nominees encourage us to be people who live for others, rather than for ourselves.
They come from all parts of our country; young and old, indigenous, immigrant, from the city, from the bush.
They're entrepreneurs, musicians, neurosurgeons, parents, carers, activists.
They represent the many who have become one united country here in Australia and they remind us that, good as we are, we are always striving to be better.
Nearly all of this year's nominees have faced adversity but they have persevered and that's what inspires us.
So, I say to each of them – you make all of us proud to be Australian and you inspire all of us to be better Australians.
Tonight, our nation honours you and we thank you for your lives of courage, achievement and determination.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen it is a real thrill to have so many of our finest citizens and our most inspirational citizens here in the Prime Minister’s Courtyard today. I want to particularly welcome last year’s award winners Adam Goodes the 2014 Australian of the Year, Fred Chaney the Senior Australian of the Year, Jacqueline Freney the Young Australian of the year and Tim Conlan our local hero of last year. May I say to all of our Awardees from last year thank you for everything you have done for our country in 2014.
It is also good to welcome spouses, partners and family member here too because none of us can achieve anything without the support of those close to us. All of you have done so much to help the distinguished Australians who we honour today.
It is great to have Ben Robert-Smith VC here in his new role as Chairman of the National Australia Day Council.
Can I say to all of the nominees for all of the awards, that you are amongst our country’s finest, you represent Australia and Australians at their best. I know that these awards don’t always sit easily with you because you are not naturally people who seek the limelight. You don’t naturally like to be singled out or put on a pedestal but you have lived for others. You have lived in the service of others and it is right that we should honour you.
All of you have had remarkable lives. Each of you would be a worthy winner and every one of you is addressing a vital issue in our national life.
Just to briefly mention the Australian of the Year finalist Deborra-Lee Furness promoting adoption and the cause of giving children without families a better life and families without children a better life.
Rosie Batty who faced an unimaginable tragedy and has become an inspirational campaigner against domestic violence.
Hetty Johnston, Australia’s foremost child protection activist.
Professor Lyn Beazley, a medical researcher and educator helping people not just here in Australia but right around the world.
Gill Hicks, who like Rosie Batty, has turned adversity, extraordinary, horrible adversity into an opportunity to help other to come closer to being their best selves.
Rodney Croome, the activist who more than anyone else ended legal sanctions against gay people in this country.
Glenn Keys a remarkable medical entrepreneur and philanthropist. Again doing good, not just here but right around the world.
Rosalie Kunoth-Monks who has been a long-term campaigner for the environment and for reconciliation.
All of you, every one of you, are doing an extraordinary job and I thank you from the bottom of my heart.
You've all made our country a better place. Some of you have inspired us, others have challenged us, all of you have amazed us. You are proof that there is no limit to what Australians can achieve. That sense of pride and belonging does epitomise the Australia Day Awards.
We can celebrate our country because we are always striving to be better than we are now and you represent that striving at its best and most effective. Your presence is a reminder that there are so many people doing good and making our country stronger, fairer, more prosperous and more free.
I congratulate all of you, I thank you for making our country a better place for everyone and I am confident that all of you will do great work in 2015.
Thank you for what you do for us.
[ends]


Today, across Australia, at BBQs, citizenship ceremonies and community events, we will celebrate everything that is good about our country.
Australia Day celebrates the ties that bind us, the values that sustain us and the nation that we have become.
Modern Australia has an Aboriginal heritage, a British foundation and a multicultural character.
So on Australia Day, we honour the ancestors who were custodians of this ancient continent; we pay tribute to our forefathers who enshrined freedom, fairness and unity in Australia’s Constitution; and we reaffirm our commitment to make this country of ours a beacon of hope and optimism in an uncertain world.
Because to be an Australian is to have won the lottery of life.
But we can’t rest on our laurels and everyone has a part to play in sustaining a country that is strong and prosperous, free and fair.
Today, thousands of new Australian citizens will take the pledge to live our values and to join our team, following in the footsteps of our first modern migrants who arrived way back on 26 January 1788.
This year we will also commemorate the centenary of the Gallipoli campaign. I hope everyone will participate in some way.
We will also continue working towards completing our Constitution by recognising the first Australians. This spirit of generous inclusion has always marked our nation at its best.
So today, we celebrate the history that has made us who we are; the country that we love and the values and institutions that underpin it.
I wish every one of you a very happy Australia Day!
26 January 2015


Thanks so much, Stephanie.
Chief Minister, parliamentary colleagues, Armed Forces Chiefs, Aunty Agnes – thank you for that beautiful welcome to country – fellow Australians.
Today, we celebrate all that is good in our country. We acknowledge the finest citizens and the greatest servants of the country we believe to be a beacon of hope and optimism in a troubled world.
I congratulate all who are honoured today by awards in the Order of Australia. I particularly acknowledge Prince Philip for his long life of duty and service. And I salute Sir Angus Houston, who has always called it for Australia.
I salute the Australians of the Year – announced yesterday. Juliette Wright our local hero, Drisana Levitzke-Gray our Young Australian of the Year, Jackie French, our Senior Australian of the Year and especially Rosie Batty, our Australian of the Year.
Her courage is different from that of Ben Roberts-Smith, but we all know courage when we see it, and we know that courage is always an act of love; love of family, love of neighbour and love of country.
We know Rosie that you still mourn. We know that you still grieve. Yet we know that you still strive to build a better Australia and will do so every day for the rest of your life.
Australia's longest-serving Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, well described the essence of Australia Day. Sir Robert said that Australia Day is more than a celebration; it is, he said, a day of memory and decision.
So today, we remember and rejoice in our Indigenous heritage, in our British foundation, and in our multicultural character.
We honour the ancestors who were the custodians of this ancient continent, and we pay tribute to our forefathers who enshrined freedom, fairness and unity in our constitution. We rejoice in a nation which has brought together people from the four corners of the earth, joining the first Australians to become one people.
During this ANZAC centenary, we also remember that 100,000 men and women who gave their lives for us, and today we also remember all those Australians currently serving throughout the world in the defence of our freedom and the universal decencies of mankind. But this is also a day of decision. It is a day to rededicate ourselves to our great national cause – building a better, fairer, stronger and more prosperous Australia.
It's a day where we commit ourselves to be more than just beneficiaries of our country's bounty, but to be contributors as well.
This is also a day of decision for nearly 16,000 people, including 25 here amongst us, on the foreshore of Lake Burley Griffin, who will today become Australian citizens.
All of you have voted quite literally with your feet for Australia. Your lives will be the better for your decision. And our lives and our country will be the better for your decision.
So, on this joyous day of memory and decision, it is now my distinct honour and privilege to preside over this citizenship ceremony.
[ends]


Thanks so much Laurie, and first, may I thank the Press Club for this opportunity to give a start of the year address and may I thank my many colleagues, led by the Deputy Prime Minister, Warren Truss, and the Treasurer, Joe Hockey, for their attendance today.
I would like, if I may, Laurie, to observe at the outset that sometimes, as Australians, we do take our most precious freedoms for granted.
As a former journalist myself, it would be remiss of me at such a gathering of journalists not to express my personal delight and our nation’s relief at the overnight release of Peter Greste and to reiterate our support, as a Government and as a people for a free media and a free press.
I particularly want to place on record my gratitude to Egypt’s President, el-Sisi, for the understanding he has shown every time I have discussed with him Peter Greste’s predicament. His role in Peter’s release cannot be underestimated.
I also want to thank the Foreign Minister for her tireless advocacy on Peter Greste’s behalf.
And so, today, as we begin this important address, we should remember Peter Greste’s ordeal and I want to say to Peter’s family: you never gave up hope and your strength is an inspiration to all of us.
At the outset I want to let all of you know that, as you would expect, over the summer, I’ve been talking to hundreds of Australians from all walks of life – in the street, on the beach, in cafes, even at the pub; and I’ve been talking with my colleagues.
As every Australian agrees, to live here is to have won the lottery of life – because we are as free, fair and prosperous as any country on earth.
But these are testing times for our country.
2014 was a tumultuous year that’s reminded us to expect the unexpected.
Thirty eight Australians were shot out of the sky by Russian-backed rebels.
A death cult, claiming justification in Islam, is creating a new dark age over much of Syria and Iraq.
And the terrorism it inspires has hit Melbourne and Sydney.
It was an anxious year for our well-being, as well as for our security.
At last, the US is growing, but Europe is stagnating, and China – our economic locomotive – is now growing at its slowest rate in a quarter of a century.
And the price of iron ore – our biggest export – has halved in just over a year.
In troubled times, people expect more of government, not less – and we have to deliver.
That’s why a government with the plan and the will to strengthen our economy and to protect our nation is so important.
This government is more determined than ever to make the changes our country needs.
This government will deliver Australia’s economic future because only a Coalition government can.
As Liberals and Nationals, sound economic management is in our DNA.
We’ve done it before and we are doing it again.
More than ever, in troubled times, government has to protect our people and stand up for Australian values.
This government would hardly have taken the political risks it has without the conviction that some change is absolutely unavoidable if our country is to flourish.
To create more jobs and more opportunities for families, we simply have to build a stronger economy.
A stronger economy is the foundation of a stronger Australia.
And if the economy is stronger, everyone’s life is better.
A stronger economy helps everyone who’s doing it tough:
parents wrestling with school fees and health costs;
small business people anxious to keep their staff;
seniors whose superannuation has to fund their retirement;
volunteers wondering if they can still afford to serve the community; and
young people looking for their first job and their first home.
Building a stronger economy is the fairest thing we can do because it means more jobs, higher wages, and more government revenue to pay for the services we need.
During 2015, our priority will be creating more jobs; easing the pressure on families; building roads; strengthening national security; and promoting more opportunity for all – with a new families policy and a new small business and jobs policy.
But we need to be candid about the challenges we face.
The drift of the Rudd-Gillard-Rudd years cannot continue.
Standing still on reform means going backwards on living standards.
Just a few years back, under the Howard government, we were quite literally the envy of the world.
In 2007, we had a strong and sustainable budget with a $20 billion surplus and $50 billion in the bank.
After six years of Labor, the deficit had blown out to $50 billion and gross debt was skyrocketing towards $667 billion.
Under Labor, government was spending too much; borrowing too much; and paying out too much dead money in interest alone.
We can’t wait for a crisis – like Europe – to address this problem because the solutions then will be much worse than the solutions today.
Our problem is not that taxes are too low; our problem is that government spending is too high.
We are writing cheques that our children and grandchildren will have to meet through higher taxes, higher interest rates and poorer services.
Right now, we’re borrowing $1 billion a month just to pay the interest on debt that the former Labor government ran up.
That’s right – one thousand million every month to pay Labor’s interest bill – that’s a brand new tertiary hospital that could be built every single month if Labor’s interest bill did not have to be paid.
And without structural change, within a decade, we’d be borrowing $3 billion a month just to pay the interest on Commonwealth debt.
So – let’s spend the money we have to on the things we really need; and let’s borrow where we must, to invest judiciously in a stronger Australia for the future – but let’s stop borrowing just to meet the ordinary expenses of government.
Reducing the deficit means that interest rates will stay lower.
Reducing the deficit means that taxes can be cut.
Reducing the deficit means more confidence in the economy.
And reducing the deficit is the fair thing to do – because it ends the intergenerational theft against our children and grandchildren.
We’ve never been a country that’s ripped off future generations to pay for today.
And under my government, we never will.
On election night, I declared that Australia was under new management and once more open for business.
Since then, new projects worth over $1 trillion have received environmental approval.
The carbon tax is gone – so every household, on average, is $550 a year better off.
The mining tax is gone – so Australia once more is seen as a good place to invest.
Big new road projects are now getting underway to overcome commuter gridlock – and the new Western Sydney Airport is finally to be built after 50 years of indecision.
After 10 years of talk, free trade agreements covering more than 50 per cent of our exports – with China, Japan and South Korea – have been finalised with better markets for Australian farmers and lower prices for Australian consumers.
The live cattle trade that Labor closed down in panic over a TV programme is booming again.
There are now 15,000 new trade support loans because apprentices finally have the support that’s long been offered to university students.
At last, the NBN is rolling out, reliably and affordably.
And despite the argy-bargy, in every sitting fortnight since last July, the Senate has passed at least one major piece of legislation.
And, of course, the illegal boats that just kept coming and coming under the former Labor government have all-but-stopped.
The Abbott government has stopped the boats – and only this government will keep them stopped.
The Abbott government has scrapped the carbon tax – and only this government will keep it scrapped.
My position on carbon taxes has been crystal clear since day one as party leader.
There will be no carbon tax under a government I lead.
At the election, the economy was weakening, the budget was haemorrhaging and unemployment was rising.
Today, despite headwinds overseas, the economy is stronger, the budget is improving and the jobs market has strengthened.
Jobs growth in 2014 was triple the rate in 2013 – with 4,000 new jobs a week.
New housing approvals are at record levels.
The registration of new companies is the highest on record.
Economic growth is now 2.7 per cent, up from 1.9 per cent a year ago.
Petrol prices are nearing 15 year lows, home loan interest rates are low and stable, and the September quarter had the biggest fall in power prices on record.
But I’m not here to defend the past – I’m here to explain the future.
People are sick of Australian citizens – including people born and bred here – making excuses for Islamist fanatics in the Middle East and their imitators here in Australia.  
It’s not good enough just to boost the police and security agencies, which we’ve done – by restoring the millions ripped out by Labor – and to improve data retention, which we’re doing.
We have to tackle the people and the organisations that justify terrorism and act as its recruiting agents – such as Hizb-ut-Tahrir.
We have already made it an offence to advocate terrorism and made it easier to ban terrorist organisations.
If cracking down on Hizb-ut-Tahrir and others who nurture extremism in our suburbs means further legislation, we will bring it on and I will demand that the Labor Party call it for Australia.
The police and the security agencies have told me that they need access to telecommunications data to deal with a range of crime, from child abuse to terrorism, and – as far as I am concerned – they should always have the laws, money and support they need to keep Australia safe.
And with the world still feeling the global financial crisis, people are anxious about our economic sovereignty.
I am a friend of foreign investment but it has to come on our terms and for our benefit.
The government will shortly put in place better scrutiny and reporting of foreign purchases of agricultural land and better enforcement of the rules against foreign purchases of existing homes so that young people are not priced out of the market.
These laws were not legally enforced by the former Labor government – not once.
This year, the government’s budget focus will be on strengthening the economy.
Because we have done much of the hard work already, we won’t need to protect the Commonwealth budget at the expense of the household budget.
As the intergenerational report will show, more is needed to put the budget on a credible path to a sustainable surplus – but as New Zealand has demonstrated, a good way to achieve this is not to make any unnecessary new spending commitments. 
We will always be looking for ways to make government more efficient and to crack down on waste.
Governments should never spend more than they must because every dollar government spends is a dollar you don’t spend, now or in the future.
So any new spending will strictly be directed to making the economy stronger so that long-term revenue increases.
Before Christmas, I said that over the break I’d be better targeting the proposed paid parental leave scheme and scaling it back, in a families package focussed on childcare.
I admire stay-at-home mums, as Margie was when our children were young, but support better paid parental leave to maximise young people’s – like my daughters’ – choices to have a career and to have a family too.
I accept, though, that what’s desirable is not always doable, especially when times are tough and budgets are tight.
As the Productivity Commission has said, and as mums and dads around Australia have reminded me, the focus really does have to be on childcare if we want higher participation and a stronger economy.
So a bigger parental leave scheme is off the table.
Values and beliefs are important but the most important consideration of all is what will best help families at this time.
I know that many women in many families are working just to pay the childcare – because that was the Abbott family’s experience when Margie first went back to work after becoming a mother.
Childcare fees skyrocketed 50 per cent under Labor which abandoned its promise to build 260 new centres.
More affordable and more available childcare means less pressure on the family budget.
More parents in the workforce mean that more people will make a bigger economic contribution as well as a social contribution to our country. 
Women, after all, are our country’s most under-utilised source of skills and entrepreneurship – if female participation in Australia were six per cent higher, at Canada’s level, GDP would be higher by $25 billion a year.
So a better childcare policy is good economic policy as well as fairer family policy.
We’ll now consult widely on a way to improve the system of multiple payments, keep costs down, and put more money into parents’ pockets.   
As well as a families package, we’re also working on a small-business and jobs package.
I admire people who take risks, have a go and employ others.
If you’re a small business owner, it’s likely that you’ve mortgaged your home in order to invest, employ and serve the community.
Quite literally, you have put your economic life on the line for others.
Every big business started off as a small business.
The new industries of tomorrow are likely to be started by the small businesses of today.
The best antidote to sunset industries is sunrise ones – and these are most likely to emerge from an enterprising small business.
At the heart of our small business jobs package will be a small business company tax cut on July 1 – at least as big as the 1.5 per cent already flagged.
More jobs and better paid workers will only come from more profitable employers in a better position to employ people.
Every new worker is generating revenue – so spending to get unemployed people into work; on childcare to keep parents in the workforce; on infrastructure to get people to their jobs; and on a small business tax cut to create jobs will help to get the budget back towards the surplus our country needs.
Economic growth is the best and fastest way to restore the surplus.
I hope that 2015 will see a more honest national conversation between all of us with Australia’s best interests at heart.
I want this year’s white paper process – on reforming the federation and on tax – to demonstrate Australians’ potential for change for the better rather than just politics as usual.
Finding ways to make every level of government more efficient, more effective and more accountable is in every Australian’s best interest and shouldn’t be an excuse for cheap shots.
Everyone who wants members of parliament to lift their game has an interest in governments taking more responsibility for the services they provide, instead of passing the buck.
We will also be inviting constructive debate across the political spectrum on all options for a better tax system to deliver taxes that are lower, simpler and fairer.
Unlike previous debates, we won’t pre-empt the outcome by ruling things in or out before the process has properly begun.
I do assure you, though, that this government wants to be remembered for cutting the overall tax burden, not for increasing it – for abolishing existing taxes, rather than imposing new ones.
As for the GST – it can’t and it won’t change unless all the states and territories agree.
It can’t and won’t change unless there is political consensus.
That means – leaving aside any minor administrative changes – that the base and the rate of the GST won’t change this term or next unless it’s supported by the likes of Bill Shorten and the Labor premiers. 
Both white paper processes will be open and constructive: stakeholders will be consulted, submissions will be published; any hearings will be open, and the states will have senior representatives on steering committees.
Everyone who wants a say will have one – and the people will have the last word at the ballot box.
Sooner or later, all responsible members of Parliament have to put the long term national interest ahead of their short term political interest and there’s no better time to start than now.
So far, this government – and only this government – has had the courage to tackle the deficit, to protect our borders, and to build a stronger and more prosperous economy.
As I said so many times before the election, we will end the waste, stop the boats, scrap the unnecessary new taxes and build the roads of the 21st century.
And the results?
Waste – down
Boats – stopped
Carbon tax – gone
Roads – underway.
Sixteen months on, we’ve laid a strong foundation – but there’s more to do and we’re determined to get it done.
Our country is at an important economic crossroads.
There’s a mess to clean up after six years of Labor chaos.
The Rudd-Gillard-Rudd years cannot become the new normal lest Australia join the weak government club and become a second rate country living off its luck.
You elected us to set Australia up for the long term.
You elected us to be an adult government focussed on you, not on ourselves.
You elected us to make the decisions needed so that everyone who works hard gets ahead, aspiration is rewarded, and our children can look forward to more opportunities than we had.
You elected us to keep you safe and, with every fibre of my being, I am focussed on our national security challenges here and overseas.
Standing up for Australian values is something I have done all my life.
Leadership is about making the right decisions for our country’s future.
It isn’t a popularity contest.
It’s about results; it’s about determination; and it’s about you.
Australia deserves the stable government that you elected us to be just 16 months ago.
You deserve budget repair, no return of the carbon tax, no restart of people smuggling, and no in-fighting.
We promised that we would do our best to keep you safe.
We promised you hope, reward and opportunity.
That’s what the Abbott government is working to deliver for you.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, I move: That the House record its deep regret at the death on 26 January 2015 of the Hon Thomas (Tom) Uren AC, former Minister and Member for Reid, and place on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.
Madam Speaker, Tom Uren was a prisoner of war, a Member of this Parliament, a Minister and a Deputy Leader of his party.
Tom was born in Balmain, but then his family moved to Harbord on the Northern Beaches at the age of five.  He attended Manly Boys’ Intermediate High School, he was a surf lifesaving champion at Freshwater and he played for the Manly Warringah in the President’s Cup rugby league competition.
And Madam Speaker while it’s true to say that Tom Uren grew up in my own electorate, I suspect his heart was always in Balmain.
He was an aspiring boxer, he was an outstanding athlete and he joined the army at the age of 20 and subsequently deployed to Timor.
He spent his 21st birthday – and the following three birthdays – as a prisoner of war of the Japanese.
He lived through the brutality of the Burma-Thai Railway, through daily extremes of suffering and privation, but he took from that experience the principle of “Weary” Dunlop: “the fit looking after the sick, the young looking after the old and the rich looking after the poor”.
On one occasion while he was a prisoner of war, a Japanese guard was about to throw a prisoner from a bridge, Tom Uren risked the rage of the guards and their rifle-butts, he confronted the guard and saved his comrades life.
After being transferred from Japan, he saw from a distance the sky turn crimson with the dropping of the atomic bomb on Nagasaki.
Madam Speaker, despite experiencing humanity at its worst, Tom Uren rejected hatred – because he said “hatred scars the soul”.
In word and in deed, he was anti-war.  It was not a belief that he developed in a coffee shop or in a lecture theatre – it was a belief he came to because of his own bitter experience and it was a sincere, passionate, lifelong belief, and I first met Tom Uren at a Palm Sunday peace march in the mid-1980s.
Madam Speaker, once as a Minister he was addressing an audience at Sydney University, he intervened to break up a fight between two students, and the former boxer said that “the only thing I fight for now is peace.”
He served our country all his days.
In 1958, he entered the Federal Parliament as the Member for Reid and represented the electorate for 31 years, leaving as Father of the House.
He became Minister for Urban and Regional Development in the Whitlam Government, and pioneered the protection of Australia’s historic and natural heritage.
He also served as a Minister in the first two Hawke Governments.
When he retired, as I said, he was the Father of the House and he remained long into his retirement an active conservationist. He was, indeed, Madam Speaker a strong supporter of the Sydney Harbour Federation Trust and in the lead-up to the formation of that trust under the Howard Government, I joined him in some protest rallies in my electorate which he’d come back to, at least to visit, against the policies of the government which earlier he’d served – at least in that respect.
Tom Uren once reflected, “I’m a much gentler man than most people believe.  There are two sides to me – I’ve got a gentle side and a harder side and as I’ve got older I’ve got much gentler”.
This of course was his way of saying that he cared and felt for people but nevertheless he did always fight for principle.
He was a warrior in this House but above all else, in war and in peace, he was a warrior for a better Australia.
In his life and through his actions we saw valour, sacrifice, service to country and a love of others over self.
It is right that his party has extensively honoured him, but Tom Uren will always be remembered as more than simply a son of his party. He will remembered as a great son of Australia.
So, on behalf of everyone on this side of the House, and I’m sure on behalf of all Australians, I extend to his widow Christine, and to his family the deepest condolences of the Government and of the Australian people.
[ends]


Danielle, thank you so much, Matilda, Kristie and Mick, thank you so very much for making all of us so welcome here this morning.
There are many gatherings here in Parliament House but there are few gatherings which bring together such an enthusiastic and committed crowd as this annual Closing the Gap statement.
The Closing the Gap statement is important. It should be an annual statement because it forces us to stay committed. It forces us to stay focused and as far as I'm concerned there is no more important cause than ensuring that indigenous people enter fully into their rightful inheritance as first Australians and as first class citizens of this great country.
My grandfather used to say that there were three things that really mattered if you wanted to be happy in your life; your family, your reputation and your health. They're the things you have to have for a happy life.
And we all know that indigenous health outcomes have been an embarrassment for far too long. There is improvement but we have so much more work to do. Mortality rates are down, child and maternal health is improving, heart disease rates are down, trachoma will be eliminated by 2020 and as Mick Gooda noted earlier, indigenous people are leading healthier lives. Smoking rates are down and in remote parts of our country community stores are now stocked with better food.
But good health depends upon so much more than just the best possible health services – important though they are. Good health takes place in a social context and if we are going to ensure that indigenous health approximates that of the Australian community, there is so much that has to be done across a whole range of policy areas; an education, a job, a safe community, decent housing – these are all absolutely essential to better indigenous health outcomes.
I want to assure you that this Government is committed to getting school attendance rates up. We are working with the states and territories to ensure the schools are better, we are improving our own programmes to ensure that youngsters attend school as they must.
We are doing what we can to ensure that indigenous employment programmes are not just training for training’s sake, but have a guaranteed job at the end of them so that indigenous people can see the point in actually doing the training.
We are working to ensure that indigenous communities are as safe as they possibly can be, free of the scourge of alcohol which has done so much damage to so many people in so many communities.
But we also accept that reconciliation must be spiritual as well as practical, if it is to be meaningful. We accept that indigenous people need to feel that they are a part of this great country, every bit as much as members of Parliament, they are a part of this great country.
That's why I'm pleased that shortly we will be receiving the final report of Ken Wyatt's committee on indigenous constitutional recognition.
We're not here today just because we're members of parliament. We're not here today just because party politics or political advantage brings us here. We are here today as human beings, not as politicians. We are here today because our hearts tell us we need to be here because making a difference is something that is important not just for us and our political advantage, it's important for our country, for the honour, the decency and the long-term glory of our country. That's why we're here.
Many people in this room have been on a long journey. I know myself ever since entering this Parliament I have been on a journey of understanding and increasing commitment in this area.
As a new Member of Parliament I would go to Alice Springs. I spent time in the company of Charlie Perkins. As a Minister in the former Howard Government every year I would try to spend serious time in an indigenous community. As the Shadow Minister for Indigenous Affairs and subsequently as Opposition Leader I tried to ensure the commitment was not just rhetorical, was not just notional but was practical and personal and experiential.
Last year, as you might remember, as Prime Minister I spent almost a week in East Arnhem and the government of the country was run from that remote part of Australia.
Surely, after 200 years of neglect it is not too much to ask of our Prime Minister and our government that one week a year should be focused on indigenous issues. I commit to doing it again this year, later in the year, spending a week in a remote, indigenous community to ensure that the concerns of remote Australia, that the concerns of indigenous Australia, for at least one week, are at the absolute forefront of our national thinking.
In about 15 or 20 years, hopefully the gap will be closed, hopefully health outcomes will be much the same for Aboriginal Australians and the rest of us.
I hope that events like this won’t stop even when the gap is closed because it forces us, it forces the Parliament, it forces the Government, to think about indigenous Australia, to think about our indigenous heritage, to think about our shared future together because that is what it will always be – a shared future together. My hope is that all of us, white and black, indigenous and everyone else, will walk together arm in arm into a future that gets brighter and brighter every year.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, this annual Closing the Gap statement is an important occasion for our Parliament.
Improving the lives of Australia’s first people is a challenge beyond partisan politics.
Two centuries of occasional, partial success and frequently dashed hopes has taught us that neither side of politics can achieve meaningful progress without working with the other.
So none of us should seek to score a point, or defend a legacy here – just to reach out across the aisle because that is the only hope of lasting success.
For so many of us in this place, few things matter more than the lot of Indigenous people.
For so many of us this is personal – not political.
So we speak and act not in the service of party, but in the service of country.
We know that until Indigenous people fully participate in the life of our country, all of us are diminished.
On days such as this, we should acknowledge where we have failed.
Equally, we should also acknowledge where we have made progress and we should stir ourselves to keep persevering on this vital but difficult journey.
Long after most of today’s debates and squabbles pass, this journey will continue.
Madam Speaker last year, when I presented the Closing the Gap statement, I said that our challenge was to turn good intentions into better outcomes.
It is now one year into our plan to address the intractable disadvantage experienced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
The past year was about developing practical reforms to give us a platform from which to deliver improvements.
At the invitation of respected Gumatj leader, Galarrwuy Yunupingu, with senior ministers and officials, I spent almost a week last September running the government from North East Arnhem Land.
We listened and saw first-hand, some of the challenges facing Aboriginal peoples living in remote communities.
As well, my Indigenous Advisory Council, chaired by Warren Mundine, has been regularly consulted on practical ways to get kids to school, adults to work and communities safe.
Because we know that getting kids to school, adults to work and communities safe is what matters most.
This year will be one focussed on action that will, over time, accelerate progress towards the Closing the Gap targets, including the new target of closing the school attendance gap within five years.
Madam Speaker much more work is needed because this seventh Closing the Gap report is in many respects profoundly disappointing.
Despite the concerted efforts of successive governments since the first report, we are not on track to achieve most of the targets.
There are some improvements in education and health outcomes.
We are on track to halve the gap in Year 12 attainment rates for Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders aged 20-24.
The target to halve the gap in mortality rates for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children does look achievable by 2018.
The new target of closing the school attendance gap within five years should be achievable and I do look forward to reporting good results on this in the years to come.
However, the other targets – to close the gap in life expectancy within a generation; to ensure access to early childhood education for all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander four year olds in remote areas; to halve the gap in reading and numeracy for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students; and to halve the gaps in employment outcomes – have either not been met or are not on track to be met.
This is not because of any lack of goodwill or effort by successive governments.
We are trying to change entrenched and multigenerational disadvantage.
This won’t happen overnight and it may not ever happen unless we continue to place high demands on ourselves of what we can achieve together.
When I presented this report last year, I also noted that for every step backwards, there could be two steps forward.
There are backward steps in this year’s report – too many of them – but there have also been many steps forward and I’d like to go through some of them.
At Bwgcolman Community School on Palm Island, success is ensuring that when students graduate, they not only have a Queensland Certificate of Education, but they also have a boat license, a first aid certificate, a learner driver’s permit and industry-specific qualifications.
At Elliott in the Northern Territory, success is the school and the community working with the night patrol and the Commonwealth’s Indigenous Engagement Officer to increase attendance at school.
On Bathurst Island, success is introducing Year 13 for mature-aged students who want to increase their employment options.
And in Sydney, success is a Vocational Training and Employment Centre run by an Aboriginal owned and operated organisation, which connects Indigenous job seekers with specific work in the health sector.
Now every community is different, but in every community – the foundations of success are the same – education, jobs and a safer living environment, underpinned by better health.
These foundations are self-evident and these success stories, and others like them, suggest that it’s the practical delivery of programmes and policies that is the key.
Government programmes can be a catalyst but success – where it is achieved – is due to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who want better for themselves.
Governments can fund and governments can urge but governments can’t change attitudes and behaviours.
It’s those who make the choice to send their children to school, those who make the choice to attend school (and stick at it), those who make the choice to get a job and stick at it and those who choose to abide by the law who are the ones closing the gap.
Closing the Gap is not something that Canberra can do on its own.
Closing the Gap is not something to be granted by this Parliament to Indigenous Australians.
Closing the Gap is to be grasped by them and Closing the Gap starts with getting the kids to school. And it starts with expecting much of them while they are there.
Dr Chris Sarra tells the story of getting 75 per cent in a test when he was in year 11.  His teacher said: “Sarra got 75 per cent so it must have been an easy!”
And as he says at the time, he laughed along with the rest of the class.
But it was only when he was studying to be a teacher himself that he started to question whether or not his teachers’ low expectations had stifled his sense of self and of what he could achieve because as he said, “I was being sold short, therefore I sold myself short.”
Too many young Indigenous students are being sold short through the tyranny of low expectations.
Schools attendance is fundamental.  It is foundational.
It’s hard to be literate and numerate without attending school; it’s hard to find work without a basic education; and it’s hard to live well without a job.
While most Indigenous families do make sure their children attend school regularly, too many are still missing too much school – especially in remote areas.
So this Government Madam Speaker is determined to break the cycle of truancy and to ensure that parents and carers do take responsibility so that children get a good education.
Once those children have graduated, they really should have jobs to go to.
So Madam Speaker we are already acting on the recommendations of the Forrest report.
We’ll partner with Australia’s largest employers to get more Indigenous Australians into jobs – because a job is more than just a pay-cheque.  A job is the key to social relationships, a sense of personal achievement and well-being.
And if we are asking the private sector to take on more Indigenous employees then we must do the same in the Commonwealth Public Sector. 
We do intend to use more of the Commonwealth’s $39 billion procurement budget to encourage Indigenous businesses to grow.
We will provide job seekers in Remote Australia with pathways to real employment through the reformed
Remote Jobs and Communities Programme and we will end sit-down money with continuous Work for the Dole.
We will put in place stronger incentives to encourage potential employers to look to the bush for workers.
And we’ll fund new enterprises that provide jobs and work experience opportunities in remote locations.
We will address violence in communities by focusing on the prevention and the treatment of alcohol and drug problems; improved policing in remote areas and better support for the victims of crime.
Madam Speaker without good physical and mental health, it is hard to go to school, to go to work, to raise children, to contribute to the community or to live a long and fulfilling life.
The National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health plan does capture the voices of the community and the experts and through this plan we will continue to support families and communities to manage their health and wellbeing; to access health services when they are needed; and to reduce harmful behaviours.
Madam Speaker these are some of the practicalities of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians – but there are other gaps to close.
We continue to work towards constitutional change acknowledging the first Australians.
Minister Scullion will have responsibility for progressing an extension to the Recognition Act.
It is always our responsibility to acknowledge the contribution of Indigenous Australians to the nation that we have become today.
In coming months, we will all be commemorating the centenary of the Gallipoli campaign.
We will remember all who served.
Among them, we will remember Richard Norman Kirby from Quambone in NSW, who joined the 1st AIF in July of 1915 and served at Gallipoli and in France.  
For his actions in 1918, he was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal.
The Citation read “for conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty during an attack.  He rushed a machine gun post single-handed, and, although wounded in the attempt, succeeded in capturing and holding two machine guns and fourteen of the enemy until the remainder of his section came up.  He set a fine example of courage and initiative to the men with him”.
Madam Speaker he died nine days later from his wounds and is buried in France.
Lance Corporal Kirby’s gallantry is remarkable because that was a time when Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people were not even counted in the census.
Yet despite so many slights and mistreatments, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people served our country with distinction. Returning home, they were denied the same entitlements as their mates.
The door was shut on every day but Anzac Day.
While abroad, “the Aboriginal soldier was a valued brother; back in Australia he returned to an unequal life and was gradually forgotten by all, but his kin and closest mates”.
We owe it, Madam Speaker, to Lance Corporal Kirby and his brothers, to build the Australia that they fought for, that they hoped in, and that they shaped, which is both free and fair.
We do have much work to do.
But there is a super abundance of goodwill.
We must strive and strive again to ensure that the First Australians never again feel like outcasts in their own country and if we do; our Parliament is at its best, our country is at its best and we are at our best.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
Well, Andrew, obviously it was quite a development over the last 24 hours or so and I really appreciate the work that you’ve done; our colleagues in New South Wales have done. It is absolutely vital that we maintain our vigilance because obviously there is a different kind of terror threat today to the one that we faced just a few years ago.
It is, it seems, a metastasising threat and the influence of our agencies at every single level, at all levels, is more important than ever.
COMMISSIONER COLVIN:
Thank you PM and might I just say welcome back to AFP Headquarters and to the Minister and Attorney as well.
You are quite right, from a law enforcement and security agency perspective this is our worst concern and the ability for people to move very quickly from an idea to an intention through to action is what law enforcement in this country is dealing with every day now.
It was good work by our police and security agencies to stop this attack but of course the work is not finished and as we will brief you in a minute we need to keep vigilant and continue to work on this problem.
[ends]


Today, I want to speak to you about keeping our country safe.
I want to speak to you about the threat that we face; the work done already to keep you as safe as we humanly can; and the things still needed to prevent further terrorist attacks.
Today, my colleagues and I are joined by representatives of the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Defence Force, ASIO and agencies like Crimtrac – which helps police and other law enforcement bodies share information.
The men and women in this room are on the frontline of Australia’s fight against terror. 
There is no greater responsibility – on me – on the government – than keeping you safe.
This is the responsibility that’s discharged by the men and women in this room.
We know that these are testing times for everyone here – and for everyone sworn to protect democratic freedoms.
The terrorist threat is rising at home and abroad – and it’s becoming harder to combat.
We have seen on our TV screens and in our newspapers the evidence of the new dark age that has settled over much of Syria and Iraq.
We have seen the beheadings, the mass executions, the crucifixions and the sexual slavery in the name of religion.
There is no grievance here that can be addressed; there is no cause here that can be satisfied; it is the demand to submit - or die.
We have seen our fellow Australians – people born and bred to live and let live – succumb to the lure of this death cult.
We have heard the exhortations of their so-called caliphate to kill all or any of the unbelievers.
And we know that this message of the most primitive savagery is being spread through the most sophisticated technology.
By any measure, the threat to Australia is worsening.
The number of foreign fighters is up.
The number of known sympathisers and supporters of extremism is up.
The number of potential home grown terrorists is rising. 
The number of serious investigations continues to increase.
During 2014, the Government consulted with our experts – many of whom are in this room today; we talked with our allies; and we worked with the Opposition, to improve Australia’s preparedness for any eventuality.
Last September, the National Terrorist Threat level was lifted to High, which means a terrorist attack is likely.
Critics said we were exaggerating.
But since then, we have witnessed the frenzied attack on two police officers in Melbourne and the horror of the Martin Place siege.
Twenty people have been arrested and charged as a result of six counter terrorism operations conducted around Australia.
That’s one third of all the terrorism-related arrests since 2001 – within the space of just six months.
The judgment to lift the Threat Level was correct.
In proclaiming a caliphate, the Islam-ist death-cult has declared war on the world.
Not only has Australia suffered at the hands of terrorists – but so have Canada, France, Denmark, Iraq, Egypt, Libya, Nigeria, Japan, Jordan, the United Kingdom and the United States.
We have seen the tactics of terrorists evolve.
In the decade after 9/11, our agencies disrupted elaborate conspiracies to attack our electricity supplies, the Grand Final at the MCG and the Holsworthy Army Barracks in Sydney.
Now, in addition to the larger scale, more complex plots that typified the post 9/11 world, such as the atrocities in Bali and London, sick individuals are acting on the caliphate’s instruction to seize people at random and kill them.
Today’s terrorism requires little more than a camera-phone, a knife and a victim. 
These lone actor attacks are not new, but they pose a unique set of problems.
All too often, alienated and unhappy people brood quietly.
Feeling persecuted and looking for meaning, they self-radicalise online.
Then they plan attacks which require little preparation, training or capability.
The short lead time from the moment they decide they are going to strike, and then actually undertake the attack, makes it hard to disrupt their activities.
Police do not have the luxury to wait and watch. 
They apply their best judgement – and they do so, fully aware that armchair critics, will find fault.
Still, police act because they have enough facts to make an informed judgement. 
Some of these raids may not result in prosecution.
But frankly, I’d rather lose a case, than lose a life.
The protection of life must always rank ahead of the prospects of a successful prosecution.
The arrest of two men in Sydney earlier this month, who’d already recorded a pre-attack message, is just one example of how quickly a threat can develop. 
I should add that without our Foreign Fighters legislation, it is highly unlikely that these arrests could have been made.
This new terrorist environment is uniquely shaped by the way that extremist ideologies can now spread online.
Every single day, the Islam-ist death cult and its supporters churn out up to 100,000 social media messages in a variety of languages. 
Often, they are slick and well produced.
That’s the contagion that’s infecting people, grooming them for terrorism.
Already at least 110 Australians have travelled overseas to join the death cult in Iraq and Syria. 
At least 20 of them, so far, are dead.
Even if the flow of foreign fighters to Syria and Iraq stopped today, there’s an Australian cohort of hardened jihadists who are intent on radicalising and influencing others.
The number of Australians with hands-on terrorist experience is now several times larger than those who trained earlier in Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
Of that group, two-thirds became involved in terrorist activity back here in Australia. 
The signs are ominous.
ASIO currently has over 400 high-priority counter-terrorism investigations. 
That’s more than double the number a year ago.
We are not alone in facing such challenges.
The same phenomenon is evident across Europe, in the United States and in South East Asia.
Many of those involved in anti-Western attacks in Indonesia over the last decade are now being released from prison—some neither reformed nor rehabilitated.
Australian and Indonesian agencies will continue to work closely together to tackle extremists – because it is in both our interests to do so.
In Australia and elsewhere, the threat of terrorism has become a terrible fact of life that government must do all in its power to counter.
So far, this is what we have done.
Within weeks of taking office, I asked the Attorney-General to develop a government response to foreign fighters.
Last August, the Government invested $630 million in a range of new counter-terrorism measures.
This funding gives our security agencies the resources they asked for to combat home-grown terrorism and to help prevent Australians participating in terrorism overseas.
The effect of these new measures has already been felt.
Counter-Terrorism Teams now operate at all eight major international airports;
sixty-two additional biometric screening gates are being fast tracked for passengers at airports to detect and deal with people leaving on false passports;
forty-nine extra AFP members are working in Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra on the Foreign Fighter threat;
seven new financial analysts have been engaged to help crack down on terrorist financing;
a new “violent jihadist network mapping unit” in ASIO has been created to improve intelligence agencies’ understanding of the threat facing Australia;
a Foreign Fighters Task Force has been established in the Australian Crime Commission with access to the commission’s coercive powers; and
Last Thursday, the Attorney-General announced a series of measures designed to combat terrorist propaganda online.
We have legislated to cancel the welfare payments of individuals assessed to be a threat to security. 
This is not window dressing – as of last September, 55 of the 57 Australian extremists then fighting with terrorist groups in Syria and Iraq had been on welfare.
We have made it easier to ban terrorist organisations which promote and encourage terrorist acts.
We have strengthened the offences of training with, recruiting for and funding terrorist organisations.
We have made it easier to prosecute foreign fighters by making it illegal to travel to a declared area overseas. 
Last December, we proscribed travel to Syria’s Al Raqqa province – where the death cult is based – without a legitimate purpose. 
We are now looking at listing Mosul district in Ninawa Province, in Iraq, which the death cult also controls.
And we have given ASIO the further power to request an Australian passport be suspended, pending further security assessment - that’s happened eight times so far.
This year, we will consider what further legislation is needed to combat terrorism and keep Australians safe.
But we cannot do it alone.
The Government is working with local communities to counter violent extremism.
I acknowledge the readiness of parents, siblings and community leaders to let the police know about people they think are falling under the death cult’s spell.
Our law enforcement agencies could not operate without their help.
I acknowledge the cooperation the Commonwealth enjoys with all States and Territories on counter-terrorism issues.
That cooperation was highlighted by the Martin Place siege.
Yesterday, Premier Mike Baird and I released the Martin Place Siege Joint Commonwealth - New South Wales Review.
What we learnt from that Review was that there were no major failings of intelligence or process in the lead up to Martin Place. 
Everyone did their job as required by law.
But now, there’s more to do.
It’s clear that in too many instances the threshold for action was set too high – and the only beneficiary of that was the Martin Place murderer himself.
For too long, we have given those who might be a threat to our country the benefit of the doubt.
The perpetrator was given the benefit of the doubt when he applied for a visa.
He was given the benefit of the doubt for residency and citizenship.
He was given the benefit of the doubt at Centrelink.
He was given the benefit of the doubt when he applied for legal aid.
And in the courts, there has been bail, when there should have been jail.
This report marks a line in the sand.
There is always a trade-off between the rights of an individual and the safety of the community.
We will never sacrifice our freedoms in order to defend them – but we will not let our enemies exploit our decency either.
If Immigration and Border Protection faces a choice to let-in or keep out people with security questions over them – we should choose to keep them out.
If there is a choice between latitude for suspects or more powers to police and security agencies – more often, we should choose to support our agencies.
And if we can stop hate-preachers from grooming gullible young people for terrorism, we should.
We have already made a start on removing the benefit of the doubt for people who are taking advantage of us.
We’ve introduced legislation to refuse a protection visa to people who destroy evidence of their identity.
And the same applies if you present a bogus document.
This Bill is currently stalled in the Senate. 
It’s reasonable. 
It’s in our country’s interest. 
And I call on all senators to support it.
The Government’s Data Retention Bill – currently being reviewed by the Parliament – is the vital next step in giving our agencies the tools they need to keep Australia safe.
Access to metadata is the common element to most successful counter-terrorism investigations. 
It’s essential in fighting most major crimes, including the most abhorrent of all – crimes against children.
Again, I call on Parliament to support this important legislation.
We need to give our agencies these powers to protect our community.
Today, I am releasing the Counter Terrorism review that the Government commissioned last August.
The Review finds that we face a new, long-term era of heightened terrorism threat, with a much more significant ‘home grown’ element.
While the Review did not recommend major structural changes, it did recommend strengthening our counter-terrorism strategy and improving our cooperation with at-risk communities.
The government will carefully consider the findings and act as quickly as possible.
In fact, some recommendations have already been acted upon:
We will ensure returning foreign fighters are prosecuted or closely monitored using strengthened control orders.
We will appoint a National Counter Terrorism Coordinator.
We want to bring the same drive, focus and results to our counter terrorism efforts that worked so well in Operation Sovereign Borders and Operation Bring Them Home.
Over recent months, I spent many hours listening to Australians from all walks of life. 
Clearly, people are anxious about the national security threats we face.
Many are angry because all too often the threat comes from someone who has enjoyed the hospitality and generosity of the Australian people.
When it comes to someone like the Martin Place murderer, people feel like we have been taken for mugs.
Australian citizenship is an extraordinary privilege that should involve a solemn and lifelong commitment to Australia.
People who come to this country are free to live as they choose – provided they don’t steal that same freedom from others.
We are one of the most diverse nations on earth – and celebrating that is at the heart of what it means to be Australian.
We are a country built on immigration and are much the richer for it. 
Always, Australia will continue to welcome people who want to make this country their home. 
We will help them and support them to settle in.
But this is not a one-way street. 
Those who come here must be as open and accepting of their adopted country, as we are of them. 
Those who live here must be as tolerant of others as we are of them.
No one should live in our country while denying our values and rejecting the very idea of a free and open society.
It’s worth recalling the citizenship pledge that all of us have been encouraged to recite:
I pledge my commitment to Australia and its people; whose democratic beliefs I share; whose rights and liberties I respect; and whose laws I will uphold and obey.
This has to mean something.
Especially now that we face a home-grown threat from people who do reject our values.
Today, I am announcing that the Government will look at new measures to strengthen immigration laws, as well as new options for dealing with Australian citizens who are involved in terrorism. 
We cannot allow bad people to use our good nature against us.
The Government will develop amendments to the Australian Citizenship Act so that we can revoke or suspend Australian citizenship in the case of dual nationals.
It has long been the case that people who fight against Australia forfeit their citizenship.
Australians who take up arms with terrorist groups, especially while Australian military personnel are engaged in Afghanistan and Iraq, have sided against their country and should be treated accordingly.
For Australian nationals, we are examining suspending some of the privileges of citizenship for individuals involved in terrorism.
Those could include restricting the ability to leave or return to Australia, and access to consular services overseas, as well as access to welfare payments.
We will also clamp down on those organisations that incite religious or racial hatred.
No-one should make excuses for Islam-ist fanatics in the Middle East or their imitators here in Australia.
For a long time, successive governments have been concerned about organisations that breed hatred, and sometimes incite violence. 
Organisations and individuals blatantly spreading discord and division – such as Hizb ut-Tahrir – should not do so with impunity.
Today, I can confirm that the Government will be taking action against hate preachers.
This includes enforcing our strengthened terrorism advocacy laws.
It includes new programmes to challenge terrorist propaganda and to provide alternative online material based on Australian values.
And it will include stronger prohibitions on vilifying, intimidating or inciting hatred.
These changes should empower community members to directly challenge terrorist propaganda.
I’ve often heard Western leaders describe Islam as a ‘religion of peace’.
I wish more Muslim leaders would say that more often, and mean it.
I have often cited Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia, who has described the Islamist death cult as ‘against God, against Islam and against our common humanity’.
In January, President al Sisi told the imams at Egypt’s al Azhar university that Islam needed a ‘religious revolution’ to sweep away centuries of false thinking.
Everybody, including Muslim community leaders, needs to speak up clearly because, no matter what the grievance, violence against innocents must surely be a blasphemy against all religion.
I can’t promise that terrorist atrocities won’t ever again take place on Australian soil.
But let me give you this assurance:
My Government will never underestimate the threat.
We will make the difficult decisions that must be taken to keep you and your family safe.
We have the best national security agencies and the best police forces in the world. 
Our agencies are working together.
All levels of government are working together.
We are doing our duty.
That is what you have a right to expect – and to demand of me and of us.
[ends]


Madam Speaker
On Indulgence.
All Australians were with the people of Queensland and the Northern Territory over the weekend as they grappled with the impact of two severe cyclones and remain with them as they are cleaning up and recovering from the devastation.
Madam Speaker, in recent days, the Minister for Justice, who deals with emergency services, and I have been in close contact with our counterparts.
I was briefed by the Northern Territory Chief Minister, Adam Giles, on the impact of Cyclone Lam in Darwin on Saturday, and I know the Deputy Prime Minister in Rockhampton and elsewhere saw first-hand the impact of Cyclone Marcia yesterday.
Madam Speaker, we are thankful there was no loss of life and the fact that there was no loss of life is testimony to the actions of emergency services and precautions that were put in place.
Nevertheless, this is a very trying time for everyone impacted by the cyclones; the people whose homes have been damaged or are without power, the small business owners whose properties and whose businesses have been impacted.
Madam Speaker, I can inform the House that there are still roads, in parts of Queensland and northern New South Wales, which are cut.
I want to repeat the advice of emergency management authorities:  if it’s flooded, forget it.
Please don’t cross flooded roads.
I can report, Madam Speaker, that in Queensland, the Army is assisting with the removal of debris and the restoration of critical infrastructure in the Rockhampton region.
Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth has activated the Disaster Recovery Payment for the Fitzroy district of Queensland.
This can be claimed through Centrelink – as well Madam Speaker, the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements have been activated by the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments for the Local Government Areas of Livingstone, Rockhampton and Banana.
As members would know, this includes personal hardship and distress assistance for individuals who have been impacted by the cyclone.
Financial assistance, Madam Speaker, is also available for local councils to assist with the costs of responding to Cyclone Marcia, including the costs of restoring essential public assets.
Similarly Madam Speaker, the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements have been activated with the Northern Territory for the local government areas of East Arnhem and West Arnhem, as well as in Queensland.
This includes personal hardship and distress assistance for impacted individuals.
As well as in Queensland, that also includes financial assistance for the relevant councils.
Madam Speaker, as always in these circumstances, volunteers and community organisations have been hard at work.
Since the dawn of our history, our summers have been difficult and dangerous and it turns out Madam Speaker that this summer is no exception.
As always Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth stands ready to assist Australians in their hour of need.

[ends]


It is lovely to be here at Old Parliament House, this is a magnificent building, it is a shrine to the great men and women who built our democracy and whose legacy we extend and build on today just up the hill.
I'm here today to formally launch the 18th annual Pollie Pedal charity bike ride and it's a real thrill to be here with so many of my parliamentary colleagues who have been part of this Pollie Pedal bike ride over the previous 18 years. 18 years ago, one night, up on the hill, myself and a number of colleagues, Ross Cameron, Jackie Kelly, Andrew Southcott were asking ourselves what we could do to lift the standing of politicians.
In those days, politicians weren't very popular – but how things have changed – and we decided after much cogitation that the best thing we could do was a long-distance charity bike ride raising money for various good causes, staying in caravan parks because it would be a complete contrast to the usual way that politicians operate. We would get out of our suits, out of the white cars, out of our offices, out of our comfort zone – in effect – to do something that would help to remind the general public, the people of Australia, that we're human, that we have the same sorts of cares, the same sorts of concerns, the same sorts of aspirations as people generally and that's what the Pollie Pedal has been over the last 18 years.
For me and for many of my colleagues and increasingly a large group of friends as well, it's been an opportunity to do something for a good cause, and in the process, see parts of our country that are off the political beaten track and to meet people who don't normally get a chance to meet senior politicians.
So, this year – the 18th – we’ll be riding from Burnie to Launceston. It's about 600 kilometres all up. We will be going through all sorts of small towns and villages. We will be meeting the people there in the seats of Braddon, of Lyons and Bass and it will be a good opportunity for them to talk about the things that are on their mind to senior members of the Government, to their local Members and it will also be an opportunity for us to experience something of the life of that beautiful part of Australia there in northern Tasmania.
It's a great thing to do; I've certainly enjoyed every second of it. It is also to raise serious money for very good causes. So far, over the 18 years, Pollie Pedal has raised some $4.5 million. Some $2 million has been raised for Carers Australia, who have been our beneficiary over the last three years and again this fourth year.
I want to pay tribute to Carers Australia; I want to pay tribute to the carers of Australia. Magnificent people who are an unpaid work force 24/7 for the people they love. The unseen pillars of our society are its carers. I've often said that it's not what we have to do but what we choose to do that is our measure. It's not what we do for money but what we to for love that is the true measure of our humanity and carers do so much for love. They choose to do so much for love and that's why it's been a real honour to ride for carers over the last few years and a real honour to get to know and become friends with Ara Creswell, the CEO of Carers Australia and Ara it’s lovely to be with you this morning.,
Before handing over to Ara, I probably should just finally again pay tribute to all of my colleagues. I should pay a particular tribute today to Paul Hillbrick who built the bike that I'm now handing over to the Museum of Democracy here. I pay a particular tribute to Kevin Andrews who effectively led last year 's Pollie Pedal when I was absent for most of it. I also want to pay a special tribute to Angus Taylor who's been the principal fundraiser for Pollie Pedal over the last year or so. Thanks, mate, really good to have all that commitment. And Stephen Hodge, one of Australia's most legendary cyclists who’s been a prominent part of Pollie Pedal for most of the last 18 years, great to have you with us again this year Steve, well done.
[ends]


I’ve maintained a very, very close relationship with New Zealand ever since I met my wife. Closer relations between Australia and New Zealand were very much boosted by this particular liaison.
It is great to be here, it is a sign of the strength of the Trans-Tasman relationship that so many people at the summit of business and indeed of government are here today. I’m delighted to acknowledge my friend and colleague the Foreign Minister Julie Bishop, the Minister for Trade and Investment, Andrew Robb, has spent much time here today and also with many of you over the last few days. We have Parliamentary Secretary Fletcher here as well and I should also acknowledge a former constituent of mine who left Australia to make good in New Zealand, a fellow called John Key. You have done quite well since you left my electorate, John.
Look, when you consider the relationship between Australia and New Zealand there are no two juridically separate entities anywhere in the world that are as close as our two countries. Yes, we are legally independent but we don’t feel like separate entities, we feel like family, not just distant cousins, we feel like close siblings. The problem with sibling relationships is that they can sometimes be taken for granted and the challenge for all of us is not to take the Australia-New Zealand relationship for granted just because Australians can get on a plane and come to New Zealand and Kiwis can get on a plane and come to Australia. That’s the challenge.
I’ve got to say, John, that certainly since the advent of your government there has been a very great interest in New Zealand on the part of Australians. I think it would be fair to say that for the first time in many years – in recent years – the economic performance of New Zealand has been making Australians sit up and take notice. Any sense of superiority that might have been felt on one side of the Tasman certainly has been dispelled by the economic performance and indeed the governmental performance of New Zealand in recent times. I’m very conscious of the fact that over the last few years you have gradually taken the size of government from 35 per cent to 30 per cent of gross domestic product. A magnificent, practical demonstration in how to be a prime minister who doesn’t just believe in smaller government but delivers it and there are some lessons here for us in Australia.
I’m conscious of the fact that while my Government has made a good start there is a way to go. I don’t want to underestimate just what good a start we have made. We’re releasing an intergenerational report in a week or so’s time and while the intergenerational report that we are releasing will reveal the ongoing budgetary challenge that Australia has, it will also demonstrate the progress that has been made in just 18 months.
It’s not often that an Australian prime minister needs to stand before a New Zealand audience and trumpet Australia’s economic achievements, but you would allow me for a moment to do so and economic  growth in Australia today is 2.7 per cent – not quite as good as yours, John but certainly a lot better than it was a year ago when it was just 1.9 per cent. Over the last 12 months, our export volumes are up seven per cent, our housing approvals are up nine per cent, consumer confidence is up, business formation is up, the number of new business registrations are at an all-time record high in Australia. All of this, in the end, feeds into economic growth which is the key to everyone’s success.
As we were at pains to stress during the G20, economic growth is the key to almost everything. Everything that we hold dear, from our humane and decent and generous society to the highest standard of living that we crave, all depends upon economic growth and that is at the heart of everything this Government in Australia is attempting to do.
This is a practical audience and you all want to know what, apart from pious aspirations, what, apart from noble sentiments, are governments working towards right now when it comes to this relationship. I hear you, Adrian, when you talk about the need for Australia and New Zealand together to be more outward looking – not just outward looking individually, but outward looking together.
We tried to be outward looking a few years ago when Australia and New Zealand jointly negotiated a free trade agreement with the ASEAN nations and, to be honest, that has been a bit of a disappointment. It has been a bit of a disappointment because once New Zealand had achieved its objectives, the shop was shut so to speak, and the agreement that we have with ASEAN is not as ambitious an agreement as, frankly, Australia would like to have in all of our successful free trade negotiations.
Both of us are now interested in an agreement with the European Union. If we are prepared to learn the lessons of the ASEAN negotiation, if we are prepared to do it differently and much more together, why shouldn’t we have a go at doing this as partners rather than as competitors?
At the moment, because of the Cricket World Cup which is going to be a magnificent triumph for one or other of us, I’m sure, we have a form of mutual recognition of visas. This seems to have gone well over the last little while. Why don’t we look at this and see if this can be taken further in the months and years ahead?
As you know, Australia has been playing catch up over the last 18 months when it comes to free trade agreements. We have been playing catch up. I don’t think we’ve done too badly, if I may say so, over the last 18 months when it comes to catching up, but it was President Xi of China who told the Australian Parliament in November last year, he said, “If you want to walk fast, walk alone, but if you want to walk far, walk together.”
I think that is a marvellous modern adaptation of ancient Confucian thinking and, John, I am certainly looking forward to walking together with you, far and fast into the future and, certainly, I’m very pleased at the fact that by finally negotiating our free trade agreement with China, we at last have a chance to catch up with you when it comes to dairy exports.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


Look, thanks for your hard work. We are delivering for the people of Australia, we are working hard for the people of Australia and that’s exactly what they want of us.
Just in the last week we’ve announced some improvements to national security; we’ve flagged progress in welfare reform, in childcare reform; we’ve flagged improvements to food labelling and we’ve also announced a crackdown on illegal foreign investment in Australia. Of course, last week, as well, we announced some important benefits to the people who were hit by the cyclone in Queensland.
So, every day we are focussed on doing the right thing by the people of Australia and that’s what they expect. They don’t want people in Canberra worried about themselves – they want people in Canberra worried about them.
There’s a lot more to do. This week, the data retention legislation comes before the Parliament. This week, obviously, the Treasurer will be releasing the intergenerational report and while that shows the scale of the budget problem, it also shows the extent of the progress that we’ve already made.
So, we’ve got a lot to discuss today and let’s get down to business.
[ends]


We are all here because this is an important occasion.
It’s good to be here for the HeForShe breakfast as part of our celebrations for International Women’s Day.
I particularly note his presence with us today of the Chief of Army, General David Morrison, and I recall his powerful admonition to his fellow soldiers in which he did not mince his words. He said, “The standard you walk past is the standard you accept.”
That is the challenge of International Women’s Day: always to lift our vision.
It’s not to walk past the big challenges.
It’s not to accept the gender pay gap as something that will never close.
It’s not to accept inflexible childcare as just a fact of life.
It’s not to accept the social and cultural barriers that hinder women and girls from participating and achieving in every part of our national life.
And above all else, it is to reject violence against women in every way, shape and form – because violence is a crime.
As a husband, as the brother of three sisters, as the father of three daughters, violence against women is absolutely abhorrent to me.
Real men don’t hit women, they don’t threaten women, they don’t bully women.
It’s worth recalling today the first female member of this Parliament, Dame Enid Lyons, who in her first speech said: the problems of government are not the problems of statistics, they’re the problems of human values and human hearts and human feelings.
And that is the issue, is it not, the darkness as well as the lightness in the human heart that produces these difficulties that we struggle against on a day such as today.
Today I want to focus on the problems faced by some migrant women in our Australian community who often don’t understand their rights under Australian law, who sometimes have unsupportive communities and sometimes have oppressive families and even face problems of forced marriage, child marriage and worse.
Today, I announce that in keeping with the recommendations of the National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women and Children, the Government will provide additional support to make our justice system more accessible for migrant women.
It is a daunting task to approach our courts at the best of times, but it must be terrifying if your language skills are poor and if you do so without the support of your family or your community.
So, the Government will work with the Judicial Council on Cultural Diversity and the Migration Council of Australia to make our justice system more approachable and more sensitive to migrant women and their families.
Just as General Morrison did with the Army – a revered and respected institution – where change is needed, we need to call it out.
If you love a community, you must face its darkness because that is the only way to change.
This means calling out child marriage for the crime it is.
It means recognising our citizenship pledge to the Australian people; whose democratic beliefs we share, whose rights and liberties we respect and whose laws we uphold and obey, is a pledge that includes the rights and liberties of women as well.
It isn’t a statement for some Australians, it’s one for all Australians, and sadly, there is no part of Australia where we can truthfully say that violence against women is not a problem.
It’s a problem in our migrant communities, it’s a problem in our remote communities and it’s a problem in our wealthiest and leafiest communities as well and this is why domestic violence will be addressed by the Council of Australian Governments this year.
We have already heard this morning of the tragic incidents and the frequency of domestic violence. One in three Australian women has suffered domestic violence in a lifetime, and every week, one Australian woman dies as a result of domestic violence.
So, we have to turn good intentions into real action, because good intentions – while better than nothing – are not enough.
So I do applaud the UN Women’s HeForShe campaign because it means men and boys stepping up and finding our voice to stand up for the rights of Australian women.
We do have, here in this country of ours, a strong story, but it’s not a perfect one when it comes to creating more opportunities and more freedom for Australian women.
Yes, we did lead the world 120 years ago when we gave women the right to vote, and yes, 20 years ago we were a signatory to the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action that we recognise this week and on International Women’s Day. And more recently, we did use our G20 presidency to ask the leaders of the world’s biggest economies to commit to reducing the gap in participation rates between men and women.
But there is always more to do and that’s what we pledge ourselves to this day. We pledge ourselves to do more.
I am delighted to be with you for this initiative and I am delighted to pledge my support for it.
Thank you.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, I move that this House:
1.Note that the 8th of March will mark 12 months since Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370 disappeared from radar over the South China Sea;   
2.Extend its heartfelt sympathies to the family and friends of the 239 passengers and crew on board, including six Australian citizens and one Australian resident, who have suffered a harrowing 12 months of uncertainty and sorrow;    
3.Acknowledge the hard work and perseverance of all those working on the international search and recovery effort, led by Australia, to locate the missing aircraft; and               
4.Note the work of Airservices Australia and their counterparts in Malaysia and Indonesia in leading global efforts to enhance aircraft flight tracking.
Madam Speaker, for the world, the loss of Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 is one of the great mysteries of our time.
For the families and the loved ones of those on that flight, it is a harrowing nightmare.
Seven who called Australia home were on board flight MH370.  
Rodney and Mary Burrows, Catherine and Robert Lawton, Yuan Li and Naijun Gu and Paul Weeks were mums and dads, spouses and partners, brothers and sisters, sons and daughters, mates and best friends; all irreplaceable to their families, friends, workplaces and communities.
Every family has a story of loss. 
We are honoured today to be joined by the Burrows, Lawton and Weeks families. 
Thank you for joining us.
We know these anniversaries are painful beyond words.
The message of this Parliament to all of the families of MH370 is that you remain in our thoughts and prayers.
To you – and to all those with loved ones aboard that flight – my pledge is that we are taking every reasonable step to bring your uncertainty to an end.
It has been the biggest search operation of its kind in history.
And it’s been an extraordinary example of international cooperation.
In the first few weeks, 28 search aircraft from Australia, New Zealand, China, Japan, Malaysia, South Korea and the United States completed 345 sorties into the southern Indian Ocean.
Ships from Australia, China, Malaysia, the United Kingdom and the United States also joined the search.
As the search from the air and on the surface reached its conclusion, Australia began the largest underwater search ever carried out, in an area that had never been mapped before.
To add to the difficulty, the search zone is in the ‘Roaring Forties’, one of the world’s roughest stretches of ocean.
Despite these difficulties, over 26,800 square kilometres of the mapped ocean floor have been searched in detail, which is about 40 per cent of the priority search area.
With sadness, Madam Speaker, I have to admit to the House that, so far, we have not found any trace of MH370.
But I do reassure the families of our hope and expectation that the ongoing search will succeed.
I can’t promise that the search will go on at this intensity forever, but we will continue our very best efforts to resolve this mystery and provide some answers.
It is right on this anniversary that Australia thanks Malaysia and China for their co-operation and friendship in this sad and difficult task.
I acknowledge the presence in the Gallery today of the High Commissioner for Malaysia and the Ambassador of the People’s Republic of China and representatives of the other countries who lost their citizens on MH370.
We grieve with you for the loss of your people and we thank you for the compassion you have shown to us on the loss of our people.
All of the men and women who have striven – from the sky and on the ocean – to unravel the fate of MH370 deserve our deepest thanks.
The members of the Joint Agency Coordination Centre have supported the families of those aboard MH370.  In word and in deed, they have demonstrated the best traditions of public service.
I acknowledge the leadership of Air Chief Marshal Sir Angus Houston, one of our nation’s great servants.
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau is tirelessly going about its work.
We have four vessels working in the search area now.
We are using cutting edge technology and world experts in underwater search operations.
Finally, on this anniversary, it is right to say that the loss of MH370 demonstrated a fundamental gap in tracking long haul flights, particularly over the oceans.
This is not the first major aircraft to go missing and, tragically, it may not be the last. 
In this day and age it seems inexplicable that the technology and systems were not in place to provide us with the exact position of this plane at all times.
The grief of the families has been compounded by this failure.
Last weekend, the Deputy Prime Minister announced that Australia, Malaysia and Indonesia will conduct a trial to track more closely aircraft over the oceans.
I thank our friends in Malaysia and Indonesia for their commitment to this essential project.
While it is not a complete answer, it will deliver immediate improvements in the way we track aircraft while more comprehensive solutions are developed and implemented.
We must ensure that no families will ever again have to endure the suffering of the families of the MH370 passengers.
Madam Speaker, on this first anniversary, we remain hopeful that we will solve this baffling mystery and bring the peace of knowing to the families and friends of all aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370.
[ends]


This marvellous new centre for Vodafone, an investment of some $12 million by Vodafone, the employment of an extra 300 people here by Vodafone makes Vodafone one of the largest private sector employers in Tasmania.
So, this is a very, very good day. It’s been made possible by a $4 million Commonwealth grant. I have to say that direct Commonwealth grants to business are rightly rare, but in this particular case, the former government decided that the economic conditions of Tasmania did make this justified and I've got to say, because of the partnership investment by Vodafone that very much seems to have been the case.
Still, the best thing that governments can do is create the conditions for strong private sector business, to get on with the job of doing what they do best and that's exactly what has been happening over the last year or so here in Tasmania, thanks to a Government in Canberra and a Government in Hobart which want our country and this state to be open for business.
Back in September of 2013, Tasmanian unemployment was over eight per cent; today it's close to the national average at 6.5 per cent. Since the Federal election, some 9,000 new jobs have been created in Tasmania; so many indicators here in Tasmania are going in the right direction for the first time in years. Over the last 12 months, tourism numbers are up six per cent to over one million. Building approvals are up 31 per cent in the nine months after the election compared to the nine months before the election and annual retail growth is now the second highest in the nation and thanks to the good work of the Hodgman Government, deficits here in Tasmania have been reduced by $450 million and business confidence is at the highest levels in years.
So, this is what happens when you get government which wants to say yes to business, government which wants to remove impediments, to remove obstacles, to unleash the creativity of people and while I have always enjoyed every second that I spend in Tasmania, while everyone who comes to Tasmania appreciates what a great place it is to visit, what a great place it is to live, Tasmania needs to be a great place to invest and to work as well. Tasmania needs to be a strong economy, as well as a beautiful national park and that's what this Government and Will Hodgman's Government is out to achieve every single day.
Finally let me just again say thank you to Vodafone. Vodafone is a great international business but it's a great international business that for many years now has had a strong base here in Tasmania. Tasmania and Australia welcomes Vodafone and we look forward to a very strong ongoing relationship between our country and Vodafone in the months and years and decades to come.
Thanks so much.
[ends]


On this National Day of Commemoration, we honour all who served in Afghanistan as part of Australia’s longest war – our armed forces personnel, our police, and our civilians.
That war ended not with victory, and not with defeat, but with hope: hope for a better Afghanistan, and for a safer world.
It really began with the attack on the Twin Towers in New York.
The 9/11 atrocity was not just an attack on America – it was an attack on civilisation, plotted and planned under the protection of the Taliban government.
The war in Afghanistan was never just to bring one country into the modern era; it was to protect every country and all people from those who would kill anyone who did not submit to their version of Islam.
It has been a long, hard and testing conflict; for us, it’s largely over in Afghanistan, but it continues in Iraq where the ISIL or Daesh death cult has likewise declared war on the world.
As Corporal Mark Donaldson VC has put it: ​"Protecting our country doesn’t just mean battening down the hatches and staying on our island and hoping the threat won’t come our way.  It can mean going somewhere else, going to war to uproot the threat at its source."
And that is what we did.
Australia accepted our responsibility for the safety of our own people and for the safety of the wider world and deployed our armed forces so that Afghanistan would no longer be a safe haven for terrorism.
Our armed forces, police and officials, almost 35,000 of them over the decade, served to uphold our values and to protect our interests.
In Uruzgan, Kandahar, Helmand, and Kabul; at other bases throughout the Middle East and aboard the ships of the Royal Australian Navy, we served to promote the universal decencies of mankind.
We mourn the 41 who died.
We grieve with the 263 who suffered serious physical wounds.
And we acknowledge the unseen wounds of hundreds more.
Your mission is over, but our mission to stand with you and to support you continues.
As Mrs Elvi Wood, the widow of Sergeant Brett Wood, said of her late husband: “He loved Australia.  He loved what he did.  He did not hesitate when he was told, you need to go there and serve your country.  He wanted to be there.”
So, today, we honour all of you – and your families, too. They carried you in their hearts and in their prayers; and they also serve who only stand and wait.
Australians didn’t fight to conquer; we fought to protect, to help, and to build.
Afghanistan is a better country because Australia was there.
Thanks to you, there are girls’ schools, roads and bridges where formerly there were none.
Thanks to you, the Afghan National Security Forces have been and continue to be trained.
Thanks to you, the world has seen once more that we are a reliable ally.
And thanks to you, the world is safer.
Today, we remember everyone who wore our uniform and served in our name.
You did your duty.
You are worthy heirs to the ANZAC legacy.
Now, some decades ago, Australians returned home from another war and were not properly acknowledged.
So, today, on behalf of our nation, I say to all our Afghanistan veterans: we are grateful to have you home, we acknowledge your achievements, and we thank you for your service.
[ends]


I move: That the House record its deep regret at the death on 20 March 2015 of the Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser AC, CH, former Member for Wannon and Prime Minister, and place on record its appreciation of his long and highly distinguished service to the nation and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.
It is fitting that we celebrate the life and legacy of our 22nd prime minister here in this chamber because this very building is one of his achievements.
He was prepared to endure jibes about politicians spending money on themselves because he understood that Australians would come to appreciate a parliament house that reflected our pride in ourselves and in our country.
He foresaw a building that would be the “crowning achievement of the parliamentary triangle” and, along with the National Gallery and the High Court that were also started on his watch, would reflect the modern nation we had become.
He was right – and of course, as so often happens in our public life – his government wore the brickbats for starting it and another government gained the credit for opening it.
The Fraser government conferred self-government on the Northern Territory, established the Commonwealth Ombudsman and enacted our first Freedom of Information laws. 
After the Hilton Hotel bombing, his government established the Australian Federal Police; and it set up the national crime commission following the Costigan enquiry.
His government commissioned the Campbell Report which laid the foundations for the eventual deregulation of the financial system.
Like all good farmers, Malcolm Fraser was a conservationist.
His government banned sand mining on Fraser Island, banned drilling on the Great Barrier Reef, set up the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and had this wonder of the natural world heritage-listed.
He was a liberal humanitarian who worked against white minority governments in southern Africa; and a staunch anti-communist who tried to keep our sports stars from the Moscow Olympics after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
At the height of the Whitlam turmoil, he’d said that he’d like to see sport rather than politics on the front page – and when he imposed the Olympic ban he managed to realise that goal!
Fraser was not an avid social reformer, like Whitlam; nor a mould-breaking economic reformer, like Hawke; but he gave the country what we needed at that time: he restored economic responsibility while recognising social change.
His government passed the Northern Territory Land Rights Act and he was the first prime minister to visit the Torres Strait.
He established the Special Broadcasting Service and began large-scale Asian immigration to Australia by accepting 50,000 Vietnamese refugees fleeing communism.
In 1983, Malcolm Fraser left parliament proud of his government and its achievements; as he said at the time: Australia is handed over…in as good or better condition than any other Western country in the world.
For a long time after 1975, Malcolm Fraser was largely defined by the blocking of supply, the dismissal of the Whitlam government and his subsequent electoral vindication.
Neither Whitlam nor Fraser ever resiled from the positions they took at that time, yet they ultimately came to see the good in each other.
Some years ago, Whitlam observed, with characteristic wit, that Fraser had supplanted him as the principal bogey man of the hard right – and that this second usurpation had been easier to take than the first!
As the Hawke government implemented market-driven reforms, a sense grew, especially among Liberals, that the Fraser government might have marked time.
In the late 80s and early 90s, Malcolm Fraser offered himself to be federal president of the Liberal Party and twice it didn’t work out.
As the Howard government implemented reforms such as the GST and privatisation; expanded mandatory detention to stop the boats; and joined US-led military coalitions in Afghanistan and Iraq, an estrangement grew between him and the party he’d led for eight years, for most of that time triumphantly.
John Howard has famously observed that the Australian Liberal Party, unlike its namesakes elsewhere, is the custodian in this country of both the liberal political tradition and the conservative one.
There is, in fact, a third tradition that our Party represents, as vital as our liberal and our conservative philosophies: a dedication to service and to repaying good fortune; the working out in this world of the Gospel notion: to whom much is given, much is expected.
Melbourne Grammar, Oxford, and a grandfather who was a senator no doubt helped to crystalize Malcolm Fraser’s instinct to serve.
Fraser’s shyness, born of a lonely childhood, often made him seem remote but it also created a keen sympathy for the outsider.
Duty and service came naturally to him – he was a man to whom becoming a member of parliament, if that opportunity presented itself, would seem the most natural thing in the world.
His political allegiances might have been instinctive as much as philosophical but he was the true and authentic representative of an honourable tradition.
My first contact with Malcolm Fraser was to lobby him for voluntary membership of the Australian Union of Students.
Because he had not been consulting papers at the time, Senator John Carrick advised me afterwards that the meeting had probably gone well – because the prime minister was focussed on the discussion and not on something else.
In the early 90s, I persuaded both Malcolm Fraser and his one-time nemesis, Liberal-turned-Australian-Democrats-founder Don Chipp, to join the Victorian Council of Australians for Constitutional Monarchy.
When I asked them both to speak at the launch, Chipp said that “if that (expletive deleted) Fraser comes, I won’t”. A few months later, Malcolm settled the matter by joining the republican side.
I made it my business to renew contact with him on becoming party leader in 2009.
We had some long talks; we often disagreed but I appreciated his wisdom born of experience.
He had a long and active life after leaving parliament.
He brought Care International to Australia in partnership with his long-time Liberal Party federal director, Tony Eggleton.
Throughout his life, he enjoyed steadfast support at home.
Tamie Fraser once said that “the best thing about being the prime minister’s wife is knowing that it won’t go on forever”.
Her legacy continues through the Australiana Fund that helps to furnish the four official residences.
All subsequent Australian prime ministers and governors-general have benefited from her work.
To Tamie, to the Frasers’ four children, Phoebe, Mark, Angela and Hugh – and to their grandchildren – I extend the condolences of the parliament and the people of Australia, and I also extend to them the gratitude of our party.
Yes, today I say “thank you” to them because my party has not said “thank you” often enough to their husband and father.
For most of his life, Fraser was a classic representative of our party.
He was conservative when he declared that “the values and principles by which we live, the human relationships which guide us, and the values to which we aspire as Liberals will not change”.
He was liberal when he stated that “each man, from the street cleaner to the industrialist, (has) an equal right to a full and happy life…to go his own way unhampered so long as he does not harm our precious social fabric”.
And he was, above all, an Australian patriot, when he declared at his first pre-selection that “I could not enter this fight if I did not love Australia”.
He was never considered a popular politician although he won three elections, including the two biggest landslides in Australian history.
Years ago, when I was helping to draft the Fightback! document I sought to include a few observations that were critical of the Fraser government.
My senior collaborator, David Kemp, rightly chided me on the grounds that it’s hard to disown your past without diminishing your future.
In a sense, today’s proceedings are a farewell – to this complex and driven man, to this forceful and effective leader, to this rare public personality who gained the support of all points on the political spectrum, but almost never at the same time.
But we Liberals owe him more than that; our challenge is not to say goodbye; it’s to be more magnanimous in his death than we were in his life, and to acknowledge this giant who is surely one of us.
[ends]


Many of us yesterday gathered at the Scots Church to farewell our 22nd Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser. It was the same church from which we had farewelled Sir Robert Menzies some 37 years earlier. Malcolm Fraser got rid of the worst government in Australia's history, and he gave us seven years of good government. It was a government which restored economic responsibility yet recognised social change. Malcolm Fraser was a giant of our history, he was great Australian, he was a great Liberal, he was one of us. We embraced him yesterday, we embrace him today, we embrace him forever.
Now, today I want to acknowledge many great Victorian Liberals, starting with Andrew Robb, the Minister for Trade and Investment. Andrew Robb has done in one year what his predecessors could not do in 10 – he has negotiated three Free Trade Agreements.
I acknowledge and salute another great Victorian Liberal – Greg Hunt. Greg Hunt was the man who persuaded the Senate to repeal the carbon tax and it takes a lot to persuade the Senate these days. He has approved $1 trillion worth of new investment. He's produced the fastest environmental approval times on record. He's stopped the dumping of dredge spoil on the Great Barrier Reef, and he's deploying hundreds of Green Army detachments right around our country to the rescue of our polluted waterways and degraded bush. He is a remarkable Victorian Liberal.
And then of course there's my friend and colleague Bruce Billson – the evangelist of small business. I almost said the messiah of small business, but he saved that up to be the John the Baptist of introductions didn’t you, Bruce? Bruce is the man who has helped to cut $2.5 billion from business red tape costs every year and he is the Minister who is delivering a small business tax cut in this year's Budget because small business is the vital beating heart of a strong economy.
Then there's Michael Ronaldson, the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs who is not just organising our centenary celebrations but he is building at Villers-Bretonneux in France the John Monash Interpretive Centre which will be a fitting tribute to a great Victorian, Australia's greatest ever soldier who changed the course of world history.
And I can't mention the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs without of course mentioning the Minister for Defence, Kevin Andrews, who is giving us the most modern and the most capable armed forces Australia has ever had.
And Mitch Fifield, the architect of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, who will deliver a genuinely insurance-based scheme which will benefit a half a million Australians with disabilities and everyone who cares for them and which will have its head office in Geelong. And I saw Sarah Henderson getting particularly enthusiastic at that point.
Finally, on my Victorian Ministerial colleagues, all of you are familiar with Josh Frydenberg. The shy and retiring Josh Frydenberg whose latest claim to fame is that he has saved Australia from the most outrageous bank job in our history, the most outrageous bank heist in our history. You know, we're all familiar with bank robberies that get away with thousands of dollars, but there was a fellow called Bill Shorten who robbed Australian banks of some half a billion dollars. He discovered that there was 156,000 bank accounts that had been inactive for three years, so what did he do? He took them! He took them! As minister for financial services the greatest bank heist in Australian history by the Leader of the Opposition and Josh Frydenberg is the man who is stopping it.
Now, my friends, it's great to be with you today, it's great to see you in good spirits today. Because I know that what happened in this State last December hurt. It always hurts to lose an election. But when you look at the great Federal Members of Parliament we've got down here, when you look at the great State Members of Parliament we've got here, our Party is in good shape here in Victoria.
I pay tribute to Ted Baillieu. I pay tribute to Denis Napthine and I make this prediction: The longer the Labor government lasts, the better the Victorian Liberal government will look. I make that prediction.
And I pay tribute to Matthew Guy. Matthew Guy has the character, the judgment and the temperament to lead our great Party to victory at the next Victorian State election.
I pay tribute to Tony Snell who has done so much over the last four years to put our Party into great shape. And I welcome back my friend Michael Kroger who has been such a remarkable shaper of our politics for more than 30 years.
Friends, I want to report to you that your Government in Canberra is making steady progress. It hasn't all been progress but we are making steady progress. It's humbling, I have to say to you, very humbling to face the kind of Party Room challenge that I faced earlier this year. It's humbling but it's also instructive.
It was a reminder that even a Prime Minister has to be a servant as well as a leader. And you might have noticed a relentless focus since February of this year on the things that really matter to the people of Australia. Yes, we have scrapped the carbon tax and that's put $550 back into the pockets of the average Australian family. And, yes, we have scrapped the mining tax and that's helped to restore Australia's reputation as a good place to invest. And, yes, we have stopped the boats and that means that hundreds of people are no longer dying at sea. And, yes, we have signed Free Trade Agreements with the countries that take 60 per cent of our exports and that is such good news for the dairy industry and for the beef industries of Victoria. And, yes we are rolling out the National Broadband Network on budget and on schedule. And, yes, we are keeping our nation safe from the terrorist death cult both at home and abroad. And, yes, we are moving to ensure that all the long-term unemployed under 50 are doing some form of work for the dole.
Yes, we’re doing all of those thing, but in the last few weeks we have lowered the screening threshold for foreign purchases of agricultural land, we have cracked down on illegal foreign purchases of residential land, we have introduced a grocery code of conduct so there will be a level playing field for large and small business for the first time in this vital sector. We have moved to establish for the first time in our history country of origin labelling, so that you will actually be able to understand the labels on your food.
We are working with the states to crackdown on the terrible scourge of ice which is stalking our regional centres in particular. We are working with the states for the first time to have a national domestic violence order in place. And once again, we are moving in the Parliament to establish a mandatory five-year minimum sentence for people who deal in illicit firearms and we are doing so as so often against the opposition of the Labor Party.
Yes, my friends, we will continue the task of budget repair because, as you know, people who have run businesses, people who know what it's like to juggle a family budget, as you know, countries, like people, like families, like businesses have to live within their means. But, as the Intergenerational Report shows, already we have halved Labor's debt and deficit going forward.
As the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook showed, every year we get about $10 billion closer to achieving a surplus. This year's Budget will be responsible, it will be measured, but it will above all be fair and, yes, there will be tough decisions in this year's Budget as there must be. But there will also be good news in this year's Budget, good news for families, with better and more affordable childcare and good news for small business in particular which deserves a tax cut.
But, friends, I want to assure you that this great Party of ours, this Liberal Party, we are the builders of modern Australia. We are the people who want to get things done. We are the people who want to see cranes over our skies. We are the people who want a great city like Melbourne to have the characteristics of a modern international city and not just those of a village.
We are the builders and as we have seen in Victoria over the last few months, Labor are the wreckers. Whether it's budgets, borders, or roads, we are those who build up and make safe; Labor are the people who tear down and wreck.
As all of you know, my Government committed $1.5 billion to ensure that the East West Link is built. This vital road that won't just connect Melbourne's great eastern suburbs to the city, it will connect the great city of Geelong to the northern suburbs of Melbourne. This is a vital project, not just for Melbourne, not just for Victoria, but for our country because Melbourne is one of the great economic assets of our country and a working, moving Melbourne is what our country needs if it is to flourish in the years and the decades to come.
Even Labor knows this. Twice Bill Shorten put submissions into Infrastructure Australia calling for building of the East West Link. Twice Bill Shorten said that we need this link and now while the Federal Government remains committed and will always be committed to putting in the $1.5 billion for East West Link stage 1 and a further $1.5 billion for East West Link stage 2, while we are prepared to spend money to build a road, you've got the very mid- summer of madness, a Victorian Labor Government, that wants to spend up to $1 billion not a build a road!
Well, we saw with the former Labor government in Canberra the ultimate insanity, a jobs destroying, investment crushing new tax, the mining tax that raised no money. Now we've got the latest Labor lunacy – spending $1 billion not to build a road. Extraordinary! Extraordinary!
But, friends, what else could we expect from a government dominated by the CFMEU because, let's face it, isn't that organisation often much more interested in stopping building operations than in starting them.
This great city of yours, this great city of ours, needs the East West Link, this is the vital missing link, this is the vital artery that will make the heart of this city beat and function. It will be built by our Party, it will be built by our party and the last thing that the people of Australia need, the last thing that the people of Victoria need is a great big message to the wider world: If you want to do business, don't come to Melbourne. And that's exactly what the Victorian Labor government is saying.
But I say to the Premier – I do have a message for the Premier. It's a very simple one: If you can change your name, you can change your mind. Change your mind and build the link. I am happy to talk to the Premier about other road projects in Victoria because Victoria needs many road projects. I am happy to talk to him about freight rail projects here in Victoria. The last thing this Federal Government would ever do is dud Victoria but one thing that must always be available is $3 billion to make sure we build the link.
As I look at Victoria, as I look at South Australia, as I look at Queensland, I see what happens when you have Labor Parties in power that have grown accustomed to think small and to think mean. The Labor government in Victoria is thinking small, it's thinking of level crossings, not modern expressways. The Labor government in Victoria thought mean when during the election campaign, like its counterparts in South Australia, Queensland and now in New South Wales, all they can do is scare people. That is the tragedy of the modern Labor Party and we need to ensure that it doesn't become the tragedy of modern Australia.
We don't want people in charge of our future who are thinking small and thinking mean. We want people in charge of our future whose dreams are as big as the Australian people. We are a great people, and our future will be bright. We should put no limits on what we can achieve and I want to say, as I look out on this concourse of my fellow Liberals – our Party is as big as the people we seek to serve. That is a constant message of the Liberal Party to the people of Australia: We want to be as big as you are.
We are the Party of freedom. We are the Party of choice. We are the Party of jobs. We are the Party that has built modern Australia. And, if you want to be as big as your hopes, not as small as your fears, this Party is the Party for you – the people of Australia.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


We are here today to pay our respects to our forebears who fought the Great War. We are also here to acknowledge the work of this generation, to remember that generation and to be worthy of the service and sacrifice, the duty and honour which that generation so abundantly showed in its service to our country and to the wider world in the Great War.
Even one hundred years on, the Great War casts a long shadow.
To think of just one illustration, right now there is a problem, as you know, in the Middle East and the settlement which the Daesh death cult and others wish to disturb is the settlement that was put in place by Britain and France at the conclusion of the Great War.
So, history has its echoes – sometimes horrible echoes, sometimes noble and laudable echoes, such as the work we are about to perform this afternoon.
We should never forget the impact of the Great War on Australia and the wider world.
In those days, we had a population of scarcely five million people. Of that five million, 400,000 volunteered to serve in the Australian Imperial Force; 330,000 left our shores; 150,000 were wounded; 61,000 never came back; and tens of thousands more carried the unseen scars of war for the rest of their lives.
No one who lived through the Great War, whether they went abroad or whether they remained at home, was untouched by it.
Yes, it was, in a sense, the crucible in which our national identity was forged, but it left horrific scars.
We will remember in just a few weeks’ time the Centenary of Anzac.
Gallipoli was, obviously, in a critical sense our nation’s baptism of fire and 8,000 Australians didn’t come back. Gallipoli, though, was a defeat. It was in its own way a magnificent and honourable defeat, but a defeat nonetheless.
We will remember Gallipoli in just a few weeks’ time, but over the next few years we will remember all the other actions in which Australia was involved – not just Gallipoli – the actions in Sinai and Palestine, the capture of Jerusalem and Damascus and, of course, the action on the Western Front where we were involved for two long and horrific years.
While Gallipoli was a defeat, the Western Front was a victory – a victory at a terrible cost, but a victory nonetheless – a victory where the Australians, under General Sir John Monash, played an absolutely critical part in the conduct of the war and, ultimately, in the defeat of our main adversary.
The culmination, for me at least, of this Centenary of Anzac period will be the unveiling in 2018 of the John Monash Centre at Villers-Bretonneux in France. Villers-Bretonneux was the site of a great Australian victory in the Western Front. It was, if you like, the beginning of the end for Germany, because it was where the main German offensive faltered in the Spring of 1918 and it was from that point that Monash, in particular, and the Australian Army was able to help roll back the German offensive using the ‘all arms’ concept of war which General Monash devised and the Australians under his command put into practice.
So, there’s much to do and much to remember over the next few years, but I want particularly to congratulate the people of the West Tamar and the Exeter RSL for the work that you have done here today. It is a work of remembrance, it is a work of commemoration. It’s a work of respect to the people of this district – the men of this district – who when their country called answered that call with commitment, with courage, with patriotism and, of course, many paid a high price.
Some 15,000 Tasmanians volunteered to serve in the Great War and today we remember all of them, but we particularly remember those of the West Tamar.
Lest we forget.
[ends]


Thank you to the Chamber of Commerce and industry, thank you to Kate Carnell, your CEO, for this opportunity to discuss what the Government is doing to strengthen the economy, to create the jobs of the future and to set Australia up for continued long-term prosperity.
And I want to assure you that from the very beginning, this Government has been working to a plan – and despite the headwinds from overseas – we are starting to see the benefits.
Over the past 18 months, the Government’s priority has always been jobs and growth – to give all Australians more confidence in our country’s future.
Our plan means building a stronger budget for a stronger economy because that means more jobs and more prosperity for everyone.
Our plan has already made it easier for Australians to work; easier for businesses to compete; and easier for families to raise their standard of living.
But I should make it clear that a stronger budget or even a stronger economy is not an end in itself.
The whole point of our plan is to give people the best chance to lead the lives they choose; it’s to give you the best opportunity to live the life you want.
From election night 2013 – when I said that Australia was under new management and once more open for business – this Government has been working to deliver more jobs through higher economic growth.
We are making progress.
We inherited a weak economy, with rising unemployment, damaged business confidence and a mining boom that was coming to an end.
Eighteen months on, there’s still much to do but there are clear signs of strength.
In 2014, jobs growth was over three times the jobs growth of 2013 – with nearly 4,000 new jobs created every week.
Household spending is growing at the fastest rate in almost three years and retail sales have risen for nine consecutive months.     
Housing approvals are up 14 per cent over the past year to near record levels.               
Although commodity prices are falling, export volumes are up by a strong seven per cent in the past year.
Importantly, in 2014, new company registrations – most of which were small businesses – were the highest on record. 
More than anything else, this shows that Australian entrepreneurs know that the Government in Canberra wants to work with business, rather than against it.
Fuel prices are the lowest in years, interest rates are low and stable, and we have a lower exchange rate, making our exporters and manufacturers more competitive – and all these factors are contributing to economic momentum.
And as I move around Australia, I have seen first-hand, the real difference that we’re already making for businesses.
In Mount Gambier, I visited the weekly cattle sale – and saw the recovery of our beef industry after the previous government had banned the live cattle trade to Indonesia. 
That damage has been repaired, and the industry is now looking forward to the abolition of tariffs on our exports to China and Korea and the near-halving of tariffs on our beef exports to Japan.
Near Perth, I visited Houghton Wines – Western Australia’s oldest and most successful winemaker – and spoke with growers about capitalising on our newly signed free trade agreements.
In Tasmania, I visited Addison Farm Produce – you may have seen the pictures.  It’s an onion company – and its produce is delicious, even raw! 
Because of changes to freight equalisation, Addison’s will now have a much better shot at exporting.
In Colac, I visited Bulla Foods which is expanding to take advantage of the abolition of tariffs on our dairy exports to China and Korea.
And right around our country, in shops and cafes, in manufacturing plants and transport businesses, I’ve been shown electricity and gas bills that were smaller at the end of 2014 than in 2013 because there is no carbon tax anymore.
Of course, as all of you know, there are challenges.
Iron ore prices have fallen from record highs of $180 a tonne three years ago and $120 a tonne at the election time to below $50 a tonne today. 
Since last year’s budget, collapsing iron ore prices – and the consequent write down in tax receipts – have already driven a cut in government revenue of more than $30 billion over four years.
But these challenges are not insurmountable.
Our economic plan is flexible. It’s flexible enough to adapt to the challenges that we face.
Our plan is for a strong five pillar economy: with manufacturing, agriculture, education, and services – as well as mining – because there’s strength in diversity; in our economy no less than in our society.
One important element of protecting Australia from future shocks – a vital element in protecting Australia from future shocks – is budget repair to give employers and investors continued confidence in our country and to reassure them that government is capable of the leadership our country needs.
The Howard government’s budget repair, delivering 10 surpluses out of 12 budgets and paying off all of the government’s net debt, gave us exactly this protection back in 2008 when the global financial crisis emerged.
By contrast, the subsequent government gave us the six biggest budget deficits in our history.
Going into the 2013 election, the then-government said that the deficit would be $18 billion; it turned out to be $48 billion.
As the Intergenerational Report shows, under the former government, net debt was heading to over 120 per cent of GDP, annual deficits were heading to 12 per cent of GDP, and Commonwealth government alone was heading to 37 per cent of GDP.
Due to Labor’s debt, we’re spending $1 billion a month on interest alone – that’s the cost of a new teaching hospital that’s spent every month just to service Labor’s debt.
Though this Government didn’t create the problem, we have taken responsibility for fixing it.
Last year’s Budget, Peter, as you’ve noted, was ambitious.
It sought to fix the Commonwealth’s budgetary problems for a generation:
to bring our universities into the 21st century;
to make pensions sustainable for an ageing population;
to reinforce the work ethic for young people;
and to make our health system affordable into the future.
Despite the difficulties in the Senate, budget measures already implemented have produced $30 billion of savings over the forward estimates and far greater savings beyond that.
The abolition of the mining tax alone, with the abolition of the spending package that the former government had linked to it, will save the Budget $50 billion over the next decade.
Indeed, the Treasury advises that, at current prices, Labor’s mining tax would not have raised a single cent over the entire forward estimates period.
Now, I used to say that Labor had booked permanent spending against temporary revenue, but in fact, in this case they booked $17 billion in expenditure over four years against a tax that would not have raised a single cent.
They failed to plan ahead, even though the mining boom was already winding down on their watch.
But as the Intergenerational Report shows, despite obstruction in the Senate, this Government has already halved the projected long-term debt and deficit we inherited.
Last year’s Budget, I stress, was part of a broader economic foundation upon which the coming Budget will build.
Besides budget repair, our plan includes reducing business costs, opening up opportunities through free trade agreements, cutting taxes and, of course, building vital infrastructure.
Since the election, we’ve cut business regulation costs by $2.4 billion.
We’re well on the way to one-stop shops for environmental approvals and since the election the Commonwealth has given environmental approval for new projects worth over $1 trillion.
Not only have we signed free trade agreements with our three biggest trade partners covering more than 60 per cent of our merchandise exports, but we are working on an agreement with India and we are optimistic about concluding the Trans-Pacific Partnership. 
These agreements are opening up the largest markets in the world to Australian businesses and I know that you are just the people to take advantage of these opportunities. 
We’ve embarked on the Commonwealth Government’s biggest ever road building programme and we’re building the Western Sydney Airport after 50 years of procrastination.
We’re rolling out the National Broadband Network on time and on budget.
We’ve scrapped the carbon and the mining taxes and we’re improving the tax arrangements around employee share ownership to assist and encourage new businesses.
Overall, this Government has lowered the tax burden by $7.4 billion compared to Labor.
And unlike Labor, we have no plans to increase taxes on superannuation and will honour our commitment not to make any adverse or unexpected changes to superannuation during this term.
Our goal is always to get taxes down; our constant objective is taxes that are lower, simpler and fairer.
These are the economic foundations that we’ll build upon through the jobs and small business package and through the families’ package that will be the centrepiece of our second Budget.
I want to stress: this year’s Budget will be responsible, measured and fair.
Its focus will be jobs, growth and opportunity.
We will work with all responsible Members of the Parliament to help ensure that Australia is once more living within our means.
We are steadily working our way through last year’s unfinished business while also pressing forward with new elements of our plan.
The deficit will decline every year.
Each year will bring us closer to a surplus – a surplus that means that debt will actually start to reduce rather than simply grow at a slower pace; a surplus that means the interest bill will start to reduce rather than grow every year.
But to achieve all of this, new spending will have to be offset by responsible and fair savings.
That’s why our childcare initiative for families is contingent – it is contingent – on the delivery of savings to pay for it because we can’t have the spending without the saving to make it sustainable. 
And our small business tax cut will be more than paid for by not proceeding with the parental leave scheme that’s already been taken off the table.
I should repeat, because it’s absolutely critical: there will be no new spending that’s not offset against savings. As well, there will be no big new spending that’s not directed to making our economy stronger.
Our childcare measures will boost participation – making our economy stronger.
Our tax cuts for small business will boost confidence and cut costs – making our economy stronger.
Our infrastructure spending will save time and make it easier to do business – making our economy stronger.
We won’t just be getting spending down; we’ll be continuing to redirect spending towards measures that clearly strengthen the economy.
Our aim in this Budget is to strengthen the Commonwealth Budget in ways that don’t damage the family budget.
It’s to strengthen our Budget without damaging yours.
It’s precisely because we have made progress in the last Budget that there’s scope in this Budget for good news for families and small businesses.
At the moment, as you know, the child care system frustrates families that are just trying to get ahead.
The Productivity Commission’s report into childcare estimated that roughly 165,000 parents with children under 13 would like to work or to work more but aren’t able to.
All parents do the sums. They work out the additional income of the second parent – mostly mums – going back into the workforce. They deduct the cost of child care and transport and they ask the question: is the extra income really worth it?
Our task is to help with the challenges of having a family, especially when children are very young, so that when parents feel like getting back into the workforce, they can say ‘Yes, this is worth it.’
Because parents hold the key to increasing workforce participation, a key component of the government’s family package will be to make child care more affordable to give families more choices.
But there do have to be jobs for family members to go to.
That’s why we’re making sensible, targeted changes to support small businesses to create more jobs so that we can ease the economic pressure on families.
Australia’s two million small businesses are the engine room of our economy. They’re the source of so much of our creativity and dynamism – and only half of them have employees.
Your ACCI red tape report says that over half of Australian small businesses believe that the compliance requirements for employing people are “very complex” or even “extremely complex”.
So, we are making it easier for independent contractors and sole traders to take the first steps in employing people.
As well, on 1 July, the tax arrangements previously flagged – a general company tax cut coupled with an offsetting levy to pay for a more generous parental leave scheme, won’t go ahead.
I can confirm, though, that the Budget will have measures to cut small businesses’ tax bills in ways that will stimulate investment, boost productivity, generate new jobs and make existing jobs more secure.
We also want to make it easier for all Australians, particularly young people, to access these new jobs.
Everyone who wants to work should get a good start – a start that encourages people to work hard and to build a successful career.
The $5 billion jobactive system announced last month is an important part of that – because it’s about focusing employment services on job outcomes rather than on process and paperwork.
Jobactive includes work-for-the-dole for all younger people who’ve been on unemployment benefits for six months – because they deserve a chance to show what they can do, rather than what they can’t.
But reform doesn’t start and end with the Budget.
In the last two weeks, the Government has released a root and branch review of Australia’s competition policies, laws and institutions with the aim of delivering lower prices and more choice for households.
And we’ve started a national debate on how to make taxes lower, simpler and fairer; and on reforming the federation so that government is more efficient and effective. 
As you know, the Productivity Commission is looking at the performance of the workplace relations system and how it might be improved.
And we’ll soon be responding to the Murray report into our financial system.
Over the past few weeks, we’ve introduced a Grocery code of conduct to give small businesses a fair go in a highly competitive industry. We’ve flagged changes to country of original labelling so consumers know more about what they’re purchasing. We’ve reduced the screening threshold for foreign agricultural land purchases and cracked down on illegal foreign purchases of residential land so that people can have more confidence that foreign investment is in Australia’s best interests.
We’re continuing the royal commission into union corruption so that the rule of law doesn’t just apply to one side in our workplaces.
Let me be clear, this Government is committed to reform because today’s reform is tomorrow’s prosperity.
Reform isn’t easy – particularly when our political opponents have walked away from the legacy of their reforming predecessors. 
Yes, there will be scare campaigns against everything we take to the next election – as we saw in the last three state election campaigns where Labor campaigned against economic reform.
These campaigns have been so dishonest that, in NSW, the scare-mongering was explicitly rejected by a former Labor cabinet minister and ACTU president. 
In Victoria, the government is trashing the state’s economic reputation. It has just decided to spend at least a half a billion dollars not to build a road and to destroy hundreds of jobs that had already been created.
This is bad for Australia but it’s terrible for Victoria.
As you and the other major business groups of our Australia correctly pointed out just recently “governing is not just the responsibility of government, it is the duty of all members of parliament”.
One side of the parliament is committed to governing well; the other side is committed just to getting back into government by any means at all.
One side of the parliament has a plan to build a stronger budget for a stronger economy with more jobs and prosperity for everyone; the other side just has a plan to exploit anything that is potentially unpopular.
In short, one side are builders; the other side, right now at least, are wreckers.
One side is prepared to trust the public’s understanding that difficult decisions are needed, at least in the short-term, if our country is to go forward. The other side is stirring fear and playing people off against one another.
Under such circumstances, it’s good that business, led as it so often is by the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry has pledged itself so strongly for reform.
The challenge now is to back the reformers; it’s to support the reform that’s actually on offer so that together we can build prosperity for all of us.
[ends]


Last November, I stood with Prime Minister Key at Albany in Western Australia.
We remembered then the convoy of Australians and New Zealanders that had sailed together in 1914, bound for war.
It was said that when our countrymen met: “the cheering and the counter-cheering, the Maori war cries and the answering coo-ees would have moved a stoic”.
Six months later, on the beaches and ridges of Gallipoli, the original Anzacs were immortalised as brothers-in-arms.
On days such as this, we do not glorify war, but we do acknowledge the selflessness and the comradeship of shared struggle.
And we honour the century-old bond that the Australia and New Zealand Army Corps established between our two countries.
Among the 11,500 Anzacs who perished at Gallipoli was Captain Alf Shout of the 1st Battalion, Australian Imperial Force. 
Born in Wellington, New Zealand, he served with the Border Horse, the Stellenbosch District Mounted Troop, and the Cape Colonial Forces in the South African War.
It was his love for an Australian that drew him to our shores and it was as a Sydney-sider that he enlisted and sailed for Gallipoli.
Just before he went into battle at Lone Pine in August 1915, he said to his mate, Lance Corporal Alex McQueen, “We’ll make a name for ourselves tonight Mac.” 
And surely he did. 
As McQueen recounted, “He was a lieutenant when going into the charge, became a captain the next day, gained the VC the next, and the following, eternity.”
Captain Shout has no known grave.
But he is known to us.
No longer solely Australian, no longer solely a New Zealander, he is – now and forever – an Anzac.
He is both our hero and yours.
We honour him with this memorial as we honour all the Australians and all the New Zealanders who have served together in a just cause, from Anzac Cove to Afghanistan.
We remember Gallipoli and the Western Front.

We remember the struggle against Nazism, Fascism and militarism.
We remember Malaya, Korea, Borneo, Vietnam and the Middle East and we remember the many peace keeping operations around the world.
We remember that we stood together.
We always stand together.
Even now, our armed forces are to work together in Iraq to promote our values and to protect our people.
On this soil, sacred to New Zealanders, we remember the values we have fought for; we remember the men and women who have paid the ultimate price and we remember those who have returned, wounded in body and in spirit. 
We who come after them – we who come after all who have served together in our countries’ names – owe them a debt that can never be repaid.
With respect for the past, we dedicate this memorial to our future, as decent self-respecting peoples whose destiny will forever be linked and whom nothing can divide.
On the central pillar of this memorial is inscribed one word: ‘Anzac’.
Charles Bean, Australia’s first and finest war correspondent, once wrote: “Anzac stood, and still stands, for reckless valour in a good cause, for enterprise, resourcefulness, fidelity, comradeship and endurance that will never own defeat”.
On the cusp of our second Anzac century, on behalf of the people of Australia, I thank you for the honour you do us with this Australian National Memorial here in New Zealand.
We are more than friends; we are family, as this memorial will always show. 
[ends]


Well, look, it is a real thrill to be here at the Australian War Memorial on the eve of Anzac week.
And it’s great to be with the Governor-General Sir Peter Cosgrove; it’s good to be here with the Director of the War Memorial Dr Brendan Nelson, who has done so much over the last couple of years to keep alive the Anzac story, to keep the flame burning in our hearts.
This will be a very significant time for our country.
It will be a time to reflect on the great men and women whose sacrifice has helped to keep us free and whose spirit still breathes over our country 100 years on.
I will be in Gallipoli on 24 and 25 April. On the 24th, I will attend the international service – the British service. On the 25th, I will attend the joint Australia and New Zealand dawn service, then the Australian service at Lone Pine and the New Zealand service at Chunuk Bair.
As well, as part of this trip, I will be talking to the Turkish government and then subsequently the French government about the interests we have in common, because from the time of ANZAC to this day, there are threats to our freedom, there are threats to our national and international security and it's important that good and decent countries should stand together and work together to keep their own people and all people as safe as we humanly can be.
While the focus this week is inevitably and naturally on the events at Gallipoli 100 years ago, our war did not end at Gallipoli. The men of the first AIF subsequently went to France, Sinai and Palestine.
So, we don't just remember the men of Gallipoli; we remember the Western Front.
We remember not just the magnificent failure at Gallipoli; we look forward to the terrible success on the Western Front.
We think of the campaign in Sinai and Palestine and the Australians who helped deliver at Jerusalem and Damascus, as well as the Australians and the New Zealanders who first stormed ashore on 25 April 1915.
So, a significant and solemn time in our national life.
I have one message, if you like, today, and that is to those millions of Australians who have not yet been to an Anzac Day event: please don't let this anniversary pass without attending one.
Best thing you can do this Anzac Day, to celebrate our country, to honour our values, to support the men and women of our armed forces is to attend an Anzac Day service and I hope every single Australian, one way or another, will attend an Anzac Day service at some point over the next few days.
[ends]


In November last year, Prime Minister Davutoglu addressed Griffith University in Queensland, on the eve of the G20 summit.
He explained that his great-uncle had fought the Australians at Gallipoli 100 years ago.
In some parts of the world, to enter the homeland of a former enemy, even two generations on, would be to invite hostility and suspicion; but Prime Minister Davutoglu was welcomed as a friend in Australia.
Likewise, I have not only been welcomed here as a friend but invited to address this Peace Summit, notwithstanding Australia’s role in the 1915 attack on Turkey.
As Prime Minister Davutoglu said, it is “very rare…in history” that two nations which fought so fiercely should become such friends.
Indeed, our friendship proves that when the battle is over, when the wounds have healed and when the ground has cooled, warriors can see their enemies’ virtue.
The Gallipoli campaign (or Canakkale Savasi as you call it here in Turkey) was a dreadful baptism of fire for the young Commonwealth of Australia.
Some 60,000 Australians fought here; nearly 9,000 died, over 20,000 were wounded and thousands more carried the unseen scars for the rest of their lives.
An Australian historian wrote of the trauma of the Great War: “dreams abandoned, lives without purpose, women without husbands, families without family life, one long national funeral for a generation and more after 1918”.
It would have been like that for Turkey too.
That’s why, this week, Australia salutes the magnanimity of Turkey towards us as well as the courage and self-sacrifice of our own countrymen.
To those who despair of reconciliation in the midst of conflict, I say: look to Turkey and Australia – two foes who have become friends.
In a place of honour, next to the Australian War Memorial in Canberra, there is a memorial to Mustafa Kemal Ataturk – a worthy and resourceful leader, who embraced his fallen enemies as sons of Turkey.
Ataturk’s famous words of consolation to the grieving mothers of Australia, that their sons were lying in the soil of a friendly country, will echo around the Anzac services held in our country this week – as they stand in stone on the sacred soil of the Gallipoli Peninsula.
One of the Australians impressed by Ataturk’s statesmanship was our 8th Prime Minister, Stanley Bruce, a Gallipoli veteran who’d been wounded at Suvla Bay.
But in 1936 he chaired an international conference in the Swiss town of Montreux which restored Turkey to full control over the Dardanelles.
The man who, in 1915, had fought to seize control of the Dardanelles for the Allies, in 1936 worked hard to return them to Turkey.
In Bruce’s closing remarks at the Conference, he declared that Turkey had provided a “magnificent example” to the world in trying to reach a solution to international problems through legal methods.
It was a practical manifestation of Ataturk’s dream of “peace at home and peace in the world”; a dream that’s shared by Australians.
Ataturk had been generous to us as a people – and grace begat grace.
For the last century, under successive governments, Australia’s determination has been to advance our interests, protect our citizens and uphold our values.
We have never believed that we can save the world single-handedly; nor have we shrunk from shouldering our responsibilities.
We seek to act towards others as we’d have them act towards us.
After all, keeping commitments, valuing human life, protecting property and extending freedom are universal aspirations, not just Australian ones.
Since 1947, Australia has provided more than 65,000 personnel to more than 50 multilateral peace and security operations.
We are not accustomed to turning back, once we’ve put our hand to the plough.
In Afghanistan we worked with Turkey in the NATO-led force.
On our side of the world, when leadership is needed, we step up, as we did in Bougainville, the Solomons and in Timor-Leste.
I acknowledge Turkey’s contribution of police to UN missions in Timor-Leste, a wonderful gesture of friendship to a new country and mark of good international citizenship.
Today, Turkey and Australia are working to defeat terrorism in all its forms.
Australia condemns the occupation of Turkey’s consulate in Mosul by Daesh terrorists.
A terrorist movement calling itself “Islamic State” insults religion and mocks the duties of a legitimate state towards its citizens.
In declaring a caliphate, this death cult has declared war on the world.
Regrettably, some Australians have joined this madness.
We’ve changed our laws to ensure that foreign fighters returning home can be arrested, prosecuted and gaoled for a very long time indeed.
And we’re working to prevent more people joining this conflict.
Our planes and soldiers are part of the international coalition to disrupt, degrade and ultimately destroy the Daesh death cult at the request of the Iraqi government.
We are doing so because the threat it poses respects no national boundaries.
Any group proclaiming “submit or die” is a threat to our lives and values – and to the lives and values of all decent people.
Australia is a free, fair and, above all, a pluralist society.
It’s our pluralism that shows that freedom and fairness is real.
Some 70,000 Australian citizens have Turkish descent.
This year is the Year of Turkey in Australia.
And it is the Year of Australia in Turkey.
Important cultural exchanges will complement our increasing economic ties.
This morning I invested Dr Haluk Oral with an award in the Order of Australia.
He has been honoured for his service to our shared history and to the commemoration of the Centenary of the Gallipoli Campaign.
A subject of Dr Oral’s research was Dr Charles Snodgrass Ryan, an Australian who’d served as a military surgeon at the siege of Plevna, where he repeatedly ran to the aid of wounded Turkish soldiers under fire.
He returned to Turkey in 1915 with the Australian Imperial Force.
On 24 May 1915, when a truce was called to bury the dead, Turkish officers thought that Dr Ryan’s medals might have been stolen.
In rusty Turkish, Dr Ryan responded “They were pinned upon my chest because I fought at the siege of Plevna with Gazi Osman Pasha”.
Sir Charles Ryan was a brave man; a healer and a saver of lives.
His story belongs to Australia and it belongs to Turkey too.
As we honour our soldiers and remember their sacrifice, we also honour those who lifted their hands in peace and were a bridge between our peoples.
I honour them all today, Australian and Turkish alike; I honour all who work for a just and lasting peace based on the universal decencies of mankind.
[ends]


Commander, it is a real honour for me to stand on this ship and stand before your crew to pay tribute to the crew of the HMAS Anzac and to pay tribute to all those who have worn our country's uniform over the last 114 years.
I have not taken time out of my busy schedule to visit you – you are my schedule. I am here to pay tribute to you. You are not some kind of a side visit or an accident to this trip to Gallipoli – you are the heart and soul of this trip to Gallipoli.
While we rightly honour those who fell here, while we rightly honour those who served here, this is not about the past – it is about the present and the future. It is about our ongoing fidelity to the traditions which were established back on 25 April 1915. It’s about the duty that all of us owe to our country; most particularly and most heavily, the duty that those who wear our nation’s uniform owe to the nation itself.
I am very proud of you.
I am very honoured to be your Prime Minister.
The Australian nation is proud of you.
We admire your professionalism, we salute your service and we know that you stand ready to serve our country in good times and in bad, in all sorts of different circumstances in a way that the rest of us are never called upon to serve.
So, thank you for what you do, thank you for the commitment that you give to our country.
I suppose this is a pretty special time for all of us because we are conscious that we are just at this moment in the shadow of great events. We are conscious just at this moment of the history which has been made here, not just 100 years ago but going back thousands of years. We are just a few miles from the great city of Troy – or the former great city of Troy – I guess the scene of one of the earliest amphibious landings.
So, there are many things that crowd our minds and crowd our memories at times like this but it is what we make of those things that matters.
It is what we do with the past which has shaped us which is important and I know that all of you will make the most of this.
I know that all of you will be even more encouraged to be your best selves in the days and weeks and months and years ahead.
Thank you.
[ends]
 


The men whose names are carved into this memorial, were the hope of their day; just as you young people, who are gathered here right now, are the hope of ours.
To us, they are Anzacs; but in their day, they were fathers, sons, parents, children, cousins and mates – just as you are now.
You walk among their headstones, you read the inscriptions, you hear the epitaphs and you hear their families speak.
In these inscriptions, in these epitaphs, we hear the echoes of our country, a century ago.
We feel that spirit beckoning us, to bigger, more honest and less selfish lives.
From this place, from those who are buried here, we draw sustenance and inspiration.
We don’t come here merely to lament.
We come here to show respect – because their stories have become our stories.
Our nation is not just a place on a map, or a mass of people who happen to live somewhere.
Our nation is shaped by our collective memory; by the compact, between the dead, the living and the yet-to-be-born.
And this is the mystery, and the wonder of Lone Pine: this home that is so far away from our home; this place of peace that was once a battlefield.
The Gallipoli of August 1915 reeked of death
It was a place of disease and lice, of dysentery and flies, of headaches and fevers from dehydration, of frayed nerves from living under months of gunfire.
Lone Pine was a battle of bayonets, hand held bombs and knives; and when there was nothing left to fight with, fists, knuckles, boots and teeth. 
Of all the bastards of places, this is the greatest bastard in the world, wrote a soldier who had lived the horror.
Woe is to be found everywhere, wrote another.
The Lone Pine attack was meant to be a distraction, while a larger operation took place elsewhere on this peninsula. 
Of itself, it had little strategic purpose.
But that didn’t stop both sides fighting with an intensity that shocks us and moves us, even a century on.
In just four days in August 1915, some 800 Australians lost their lives; and 1500 were wounded in and around the trenches that run across this cemetery.
The Turkish casualties were almost three times ours.
It’s hard to fathom so much loss for what seems so little.
Yet it was not for nothing.
It was for country, empire, king, and the ideal that people and countries should be free.
It was for duty, loyalty, honour and mates: the virtues that outshine any cause.
So here, at Lone Pine, we remember those men called upon to do things in their country’s name that took them to the very edge of their physical and emotional limits, and beyond.
We remember them and how they somehow found strength in each other.
We wonder at their selflessness.
We wonder at their capacity to face death, and not to falter.
We wonder at what possessed them to charge into machinegun fire, or to push friends out of the way of unexploded bombs.
And we remember everyone who served on this peninsula: Australians, New Zealanders, Britons, French, Indians, Canadians – and Turks too.
We remember the brave, the scared, and the confused.
We remember the good and the bad; the greatness and the smallness of it all.
For when the battle is over, when the wounds have healed, and when the ground has cooled, great warriors can see their enemies’ virtue. 
The care taken of this place reflects the foe that is now a friend.
So today, I salute a noble adversary and I thank the Republic of Turkey for accepting our sons with theirs.
On the headstones here, on the graves with no name, are etched the words: their glory shall not be blotted out.
It is taken from the Scripture: Their seed shall remain forever. Their glory shall not be blotted out.
A century on, we re-affirm this truth. 
Our nation has grown from their seed.
Australia thrives and prospers, nourished by their example.
Here at Lone Pine, the pact between the past and the present is renewed for the future; for all who seek to understand what it means to be Australian.
[ends]


It’s one hundred years since Australians and New Zealanders splashed out of the sea, right here.
So now we gather in the cold and dark before dawn; wondering what to say and how to honour those whose bones rest in the hills and the valleys above us, and whose spirit has moved our people for a century.
Year after year, we journey to what’s now a peaceful coast to remember things that, normally, we might try to forget.
Year after year, from all over our country, from every walk of life, from every background, young and old make this pilgrimage.
We aren’t here to mourn a defeat or to honour a success, although there was much to mourn and much to honour in this campaign.
We aren’t here to acknowledge a legacy in this country, although Gallipoli shaped modern Turkey as much as it forged modern Australia and New Zealand.
Few of us can recall the detail, but we have imbibed what matters most: that a generation of young Australians rallied to serve our country, when our country called, and they were faithful, even unto death.
Beginning here, on this spot and at this hour, 100 years ago, they fought; and all-too-often they died: for their mates, for our country, for their King and – ultimately – for the ideal that people and nations should be free.
The first Anzacs were tradesmen, clerks, labourers, farmers and professionals; they were from every conceivable occupation, from every rung in the ladder of society, and from every point under the Southern Cross.
Instead of landing here, they would have longed for the homes they’d left behind, the times they might have shared with their families, the backyard sport they could have played with their mates.
But ordinary men did extraordinary things.
“They lived with death and dined with disease” because that was where their duty lay.
In volunteering to serve, they became more than soldiers; they became the founding heroes of modern Australia.
If they had not been emblematic of the nation we thought we were, Anzac Day would not have been commemorated from that time until this – in every part of our country, in every place where Australians gather, and in every military base where Australians serve.
If they were not still emblematic of the nation we think we are, none of us would be here.
But like every generation since, we are here on Gallipoli, because we believe that the Anzacs represented Australians at our best.
It’s the perseverance of those who scaled the cliffs under a rain of fire.
It’s the compassion of the nurses who attended to the thousands of wounded.
It’s the conquest of fear, often through a larrikin sense of humour.
And it’s the greatest love anyone can have: the readiness to lay down your life for your friend.
It’s this that’s ennobled those Anzacs to all who have come after them: they faced the hardest possible test and they did not flinch.
The Gallipoli campaign was a failure, of course; the only really successful part was the evacuation.
But the survivors of Gallipoli and their reinforcements went on to become some of the world’s finest soldiers.
The Australian and New Zealand mounted infantry spearheaded the British army that captured Jerusalem and Damascus.
In March 1918, it was the Australian army corps that held the last great German attack that had split the British from the French armies.
And it was Monash, the engineering genius and citizen soldier, the commander who’d struggled at Gallipoli but succeeded in France, who pioneered the all-arms warfare that led to victory, by breaking the bloody stalemate on the Western Front.
Over the past century, the Anzacs’ descendants have honoured that tradition: in the Second World War, Korea, Malaya, Borneo, Vietnam, Iraq and – our longest war – Afghanistan.
Those serving on peacekeeping and relief missions have likewise kept faith with the original Anzacs.
Even now, our armed forces are serving in the Middle East and elsewhere, defending the values that we hold dear.
Today, all of us who have not been tested in war salute all of those who have.
Most of us have never worn our country’s uniform.
We have not climbed the steep cliffs of Gallipoli.
We have not trudged through the snow of Bullecourt. 
We have not struggled through the mud of Passchendaele.
We have not experienced the horrors of Hellfire Pass, or fought through the jungles of Kokoda or Vietnam, or shaken the Uruzgun sand from our clothes.
We have not risked being shot out of the skies over Germany or torpedoed in the Med or in the Pacific.
But we are the better for those who have.
Because they rose to their challenges, we believe that it’s a little easier for us to rise to ours.
Their example, we believe, helps us to be better than we would otherwise be.
That’s why we’re here: to acknowledge what they have done for us – and what they still do for us.
The official historian, Charles Bean, said of the original Anzacs: “their story rises as it will always rise, above the mists of ages, a monument to great hearted men; and, for their nation a possession forever”.
Yes, they are us; and when we strive enough for the right things, we can be more like them.
So much has changed in one hundred years but not the things that really matter.
Duty, selflessness, moral courage: always these remain the mark of a decent human being.
They did their duty; now, let us do ours.
They gave us an example; now, let us be worthy of it.
They were as good as they could be in their time; now, let us be as good as we can be in ours.
[ends]
 


Although we marked one hundred years since the Gallipoli landing yesterday, the centenary of Anzac has not passed.
Later this year, we will remember the Battle of Lone Pine and the Gallipoli evacuation, which was the only really successful part of that fraught campaign.
Over the next three years, we will remember the achievement of the Australian light horse in Sinai, at Beersheba and in the capture of Jerusalem and Damascus.
But increasingly our attention will turn here, to the Western Front, the main focus of the war, where almost 300,000 Australians fought and 46,000 died.
Gallipoli has dominated our imagination but the Western Front was where Australia’s main war was fought.
This is where our thoughts must dwell if we are truly to remember our forebears, pay homage to their sacrifice and honour their achievements.
Gallipoli was a splendid failure; the Western Front was a terrible success and we should recall our victories as much as our defeats.
In the final months of the war, the five divisions of the Australian army, fighting together for the first time, bested 39 German divisions, took 29,000 prisoners, captured 338 guns and advanced over more than 40 miles of contested ground.
 
It was the commander of the Australian Army Corps, General Sir John Monash, who most thoroughly brought organisation and technology to the battlefield: to break the stalemate of trench warfare and the futility of men charging against barbed wire and machine guns.
And it was on these broad slopes to the east, that Monash and his men fought what has been acclaimed as ‘the perfect battle’ at Le Hamel. 
Soon, this shrine will be more than a place to mourn and reflect; it will also be a place to learn and to understand.
A new centre, bearing Monash’s name, will tell the whole story of Australia’s part in the Allied victory here on the Western Front.
When Australian troops recaptured Villers-Bretonneux on Anzac Day 1918, they helped to turn the tide of war.
Marshal Foch said of the Australians here: You saved Amiens, you saved France; our gratitude will remain ever and always to Australia.
At the 1938 dedication of this memorial, President LeBrun declared that there is no spot on the whole of the tortured soil of France which is more associated with Australian history and the triumph of Australian soldiers than Villers-Bretonneux.
Australians should congregate here, every April 25th, no less than at Anzac Cove.
Shortly, Dr Patrick Simon, Mayor of Villers-Bretonneux, will be invested as an Officer in the Order of Australia. 
The Order of Australia is our country’s civilian order of merit that Dr Simon has abundantly earned, by ensuring that the memory of Australia’s glorious dead is never forgotten in the country they helped to protect.
We salute the brave French soldiers who were our allies.
As well, we acknowledge the people of Fouilloy, of Villers-Bretonneux, of Amiens and all the towns and villages of the Somme, who likewise have cherished the memory of their protectors for the past century.
Australia suffered for freedom in the Great War, but no nation paid a higher price than France. 
Together, in this centenary year, we remember the tide of events that shaped our nations and that still cast their shadow over the wider world. 
We do not glorify war; we honour what’s best and noblest in human nature.
We honour what our countries fought for then and still fight for today: freedom under the law, representative democracy and the universal decencies of mankind.
The centenary of the Great War should mean that Australians, once more, are as familiar with the story of the Western Front as we are with that of Gallipoli.
This is not just France’s story, it is ours too.
It should be better known, to everyone; and thanks to our work today, it will be.
[ends]
 


Your Excellency, Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, back in the year 2000, the week after the Sydney Olympics there were very serious fires in my electorate. A few days later I was on the beach and I was talking to one of my fellow nipper parents and he was explaining to me that he'd been sitting on his veranda drinking beer while down the end of the street the local fire service had been striving to save his house.
He said he felt so guilty about it that he was determined to go and join the local fire brigade. Well, we both joined together and we've been members of the Davidson Volunteer Rural Fire Brigade ever since. I must say that in almost 15 years of service I've never heard a member of my brigade or any other brigade speak of himself or herself as brave or selfless and yet that is what members of our fire and emergency services are sometimes called upon to be as we face the natural disasters that are common in this wide brown land of drought and flooding rain.
Today, we remember those who have been lost and we particularly honour five brave and selfless men who have recently lost their lives in the line of duty. We honour David Balfour who travelled from his Canberra home to support Victorian fire crews in their time of need. We honour Andrew Harrison, a volunteer fire fighter who valiantly protected the property of his neighbours. We honour Brian Johnston, who would have marked an incredible 50 years of fighting fires this year. We honour Daniel Howard who earned the title of local hero when he battled a fire in Cobar to save life and property and we honour David Black, a skilled pilot who battled dangerous conditions to protect homes and lives on the South Coast of New South Wales.
Their selflessness beckons us all to live bigger lives, lives of duty and service.
To their families and to the families of all who have suffered in the line of duty, I express the gratitude of our nation. We honour them at this national memorial; we honour all who serve our country.
The work of those who serve our country each and every day makes this nation a safer and a better place.
[ends]


Thanks, Mel and thanks everyone for being here.
Today is a wonderful opportunity to meet some extraordinary people – it really is.
I like to think that this is the people’s house but rarely have such extraordinary people gathered together as are gathered here today.
Mother’s Day in Australia began back in the 1920s and we were a very different world – a much more stoical society, a much tougher society in many ways.
Mothers did it tough then and Mother’s Day brought a bit of recognition into the lives of so many mothers who were doing it tough.
We are a different society. There will be many mothers today that are tucked up in bed being feted by their families and that is a marvellous thing but there are still mothers doing it tough and we should think of them today as we celebrate some remarkable mothers.
Every human being has a mother. We owe almost everything that we are to our mothers and that is why mothers should always be recognised and acknowledged.
A mother is someone who never puts herself first. A mother is someone who wants the best for everyone except herself and that is the quality of selflessness that marks out motherhood and which we celebrate today.
I must say I feel both inspired and humbled by the remarkable women whose stories we have shared this morning. Inspired, because so many of you have overcome extraordinary difficulties to be amazing for your children, for others’ children and for other mothers; these are really remarkable achievements and proof positive that we have got the seeds of greatness in us. It is amazing what people can do when we summon up the better angels of our nature and that is what every one of the mothers nominated today has done.
Inspiring, but for me also very humbling, because the mothers that we honour today have experienced things that would have broken many others. I am sure I would never have been able to cope with the kind of circumstances that the mothers that we celebrate today have been through.
So, well done.
I should pay tribute to the mother I know best – my wife Margie, who, for much of her married life has been pretty much a sole parent while I went off chasing my own dreams – and Margie, our kids have turned out well and that is much more to your credit than mine. So, thank you, and well done.
I should also pay tribute to my own Mum – a remarkable woman who dedicated her life to her children and, Mum, I hope you think we’ve turned out ok!
I obviously pay tribute to Louise Voigt, and Louise I am going to offer these to you because after so many years working for mothers, the least you deserve on Mother’s Day are some marvellous roses from Roses Only.
Finally, again, I pay tribute to all of our finalists.
Listening to your stories, every one of you should be Mother of the Year – you really should, because they are extraordinary stories – absolutely extraordinary, inspirational and uplifting stories.
Unfortunately, only one can be.
Mel, is it my job to make that announcement? Well, I am going to make that announcement.
All the finalists come up on the stage, please.
The Barnardos Mother of the Year for 2015 is Leanne Robson.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, I move that this House:
1. Acknowledge that the 25th of April 2015 marked 100 years since Australian and New Zealand troops landed at Gallipoli;    
                                                                                                     
2. Pay its respects to the 60,000 Australians who fought in the Gallipoli campaign, the nearly 9,000 who died, the 20,000 who were wounded and the thousands more who carried the unseen scars for the rest of their lives;
3. Remember the brave soldiers of Great Britain, France, India and Newfoundland who fought alongside the Anzacs 100 years ago;
4. Note that on the 25th of April, solemn services of remembrance were conducted at Anzac Cove and at Lone Pine in Turkey, attended by some 8,000 Australians, including the widows of Australian veterans;                                                                      
5. Extend its thanks to the people and the Government of Turkey for their support of the centenary commemorations and their ongoing and faithful care of the Gallipoli battlefields; and          
                                                                                                                                
6. Note that on Anzac Day, millions of our fellow Australians gathered to remember the Anzacs and all those who have worn our uniform and served in the name of Australia and that the people of every electorate represented in this Parliament have honoured this milestone: the centenary of the landings at Gallipoli.
Madam Speaker, on Anzac Day, the Leader of the Opposition and I stood together with thousands of Australians and New Zealanders on the distant shores of Gallipoli.
Together with representatives from New Zealand, Great Britain, Ireland, France, Greece, India, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Canada and together with representatives from Germany, Hungary and Turkey – the foes we now count as friends – we paid our respects to the Anzacs whose spirit has moved our people for a century. 
We went to honour the generation of young men who rallied to serve our country when our country called and who were faithful, even unto death.
At dawn at Anzac Cove and later at Lone Pine, these places of peace that were once battlefields, we remembered the original Anzacs.
This Parliament, Madam Speaker, was only 13 years old when the Great War broke out.  This Parliament still sat in Melbourne.
Nine sitting MPs served in the Great War. In all, some 120 members of the Commonwealth Parliament served in World War One.
On behalf of all members, I pay my respects to them.
I honour all the men and women who have come to this Parliament after service in our armed forces.
This Parliament should always count amongst its number men and women who have served our crown and worn our uniform.
One we should especially remember on the Centenary of Anzac is our eighth Prime Minister, Stanley Melbourne Bruce MC, who was wounded at Suvla Bay serving with the British Army.
It would have been easy, even natural, for a man like Bruce to be full of hatred for the enemy who had wounded him and killed so many of his mates.
But this man – this former prime minister of ours – who in 1915 had fought to seize control of the Dardanelles for the Allies, in 1936 worked chaired a Conference in the Swiss town of Montreux which restored the Dardanelles to full Turkish control.
He forged a lifelong admiration for Mustafa Kemal. He had great respect for Ataturk, the General turned statesman whose famous words of consolation to the grieving mothers of Australia, that their sons were lying in the soil of a friendly country, stand in stone on the Gallipoli Peninsula and are carved on the Ataturk Memorial here in Canberra.
Madam Speaker, Ataturk’s words and Bruce’s example challenge all of us who seek to build a better world to be greater than our fears and to serve the true interests of the people we represent.
Madam Speaker, wherever we find ourselves on Anzac Day, Australians at home and abroad pause to remember all who have served our country.
On this centenary, Australians gathered in numbers not seen in decades to acknowledge a poignant milestone.
On the 19th of April in your electorate, Madam Speaker, adjoining my own, thousands of people lined Pittwater Road at Warriewood to watch over 2,500 people march to Pittwater Rugby Park in honour of the Centenary of the Gallipoli landing. 
It was a great crowd, as you know. You and I joined with the Governor of New South Wales to remember the men of the First Australian Imperial Force from Warringah and Mackellar and to acknowledge their service and sacrifice.
There were record numbers at all the annual services in our electorates as there were in most electorates right around our country.
At schools around our nation, students paid their respects at special ceremonies before and after Anzac Day.
To give one example, at South Curl Curl Surf Life Saving Club was organised the 100 Years 100 Boats Anzac Beach Memorial.
Hundreds were expected to attend, but instead, Madam Speaker, thousands lined the beach to watch the boats come in, with more than 450 rowers from Australia and New Zealand and one Turkish crew.
As well, groups across our country participated in the Centenary of Anzac Grants programme, restoring memorials and honour boards to demonstrate that we are a country that really does remember.
I acknowledge my own Centenary of Anzac committee, headed by Colonel John Platt CSC. I’m sure all Members would want to acknowledge their own Centenary of Anzac committees.
Madam Speaker, here in our nation’s capital, some 50,000 people were expected to attend the Dawn Service at the Australian War Memorial, but double that – at least 100,000 people – showed up in the cold and dark to pay their respects.
This has obviously been a momentous time for the Australian War Memorial, the Shrine and the museum which has served us so well.
It’s been a momentous time for its Director, our former colleague Dr Brendan Nelson, with the opening of the new First World War galleries and the launch of the Spirit of Anzac Centenary Experience which will begin touring our nation later this year,
Madam Speaker, the War Memorial has well and truly kept faith with the spirit of Charles Bean, the official historian of The Great War. 
Madam Speaker, at Gallipoli, at Villers-Bretonneux, in Belgium, in Israel and at other points around the globe, as well as here at home in Australia, the work of appropriately marking the Centenary of the Gallipoli landings has been exacting.
The Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Senator Ronaldson, and his Department have well-earned our respect for the meticulous planning and the reverent touch that they brought to all these commemorations.
Madam Speaker, I thank – and I’m sure I do so on behalf of all Members of Parliament – all the arms of government that have been involved in the centenary commemorations: Foreign Affairs and Trade, Attorney-General’s, Defence, the Australian Federal Police and also the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Madam Speaker, I thank the Government and the people of Turkey for their support of these commemorations and for their hospitality to Australian pilgrims this year and every year as well as for their faithful care of the battlefields where our soldiers lie still. 
And I acknowledge the Office of the Australian War Graves and the Commonwealth War Graves Commission that protect the last resting places of Australian service men and women all around the world.
Madam Speaker, you cannot visit one of these cemeteries and not be moved.
As you look at the headstones and read the epitaphs, you can hear the voices of an earlier generation of Australians.
Their love and their suffering, their loss does not diminish with time.
On Anzac Day we remembered the original Anzacs and the legacy of all who have followed in this path.
We honoured all who have served in the Second World War, Korea, Malaya, Borneo, Vietnam, Iraq and – our longest war – Afghanistan – as well as those who have served in peacekeeping and humanitarian operations, and we especially remember those serving today in the Middle East and elsewhere, defending the values that we hold dear. 
Madam Speaker, our nation is not just a place on a map or a mass of people who happen to live somewhere.
Our nation is shaped by our collective memory; by the compact between the dead, the living and the yet-to-be-born.
On Anzac Day this year and every year, the pact between the past and the present is renewed for the future for all those who seek to understand what it means to be an Australian. 
Madam Speaker, on every Anzac Day the phrase echoes around our services: Lest We Forget.
But we have not forgotten and we will not forget.
Planning is well underway for commemorative events marking the one hundredth anniversaries of other key events of the Great War: the battles in Palestine and on the Western Front.
Madam Speaker, in 2018 we will open the Sir John Monash Centre at Villers-Bretonneux to honour the life of Australia’s finest General in our greatest war.
Madam Speaker, we will never forget the 400,000 who volunteered from a population of nearly four million; the 330,000 who served overseas; the 155,000 who were wounded or; the 61,000 who never returned.
We will never forget the long funerial pall that the Great War cast over our country and our world.
We will never forget the magnificent defeat at Gallipoli or the terrible victory on the Western Front.
We will never forget the suffering of those men and we will never forget the just cause for which they fought.
[ends]


Scott, thank you so much for that very warm introduction. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much for the warm welcome that you’ve given to me, to my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, particularly Scott, particularly Mathias and Marise, my ministerial colleagues, to Karen McNamara and to Nick Varvaris who I think are the most marginal seat holders here. They need a special round of applause because it’s people like them who keep us in Government.
Thank you so much for being here to support the best possible government in our country right now.
I regard every one of you as people who are doing your patriotic duty, because when you come to a gathering like this you are helping the Liberal Party to be the best it possibly can be and we could not be a Government, we could not win elections without your support.
So, in being here today you are being, above all else, patriotic Australians. So, thank you so much for what you’re doing.
Now, you’re also here because you’re interested in our country, its future, its prosperity, its economic welfare and I want to remind you of what I said on election night in 2013. I said that this country is now under new management and once more open for business.
We needed to be open for open for business because over the six years of the Rudd-Gillard-Rudd Government, you've been loaded up with more taxes, more regulations and you knew that you did not have a friend in Canberra – you did not have a friend in Canberra.
But you do now and you have a Government in Canberra which is every day striving to do what we said we would do pre-election: to build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
That's what we are trying to do every day and it was so necessary because when we took office, our country had been saddled with debt and deficit the like of which we'd never seen.
We'd been saddled with incompetence and chaos in government the like of which we hadn't seen.
Under the former Labor government, debt was skyrocketing towards $667 billion. They'd saddled us with cumulative deficits of $123 billion and it was so different from the inheritance they'd got from the Howard/Costello Government where there was a surplus of $20 billion which was more valuable then than it is now and $50 billion in the bank.
So, we had a terrible inheritance and we have set about setting things right.
That's what we've been doing for the last 18 months or so.
And, you know, we brought in a Budget last year which was tough.
It had to be tough.
We wear some bruises still, but they were bruises that we were prepared to take for the sake of our country, because this is not about political popularity; it's not about my welfare or my success; it's about your success.
That's what being in government is all about: it's about the success of our people and our country.
But the good thing about last year's Budget, as well as getting rid of the carbon tax and getting rid of the mining tax, was that we also got $30 billion worth of savings – even through this not always easy Senate – we got $30 billion worth of savings through and that set up this year's Budget.
Now this year's Budget has some tough decisions in it – no doubt about that – but this year's Budget is able to build on the success that we have already had.
Not only did we bring in a Budget last year that was tough but necessary, we've managed to cut some $2.5 billion out of business red tape costs.
We've been able to move towards a one-stop shop for environmental approvals. You know, $1 trillion worth of new projects have been approved – $1 trillion worth of new projects have gained environmental approval since this Government took office.
We've got some workplace relations changes like the restoration of the Australian Building and Construction Commission, all of which is designed to try to ensure that the creative people of our country are allowed to have a go.
Even before this week's Budget, there were signs of optimism in our economy.
Economic growth is about 25 per cent higher now than it was in 2013 – still got a way to go – but it's about 25 per cent higher now than it was when we took office.
Jobs growth is three times higher now than it was in 2013.
Despite the difficulties in the iron ore market, our exports are up seven per cent, housing approvals are up over 20 per cent, retail sales have been up for the last 10 months.
Confidence is in positive territory.
Things are getting better because we are a great people who like to have a go.
This country was not built on pessimism and despair.
This country was built on optimism and a can-do attitude.
And that's what this year's Budget was designed to foster.
Yes, a Budget for confidence; yes, a budget for middle Australia; yes, a budget for fairness, too, because in the end, it's fair to give the people who are having a go, a fair go.
It is fair to do that.
That's what this Budget is all about.
I want to assure you that this Budget was measured and responsible, as well as being fair – responsible in the sense that we do have a credible path back to surplus.
The deficits going forward are $40 billion lower than they were.
Peak debt is $110 billion lower than it was.
And every year, the deficit shrinks. It shrinks by about a half a percentage point of GDP.
Because you know and we know that government, like business and like families, has to live within its means and a government that does not live within its means is ripping off our children and our grandchildren.
A government that does not live within its means is ultimately engaged in a species of intergenerational theft and we don't want to be that kind of a government because we know that we are not that kind of a country.
But this Budget on Tuesday night wasn't just about tough decisions; it was also about unleashing the creative potential of our people.
At the heart of this year's Budget is a $5.5 billion tax cut for small business.
This is the best Budget in our history for small business because we know that small business is the engine room of our economy.
We know that small business is the place where jobs are created first and fastest and we know, as you do, that every big business started off as a small business.
The more productive and prosperous and profitable small businesses that we have now, the more prosperous and productive and profitable big businesses we will have in the years to come.
So, there's a 1.5 per cent cut in the corporate tax rate for incorporated small businesses.
There's a 5 per cent tax discount for unincorporated small businesses.
Best of all, there is the $20,000 instant asset write-off for all small businesses.
This means that the tradies can go and buy themselves a new ute.
The offices can recarpet themselves.
The restaurants can have new fittings and fit-out.
This is what we want the creative people of our country to go out and do.
People said, "Oh $20,000, you know, what can you do with $20,000?"
Well, I was watching television. I had a few moments off last night and I was watching Downton Abbey and they've dropped the price of a ute to under $20,000 so that the tradies of our country can take advantage of the instant asset write-off.
We also want to make it easier for the families who are striving to get ahead.
Now, I'm sure most of you at some stage of your life have sat down around the family dinner table and you've been looking at your mortgage and you've been looking at your expenses and you've been thinking: we just need to earn more.
It's very hard to earn more without working a little more.
Then you think: how can we do that if we can't get any child care?
Well, we want to change the economics of work for millions of Australians and that's why we've brought down our Jobs for Families package.
If you are a low or middle income family with children in child care on average you will be $1,500 a year better off.
If we change the economics of child care, we change the economics of work, we have a more creative, a more productive society.
Ultimately, we have more fulfilled people because so many of us derive so much of our sense of self from the work we do.
So, this is a Budget which is very much targeted at the people in our country who want to have a go, who want to get ahead, who want to do the right thing by their families, by their neighbours, by their country, by everyone.
The great thing about our way of providing a bit of stimulus is that we haven't said, “oh, we officials siting in Canberra think that we need more spending here or more spending there.”
That's a top-down stimulus – that's a bureaucracy driven stimulus.
But we know that the people with the best sense of where the money will work the hardest, the best sense of where the money will have its most impact, is the people who are spending their money not someone else's money.
So, by incentivising small business to spend its money because it's going to get a much better tax situation as a result, we have empowered the most creative and entrepreneurial people in our society to give our economy stimulus.
That's because we know that in the end, you are the best judges of our economic future.
Yes, there are a lot of smart people in Canberra – very smart people in Canberra – but you are the people who are putting your money at risk.
We know that the best judge of where your money will be most productive is you.
That's why the more money we can leave in your pocket, the better for you and the better for our country.
So, I think this is a Budget that all of us can be pleased with and those who are responsible for it can be proud of it.
It's great to have Scott Morrison here because so many of the initiatives in this Budget are in his area.
It's great to have Mathias Cormann here, because for two budgets running now, Mathias has been running the engine room, effectively, as the Minister for Finance.
It's great to have Marise Payne here because she writes the cheques as the Minister for Human Services and over time we want to ensure that the people who are receiving the cheques have more opportunity to make money as well as to receive money.
And all of my colleagues are part of what really has been a stupendous team effort.
I dare say many of you have heard many budget speeches over the years, and so many of the budget speeches that you hear will be quite dry discourses on policies for this and policy for that.
There's a lot of technical language in them, and inevitably even this year's Budget Speech had a bit of that, but what it also had was heart and soul and passion, because what Treasurer Joe Hockey brought to this year's Budget Speech was a real experience of small business, a real life that had depended on the success of a small family business.
So, when Joe talks about family business succeeding, or family business failing, and the difference that can make to people's lives, he knows it because he's lived it.
And when Joe said that what he was on about was giving a fair go to those who wanted to have a go, he was appealing to the best instincts of our people.
I've often said that there are two things that characterise our country, two things that are heart and soul in our DNA. They are the desire to extend to every Australian a fair go, the best possible deal that we can and the desire to make the most of ourselves and our country, the desire to have a go, and that's what this Budget is all about.
It's about encouraging people to have a go so that everyone will get a fair go, so that our country will be the very best it can be.
Because you all know that over the last few years, there's been this sense that good as we are, we aren't quite what we should be.
You all know that over last few years there's been this sense of national disappointment.
Well, I want that to go.
I want to put that absolutely in the past. I want us to be everything we can be.
I want us to grasp the achievements that are there waiting for us. That's what I want us to do and I am so confident this Budget will help us to do just that.
So thank you, ladies and gentlemen. It is so good to be with you today. So good to be with so many of my fellow Australians, the people who are out there striving every day to do the right thing by their families, by their workmates, by their neighbours.
That's what it's all about – doing the right thing by our country and I'm confident that this year your Government has not let you down.
[ends]


Thanks very much, Mark. Thank you so much, ladies and gentlemen. You have got a Prime Minister for infrastructure here today, you have got a Deputy Prime Minister for infrastructure, and you have got Minister Briggs as well.
That is how seriously this Government takes infrastructure and while the Deputy Prime Minister and myself do have other responsibilities, too, Minister Briggs lives and breathes infrastructure in his role with Infrastructure Australia – and judging by his radio appearances today, he never stops talking about infrastructure, either!
At the beginning of April I went to Kybong in Queensland to launch the tender for the next section of the Cooroy to Curra upgrade of the Bruce Highway. 
Every day on that section of the highway, motorists dodge semi-trailers taking their kids to school; truck drivers worry about pulling in to an accident black spots; and everyone dreads the flashing lights and sirens that signal yet another serious accident.
On the day I was in Kybong, Warren Truss happened to be celebrating the 25th anniversary of his election to Parliament.
People have been talking about fixing that section of the highway since before Warren entered public life and he has sworn not to leave public life until it is fixed.
What happened was that lack of will, lack of funds and lack of information has contributed to decay through delay but finally that section of the Bruce Highway is being tackled by a Government determined to end the infrastructure inertia of the last few years.
Too often, governments have said that we cannot afford to build, yet all too often we have found that we cannot afford to delay.
Lives are lost on roads that have not kept pace with the traffic on them.
Productivity is lost through congestion and increasing freight costs.
All of us – every single one of us – lose time that we could spend doing something more productive than sitting in traffic.
The costs of delay; to ourselves, to our businesses and to our economy are almost never counted.
Infrastructure should not be seen just as a cost to government.  It’s actually an investment by government in making our country more productive and more liveable.
That’s why, as the infrastructure prime minister, with the infrastructure deputy prime minister this government is investing a record $50 billion-plus in infrastructure.
Because we live in a Federation, we are working with the states and the territories. 
We are working with them to help deliver the infrastructure that their communities need; through direct grants, through concessional loans and through asset recycling that give the states an incentive payment when they recycle privatisation proceeds into economic infrastructure – including urban rail.
These measures are about accelerating the public and the private investments in the big projects that our country needs.
We don’t just have to fix the infrastructure that is holding our country back; we have to fix the system that is holding back the infrastructure. 
So now we’ve got the will, we’ve got the funds and the Infrastructure Australia Audit that is launched today will give the nation, for the very first time, Australia-wide information on the adequacy, capacity and condition of nationally significant infrastructure.
It is a comprehensive investigation of the infrastructure we have, what’s missing, and what we need to do to drive our country’s economic potential.
Reading their audit, you will see that it’s robust, evidence based and independent. 
It is in fact the independent report card that our country needs.
It is, of course, a report to government – not a report of government.
Still, this Government will use this document as the foundation to develop a 15 year infrastructure plan that will set out our priorities in roads and other forms of transportation; in energy, in water and in telecommunications.
I invite the states and the territories to support the development of this 15 year plan, because Australians want their governments to work together to make everyone’s life richer and better.
This Audit is a first for Australia.
It will make decision-making more robust.
And it will drive action by revealing the costs of inaction.
The Audit details the cost to Australia of our failure until now to plan adequately for the future.
Road congestion, as Mark Birrell and Brendan Lyon have mentioned, is currently costing Australia some $13.7 billion a year. 
As a nation, if we don’t take action on better roads, better public transport, better land use and better planning, the cost will be $53 billion a year by 2031.
$53 billion a year in congestion costs in just 15 years’ time – that’s more than $1 billion every week.
The population of our cities is getting bigger and our transportation infrastructure is getting slower.
As the Audit highlights, demand on most key urban road and rail corridors will very significantly exceed current capacity by 2031 in just over 15 years.
The good news is that the Commonwealth is already investing in fixing some of the most congested roads in the country.
For instance, the Audit shows that the worst road corridor in the country for the cost of delays is Pennant Hills Road, from Parramatta to Hornsby.
Second, in the Audit’s ‘hall of shame’, is the King Georges Road Corridor.
But improvement is already at hand.
We are working with the NSW Government to build NorthConnex and WestConnex that will address both of these corridors and work is already underway. 
Both projects will improve people’s travel times, create new jobs and boost economic activity.
The NSW Government is also reinvesting the proceeds of the State’s Electricity privatisation in much needed road and rail projects. 
NSW and the ACT are the first to commit to serious asset recycling, but they certainly won’t be the last.
The Commonwealth is rewarding NSW with close to $2 billion to help upgrade Sydney’s rapid transport, Western Sydney Rail and Parramatta Light Rail as well as to build more roads.
In Victoria, treasurers Hockey and Pallas are working together to support the Victorian Government’s reinvestment of the proceeds from the sale of the Port of Melbourne into major infrastructure projects.
Yes, there is a disagreement between the Commonwealth and Victoria on the East West Link. 
It’s folly – extraordinary folly – to spend up to a billion dollars not to build something and to rip up the contract that improved transport, created jobs and invested in the liveability of Melbourne.
This could sentence Victorians to years of gridlock.
Still, the Commonwealth will keep our $3 billion commitment to the East West Link in a locked box to be made available to the first Victorian government that wants to build it – and we will keep talking to Victoria about nationally significant road projects so that Victorians aren’t dudded.
The development of this 15 year national infrastructure plan should resolve some of the contention around big projects by making the benefits of action and the cost of inaction more obvious.
The audit shows, for instance, that without action the cost of road congestion in Greater Perth will eventually exceed the cost of congestion in Western Sydney by 2031.  
The Audit vindicates the Government’s announcement of almost $500 million worth of additional investment in Western Australia for road projects that might not have gone ahead or gone ahead much more slowly. 
The work that’s now underway on some of the nation’s worst roads is only a start but it’s a taste of what can be achieved by a government that is determined to make a difference.
The whole point of infrastructure is to make it easier for Australians to work; easier for businesses to compete and easier for families to raise their standard of living.
The right infrastructure means that businesses can expand with greater confidence and parents can be home in time to take their kids to the netball or the footy.
Investment in productive infrastructure now will strengthen the economy, generate jobs in construction and soften the impact of the mining investment boom coming to an end. 
With lower exchange rates making our exporters and manufacturers more competitive, a credible pipeline of infrastructure combined with lower fuel prices and low and stable interest rates will help to drive growth in our economy.
It was John Howard who often said that national competitiveness is like a race with an ever-receding finish line.
Our competitors aren’t standing still – so we can’t either.
A key measure of our competitiveness is how quickly we can move products and people around the country, and from here, to the wider world.
According to the Audit, for instance, Australia’s biggest airports, such as Kingsford-Smith, are near capacity.
Well, after years of gridlock and procrastination, this Government has finally confirmed the site for Sydney’s second airport.
The economic consequences of inaction demand that we swiftly proceed with what I call Western Sydney’s first airport.
And we will ensure that it’s a case of roads first, airport second – because we want this airport to be a success right from the start.
It means that thousands of good jobs and better local roads will be delivered well before the first plane taxis down the runway.
As the Audit highlights, investing in our regions is just as critical as investing in our cities. 
Regions like Gladstone, the Pilbara, the Hunter, the Illawarra and the La Trobe Valley contribute so much to our economic muscle. These regions add $107 billion to National GDP and almost a fifth of it is attributable to infrastructure.
That is why this Government is determined to ensure that infrastructure in the regions is on the same fast-track as infrastructure in our cities. 
Businesses in regional Australia make highly sought-after products, but they are let down by inadequate freight links – it’s a ‘wait for freight’ that’s simply unacceptable.
From 2011 to 2031, right around our nation, container movements through our ports are estimated to grow by 165 per cent. 
The road and rail freight task over the same period will increase by 86 per.
While that does mean more pressure on our roads, our railways, our terminals and our ports, this is good news as more freight means more commerce, and more commerce means more jobs.
Our challenge is to create the means of coping with it.
Duplicating the Pacific Highway and upgrading the Bruce Highway will finally bring our eastern Australia road freight artery into the 21st century.
The fully funded duplication of the Pacific Highway will finally be completed by the end of this decade.
This upgrade is expected to save around 2.5 hours travel time.
In South Australian, the Commonwealth is working with the state government to deliver the North-South spine.
In Tasmania, we are delivering on our commitment to upgrade the Midland Highway.
And here in Sydney, we are working with the private sector to invest in intermodal capacity at Moorebank that can handle the expected growth in containerised freight moving through Sydney.    
We’ve committed $300 million towards the Melbourne to Brisbane Inland Rail which will not only serve the Murray-Darling basin but also act as a Sydney by-pass.
We are determined to improve the productivity of shipping because 99 per cent of our international trade by volume goes by ship.
Australian ports manage 1.2 billion tonnes of cargo a year which is why the Deputy Prime Minister has just released our shipping reform agenda to boost competitiveness and give our traders more efficient services.
Productivity and economic growth – and the jobs that they generate – depend, absolutely depend, on our ability to move goods efficiently and reliably. 
No less important to our prosperity is the ability to move information rapidly and reliably.
Modern communications infrastructure underpins our prosperity too.
That’s why the Government is investing almost $30 billion to roll out the National Broadband Network to every home and business by 2020 but it will be a common-sense NBN, utilising existing infrastructure delivered on time, at the right price.
 
As well, to make sure that regional Australia gets the quality digital infrastructure it needs, we’re investing $100 million to address mobile phone black spots in rural and remote parts of our country.
Better infrastructure – digital infrastructure and built infrastructure – is critical if business is to take full advantage of the economic growth of our Asian neighbours and the free trade agreements that this Government has concluded with them.
We do have producers willing and able to scale up their production to meet the new, tariff free demand, and we want to ensure that they are no longer let down by creaky supply chains.
That’s why the Government is making investments like the $100 million Northern Australia Beef Roads Fund.
By 2030, two-thirds of the world’s middle class will be in the Asia-Pacific region which makes the case for better infrastructure in the North even more compelling.
During the last election campaign, we promised that vital infrastructure projects would be underway within 12 months of our election and we’ve delivered.
 
We promised that there would be an Audit of our national infrastructure base and today we’ve delivered.
Yes, there are challenges for governments and for the private sector alike to be even more innovative in how we tackle infrastructure problems and congestion as our population grows.
To help our next commitment is that Infrastructure Australia will now develop a 15 year plan for Australia’s infrastructure priorities.
Infrastructure Australia will work with the states and territories and seek public feedback on this Audit as it prepares the 15 year plan.
And we’ll see the plan by the end of the year. 
All Australians will be able to see what our priorities are. All Australians will know what they can expect and when they can expect it.
I promise you that your Government will be working hard, day in day out, to get the right infrastructure built on time and on budget.
We will do so because building the infrastructure of the 21st century is vital for our way of life, vital for our economy and vital for our long-term prosperity.
So, if you are sitting in your car right now, if you are waiting for a train right now, if your phone is dropping out right now – you deserve to know that this Government is on your side and will build you a better future.
To use our Budget language: we will have a go so that you can, too.
So, ladies and gentlemen thank you so much.
Infrastructure Australia now has to turn the Audit into the 15 year plan – the 15 year priority list – and the Government will then work with Infrastructure Australia to get it done.
Thanks so much.
[ends]


Madam Speaker, on the 100th anniversary of the landing at ANZAC Cove, thousands of Australians made the journey to Gallipoli.
The descendants of the fallen, as well as strangers, walked among the graves, read the epitaphs and touched the walls of granite where the names of the missing are inscribed.
In both world wars and in Korea, our dead lie close to where they fell. 
As every visitor to our war cemeteries knows, the Commonwealth War Graves Commission reverently maintains the shrines where they rest.
Madam Speaker, shortly after the commencement of our involvement in Vietnam, Australian policy changed.
We decided to bring home the bodies of the fallen.
We can never restore those who have died in the service of our country.
But we can and we should offer solace and support to the families left behind.
Fifty years ago this week, the first contingent of the 1st Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment departed for South Vietnam. 
Eventually, almost 60,000 Australians, including Army, Air Force and Navy personnel, served in Vietnam.
Some 521 of them are listed on the Roll of Honour at the Australian War Memorial.
Of the 521, all but 25 were brought home.
Of the 25 not brought home, 24 of them lie at Terendak Cemetery in Malaysia.
Terendak Cemetery is situated on a peaceful slope, surrounded by trees.
The graves are tended with respect – and I thank the Government of Malaysia for the care it has shown for almost half a century.
However, the cemetery is located within a large, operational Malaysian military base, and security restrictions understandably limit the access of families to the graves of their loved ones. 
Among those buried in Terendak Cemetery, is Private Ronald Field of the First Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment. Private Field, a forward scout, was killed in action on the 9th of October, 1965. 
Also lying there is Warrant Officer Max Hanley of the Australian Army Training Team Vietnam. He earned the Military Medal in the Malayan Emergency and was also awarded the US Bronze Star for exceptional heroism while serving as a platoon leader in Vietnam. Warrant Officer Hanley was killed in action in South Vietnam on the 20th of February 1967. 
Also interred at Terendak, alongside our Vietnam veterans, is Lieutenant David Brian of the 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment. Lieutenant Brian was killed during operations on the Thai-Malaya border on the 5th of March 1964.
Madam Speaker, Mrs Dianne Field, the widow of Private Ronald Field; Mrs Marie Hanley, widow of Warrant Officer Max Hanley; and Mrs Sara Ferguson, the widow of Lieutenant David Brian are with us in the gallery today.
You are our honoured guests.
Today we remember the sacrifice of your husbands made in the service of our country – as well as the burdens that you and your families have carried.
Madam Speaker, the natural instinct of governments is to resolve problems to the satisfaction of their citizens.
We don’t want soldiers killed in the same war treated differently.
Hence, Madam Speaker, the Government will offer to repatriate the remains of all the Australians interred at Terendak Cemetery.
This offer will also be extended to the family of Warrant Officer Kevin Conway, who died in the Vietnam War, and is buried in Kranji War Cemetery in Singapore.
Because of the unique circumstances of Terendak Military Cemetery, with its limited access for families, this offer will be extended to all the families of those interred there, including those of service dependants.
Madam Speaker, in making this decision, the Government has consulted with the RSL, the Vietnam Veterans’ Association and the Vietnam Veterans’ Federation, as well as with families.  
I want to acknowledge the fine work of the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Senator Ronaldson in this matter and also the advocacy of the Member for Solomon.
Madam Speaker, the decision to take up this offer of repatriation rests, as it should, with the soldiers’ widows, children or immediate family. 
They can start to bring their loved ones home or they may choose to let them rest where they lie.
Either way, their decision will be respected.
I can assure those who choose repatriation, that we will bring our soldiers home with full military honours.
They will be reburied in Australia at a cemetery of the family’s choosing.
The Commonwealth will bear the full cost of repatriation and burial.
Madam Speaker, the former Chief of Army, General David Morrison, once observed that the Australians who served in Vietnam laid the foundations for the modern, professional Australian Army.
They fought well in a difficult and a controversial war.
But they are worthy successors to the ANZACs we remembered a month ago.
Today’s decision will ensure that all the Australians who died in the Vietnam War receive equal treatment.
It is a policy worthy of a country that honours all who wear our uniform and who serve in our name.
We do remember all who served in the Vietnam War.
We especially remember those who were faithful, even unto death.
They did their duty. 
They remain an example. 
Their selfless sacrifice will never be forgotten by the country they served.
[ends]


The Government’s first priority is always to keep our country safe. The Minister for Justice, the Honourable Michael Keenan MP, will take on the role of Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Counter Terrorism. In that role he will be my primary point of contact within the ministry on counter terrorism matters. He will be responsible to me for ensuring that counter terrorism efforts across the Government are properly coordinated. He will be supported by the new Commonwealth Counter Terrorism Coordinator in the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Mr Greg Moriarty.
Senator the Honourable Connie Fierravanti-Wells as Parliamentary Secretary to the Attorney-General and as Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister for Social Services, will take on responsibility for ensuring that all the relevant community engagement programmes in the Social Services portfolio are aligned and contribute effectively to the Government’s broader efforts to promote community engagement and to counter violent extremism.
I should also acknowledge the presence today of the Honourable Philip Ruddock MP, who is not being sworn, who of course will be my Special Envoy for Citizenship and Community Engagement.
[ends]


Thank you very much, Andrew, and thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
It is good to have so many of Australia’s most productive people here in Parliament House. We have at least as much to learn from you as you do from us as the presence of so many of my colleagues here tonight testifies.
My first task tonight is to pay tribute to an industry that has done so much for our country and, indeed, for the wider world.
Our country would not be what it is today without the resources industry.
You are just two per cent of our workforce, but you are almost 10 per cent of our GDP and you are almost 60 per cent of our exports.
Over the past decade, you have paid $104 billion in company tax. 
That’s $104 billion towards paying for the social security and the services upon which Australians depend.
The wider world would not be what it is today without the Australian resources industry.
The economic miracles of Japan, Korea and, above all, of China have relied on Australian coal, Australian iron ore and Australian natural gas.
Over the years, we have exported enough iron ore to lay all the railway tracks in Japan 300 times or to build the Tokyo Tower 400,000 times.
Over the past four decades, our trade with China has increased thirteen-hundredfold – not twofold, or fivefold, or tenfold, but thirteen-hundredfold – and your sector is responsible for over 80 per cent of our exports to China.
Last year, your exports to China totalled almost $80 billion.
Thanks to you, Australia is the world’s largest exporter of iron ore, close to being the world’s largest exporters of metallurgical coal and soon will be the world’s largest exporter of LNG.
 
As well, you have built so much of Australia’s industrial muscle. Regions like Gladstone, the Pilbara, the Hunter, the Illawarra and the La Trobe Valley are unimaginable without the resources industry.
While the resources investment boom is winding down, world supply has increased and prices have fallen, your industry remains critical to Australia’s future.
Indeed, just today, our national accounts show that mining remains our fastest growing industry with exports up over six per cent, helping to drive the fastest overall export growth in Australia since September 2000.
So please, no gloom. Do not under any circumstances underestimate yourselves.
My second task tonight is to explain how the Government is helping the resources industry as part of our plan for a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
This Government does have a clear vision for mining.
This Government wants our country to have the most competitive and advanced mining industry of any developed democracy.
Under this Government, the carbon tax has gone.
The mining tax has gone.
One trillion dollars’ worth of new projects – many in your industry – have been given the green light.
Red tape is being cut – over $2 billion in costs and over 50,000 pages in regulation so far.
Free trade agreements have been concluded with China, Japan and Korea. 
Our free trade agreement with China, for instance, will end tariffs on alumina, zinc, nickel, copper, and coking coal.
The tariff on thermal coal will be phased out over two years.
So, we have made it easier to do business, but it doesn’t stop there.
Australia needs more investment, more exports and more jobs and there are a series of measures now in the Senate that will deliver exactly that.
They are part of the plan that we took to the people at the last election.
The Senate has legislation to re-establish the Australian Building and Construction Commission, an effective cop on the beat that stamped out thuggery and boosted productivity.
Thanks to the ABCC, industry productivity rose by 16 per cent with an economic benefit to the country of about $7.5 billion a year.
The ABCC drove construction industry disputes to record lows.
To attract more investment, we want to extend the Commission’s powers to offshore work, including the multi-billion dollar resources projects on which our future prosperity depends.
And we are determined to restore the right of entry laws that the former government promised to retain during the 2007 campaign before unions were given the green light to sit in any lunch room.
For instance, the Pluto LNG project received over 200 right of entry visits in only four months. 
BHP’s Worsley Alumina plant faced 676 right of entry visits in a single year – they must have done a very good lunch there!
Our changes before the Senate will mean unions can no longer deny workers access to an individual flexibility agreement.
Our changes before the Senate will remove the union veto on greenfield projects by allowing the Fair Work Commission to approve an enterprise agreement after three months of negotiation.
Our changes mean that productivity will be genuinely considered when employees and employers are making Enterprise Bargaining Agreements.
 
As well, our changes will end the ‘strike first, talk later’ approach to bargaining.
None of these are new policies.
They’re not new plans.
They are precisely what we took to the people.
They are the changes that we have a mandate for.
John Howard often said that our national competitiveness was like a race with an ever-receding finishing line.
Our goal is to make our resources industry the most competitive in the world.
Our reforms across government are about making our country more productive with more jobs and more prosperity for everyone.
To take an example, as an island nation, we depend on an efficient shipping industry because 99 per cent of our trade by volume goes by ship. Between 2007 and 2013, however, the number of Australian ships on the coastal trade halved.
Bell Bay Aluminium has said that the freight costs for shipping from Tasmania to Queensland rose by 63 per cent, from $18 a tonne in 2011 – before the former government introduced the Coastal Trading Act – to $29 in 2012. 
Because of this Act, it’s cheaper to ship sugar from Thailand to Australia than around our own coast. 
It’s also cheaper to ship goods from Melbourne to Singapore than from Melbourne to Brisbane. 
Australian jobs in Australian industries depend upon cost-effective shipping.
We will untangle this mess because coastal shipping, in all its forms, is vital to our national productivity and competitiveness.
This Government understands in the marrow of its bones that the foundation of a strong economy is strong, productive and competitive business.
Since the days of the gold rushes, your industry has been part of our national character as well as our national economy. 
You have been strong, innovative and resilient and you’ve kept proving the pundits wrong.
In the 1950s, it was said that bauxite was rare in Australia, that payable oil would never be found here and that our tropical north could not be prospected. 
But with ingenuity, investment and vision, you have opened deposits once thought unviable and discovered new deposits, even in areas once thought thoroughly explored. 
Today, new mines are being developed and high-grade deposits are being reported. 
New tungsten mines will once again make Australia one of the top 10 producers of this essential metal.
In Dubbo we have one of the world’s largest in-ground resources of rare metals and heavy earths and Australia now has the largest and richest deposits of scandium.
So for the innovators in mining, for the intrepid men and women who discover the deposits that will deliver our future prosperity, this Government has introduced an Exploration Development Incentive – a flow through share scheme to support investment in small mineral exploration companies involved in greenfields exploration.
Finally, let me say a few words about the coming climate change negotiations.
Australia is a country that keeps its commitments.
We more than achieved our first Kyoto target and we will achieve a 13 per cent reduction by 2020 on 2005 emissions levels.
But we will do so without a carbon tax and without harming our economy.
Our Direct Action Plan is working.
The Emissions Reduction Fund has so far achieved 47 million tonnes of reduction at a cost of just $14 a tonne.
We will continue to deliver reduced emissions in ways that don’t damage our economy.
We will continue to be a good environmental global citizen without taxing investment and jobs.
I look forward to working with you to build a strong economy and a clean environment.
You are citizens as well as business people.  You want a better world for your children as well as a better return for your shareholders.
Together, we will build the best possible Australia on the shared understanding that a strong economy makes possible the high environmental standards that we all seek.
So, thank you so much. It’s terrific to have you all here in Canberra and it’s good to see you in buoyant spirits and may the iron ore price continue to be $63 a tonne or higher.
[ends]


It’s a real honour for me to be here.
 
This has been a great game today, and even though I am a Rugby Union man at heart, it is fantastic to be watching the extraordinary athleticism of this AFL game.
Apart from watching the game, what has been truly magnificent is to see the city of Melbourne and the great sport of AFL rallying behind this magnificent cause of raising money for MND research.
 
This shows the power of sport to bring people together.
It also shows the power of an individual – Neale Daniher.
Neale – your inspiration, your courage, your commitment to bring people together to do something important is a cause which really matters – it really matters.
Mate, when you were diagnosed, you could have brooded, you could have cursed, you could have said "how unfair all of this is" because it is bloody unfair.
It is absolutely unfair that someone in the prime of life should be afflicted with a terrible condition like MND.
The great thing about the human spirit is when faced with something terrible, we turn it into something useful and that is what you have done, mate.
You have turned a dreadful affliction into an opportunity to do good for hundreds of other people. All of your fellow MND sufferers in Australia feel encouraged and inspired by what you have done.
If this money can aid the treatment and cure maybe down the track for this, then, well, you would have helped millions of people.
So, Neale, I am incredibly honoured to be here with you and to have made the walk with you to the 'G earlier.
Frankly, the privilege of being Prime Minister is to meet and to mingle with people who are an absolute inspiration and I simply want to salute you, Neale. And I also want to salute everyone here today for the work you are doing to support him.
Thank you so much.
[ends]
 


It’s good to welcome you all to this important Summit.
I acknowledge the presence here today of the Premier of New South Wales, Mike Baird, and the Deputy Premier Troy Grant.
My Cabinet colleagues the Attorney-General, George Brandis; the Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop; the Immigration Minister, Peter Dutton; along with Senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells and Philip Ruddock who are currently leading a national consultation on Australian citizenship.
I acknowledge Dan Tehan, the Chairman of the Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, and Anthony Byrne, the Deputy Chair.
I acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Tanya Plibersek and her frontbench colleague Mark Dreyfus.
I also acknowledge the presence of the Member for Reid, Craig Laundy.
I particularly acknowledge the community and non-government leaders here today who are working to keep our communities safe.
I welcome the distinguished representatives of over 30 nations from across our region and the wider world.
I note that this conference is a regional version of the White House summit on countering violent extremism held earlier this year.
As everyone who has experienced the great city of Sydney knows, there is no more beautiful and easy-going large city anywhere on earth.
This country has not flourished because success was inevitable or ordained by God; this country has flourished because people from the four corners of the earth have come here to work hard, to respect each other, and to build a better life for their children and grandchildren.
This country of ours has an indigenous heritage, a British foundation and a multicultural character.
Yet the tentacles of the death cult have extended even here, as we discovered to our cost with the Martin Place siege last December.
We have all seen on our screens the beheadings, the crucifixions, the mass executions and the sexual slavery that the Daesh death cult has inflicted, mostly on Muslims, in the Middle East.
That is what the death cult has in store for everyone if it has its way.
This is not terrorism for a local grievance; this is terrorism with global ambitions.
The death cult now holds sway over an area as large as Italy in eastern Syria and northern and western Iraq.
Its affiliates control parts of Libya and Nigeria; it is active on the Horn of Africa and parts of the Arabian peninsula and it has ambitions to establish a far province in south east Asia.
Its senior members are routinely calling on sympathisers to kill un-believers wherever they find them, sometimes specifying Australians.
In the past year, Daesh and its imitators have carried out terrorist attacks here and in Melbourne, as well as in France, Belgium, Canada, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Egypt, Nigeria, Jordan, Denmark, Kenya and the United States.
At successive conferences such as this, the list of atrocities gets longer and longer.
Daesh is coming, if it can, for every person and for every government with a simple message: submit or die.
The declaration of a caliphate, preposterous though it seems, is a brazen claim to universal dominion.
You can’t negotiate with an entity like this; you can only fight it.
So, what is the Australian government doing?
We’ve sent a strong military force to the Middle East to hit Daesh from the air and to train and assist the Iraqi army to retake their own country.
We are talking with our friends and partners about how the air strikes might be more effective and how the Iraqi forces might be better helped.
American leadership is indispensable here as in all the worlds trouble spots.
At home, we are trying to ensure that Australians don’t leave this country to join the 15,000 foreign fighters already in Syria and Iraq.
Counter-terrorist units from the Australian Border Force are now operational at all our international airports.
Hundreds of people have been questioned about their travel plans and well over 100 passports have been cancelled.
We are trying to ensure that people who have been brutalised and militarised by fighting with the terrorist army cannot be at large on our streets.
The Government intends to strip citizenship from known terrorists who are dual nationals so that they can’t return to Australia – and I am grateful for the Opposition’s support on this.
As part of a broader discussion of the responsibilities of citizenship, the Government is looking at what can be done to deal with Australian citizens who have betrayed our country by fighting with terrorists, this modern form of treason.
Already, the Government – with the support of the Opposition – has imposed heavy punishment on people who travel to terrorist-controlled areas without good reason and has strengthened the powers of our police and security agencies to detain terror suspects.
In the end, though, the only really effective defence against terrorism is persuading people that it’s pointless.
We have to convince people that God does not demand death to the infidel.
Over time, we have to persuade people that error does have rights.
We need everyone to understand that it is never right to kill people just because their beliefs are different from ours.
Above all, we need idealistic young people to appreciate that joining this death cult is an utterly misguided and wrong-headed way to express their desire to sacrifice.
How this is best done is of course the work of this conference.
Our task is to share our challenges and our strategies; to discuss where we have failed and where we think we might have succeeded so that all of us can learn to be more effective in grappling with the biggest security challenge of our time.
I thank all our police, security agencies, agents and officials for their tireless work to keep us safe: I particularly acknowledge those working to prevent the on-line grooming of children and adolescents for terrorism.
I thank the hundreds of family members who have alerted our police and security agencies to potential problems in our midst.
Many young people have been stopped from travelling overseas because a mother, brother or aunty has picked up the phone to contact authorities.
I thank all those Muslim community leaders who have opposed Australians becoming foreign fighters and have expressed their abhorrence of Daesh.
I admire the leadership shown to the world by Muslim statesmen such as Prime Minister Najib of Malaysia who has described Daesh as “against God, against Islam and against our common humanity”.
I salute Egypt’s President al Sisi who recently told the imams of Al Azhar University in Cairo that Islam needed nothing less than a “religious revolution” to reverse centuries of false thinking.
As the world gets smaller, the challenge to find common ground, and to build upon it, becomes more and more urgent.
I thank God that more and more people are focussed on the things that unite us and invite everyone to join us in respect for the universal decencies of mankind.
[ends]


Warren, thank you so much. Thanks everyone for being here. It is tremendous to feel the enthusiasm in this room. It really is palpable the enthusiasm in this room for our country in general but particularly Northern Australia.
Warren, you have been a tremendous advocate for Northern Australia for as long as you have been in public life. It is great to have here the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Trade and Investment, all of my parliamentary colleagues but I do want to particularly acknowledge the Treasurer of Queensland Curtis Pitt, thank you for being here, and Gary Gray, one of our Opposition frontbenchers from Canberra. The fact that we have got people from both sides of the Parliamentary divide here shows that this is not just one Party’s vision. This is a vision for Northern Australia from Australia.
This isn't just about Northern Australia. This is about our country. This isn't just the Coalition – important, though, Northern Australia is to us – this is our country rallying together to make the most of northern Australia because we can't make the most of Australia unless we make the most of Northern Australia too.
This is about all of us.
 If the north flourishes – our country flourishes.
We want to build on the strengths of our great north because if the north is great, Australia will be great.
I want you to savour that phrase, “the great north” because that's what it is. It's great in size, it's great in its people, and it's great in its potential and this White Paper is about seizing for tomorrow and the day after what is there for us.
Seizing the future – that's what this is all about.
Now, I've been coming up to Northern Australia for many years now and I have seen with my own eyes how Northern Australia has developed.  Darwin, Cairns, Townsville, Mackay, Broome – once outposts, now each of them dynamic cities.
Fifty per cent of our exports come from Northern Australia. So, there is a fair foundation upon which to build – and build we will, starting from today.
There is a $1.2 billion spending commitment in the forward estimates in this White Paper.
There is a $5 billion concessional loan facility for economic infrastructure projects in this White Paper.
This is about giving Northern Australia what Northern Australia needs: it needs more infrastructure, it needs more people, and it needs more efficient and effective use of land.
We've got to build on the strengths we have.
Infrastructure – you all know how difficult it is to get about northern Australia. There's $700 million to upgrade roads, such as the Hann Highway – so important to people in this part of Queensland.
The Tanami Road – so important to the Northern Territory.
The Outback Way – so important to all of the three states of Northern Australia.
We must develop our water resources.
Australia does not have a water problem – we have a water management problem. That means making much better use of the water that we have.
There is a $200 million water facility in this White Paper for Northern Australia, but we are starting off with $5 million to try to make the Nullinga Dam near Cairns come to fruition and $5 million to try to make sure that Ord Stage 3 comes to fruition.
We need more people. We need people from the south going to the north. We also need people from the world coming to the north. That's why we are making it easier for people to come to this country if they are prepared to spend time working in the north, but I stress, working under standard Australian wages and conditions.
We do need to make more use of our land.
It is good that Noel Pearson is here. I have spent a lot of time over the years working with Noel.
Indigenous land is a sacred, special thing.
Indigenous land is something which must always be a cultural and spiritual asset but it needs to be an economic asset as well, for the traditional owners who choose to go down that path and we want to work closely with the traditional owners, with Indigenous people to try to ensure that economic development is possible; that economic development is available and that the Aboriginal people of our country, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people of our country, can be full economic participants as well as social and cultural participants in the future of this great land of ours.
Now, all of you have heard, over the years, from many politicians. You have heard lots of politicians talk about the future. You have heard lots of politicians talk about what we are going to do. “Gonnas” – that is what you often call us.
I am determined – absolutely determined – that this White Paper, unlike so many other vision statements from Government, does not simply remain a statement of good intentions mouldering on a shelf in Canberra.
We will continue the strategic partnership for Northern Australia – a meeting of the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Premier of Queensland, the Premier of Western Australia, the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, as an adjunct to every meeting of COAG. That will continue.
The Deputy Prime Minister will make an annual statement to the Parliament on our progress in developing Northern Australia. Warren Entsch’s committee will continue. There is no greater badger for the things he believes in then your local member, Warren Entsch.
Perhaps the greatest pioneer of the development of the north in this room is Senator Ian Macdonald, and there will be a Coalition implementation Committee chaired by Senator Ian Macdonald with the capacity to call public servants, as well as ministers, before the committee to ensure that we do get this thing done – we do get this thing done – because we can’t be content with good intentions.
Good intentions are not enough.
The world is full of good intentions but unless we turn our good intentions into a better reality for all of us today, tomorrow, forever –well, frankly, we’re not doing our job.
So, my friends, this is the mission upon which we are all embarked. I know every one of you wants to make this a personal mission and together we can make a difference, we can build our country, and in the decades to come you will all be able to think of this day, this morning, and think – yes, we were there at the start of something special.
[ends]


Thank you, Chris, yes I am the Prime Minister of New South Wales – and Victoria and Queensland and South Australia and all the other States and Territories. But I'm only the Prime Minister because of you. That's the truth. I'm only the Prime Minister because you my fellow Liberals pre-selected me all those years ago to be your candidate in Warringah; and you my fellow Liberals have supported me for the last 21 years; and you my colleague Liberals have supported me through thick and thin in the Party Room over last five and a half years. That's why I am Prime Minister. I am indebted to you. I will never forget what I owe to this great Party. I will never forget what I owe to my colleagues and I do want to mention some of them today. I'm not going to mention everyone, but I do want to mention my ministerial colleagues.
First, Joe Hockey. Now, Joe has copped a lot of crap lately, but since the Budget, hasn't it changed! Because what Joe has done is brought down the best Budget ever for the small businesses of Australia – and didn't the small businesses of Australia finally deserve some recognition and reward. The small businesses of Australia are out there making the most, right now, out there at the shops and stores, they’re making the most of the instant asset write off that Joe brought down as the centrepiece of this Budget.
Not only was Joe able to bring down the best Budget ever for small business, but he was able to give us a sustainable and a credible path back to surplus; every year the deficit drops by about half a percentage point of GDP. We were only able to do that because of the hard yards that Joe did, that all of us did, in last year's budget, where we cut $30 billion – where we cut $30 billion – off Labor's unsustainable spending.
Scott Morrison, what an extraordinary man. He did what everyone said couldn't be done – he stopped the boats. Yes, we had to be firm. Yes, we had to be prepared to take some risks. Yes, we had to be prepared to be unpopular, but I tell you what, we had to be prepared to stop the boats and we were. Having stopped the boats, he's now delivering a fairer and more sustainable pension system for the long term – well done, Scott.
Now, I'm told Marise Payne is in the audience. Marise, there you are, typical of Marise, she's not in the front row, she's in the second row. It's good to see our Ministers who don't need to blow their own trumpets. But I want to blow Marise's trumpet for her because yes, she is the person who writes the cheques for millions and millions of Australians, not only is she delivering people a fair go, but she's giving them more and more opportunities to have a go as well. That’s what we want. We want more and more Australians to have the opportunity to show not what they can't do, but what they can do and that's Marise is delivering.
Malcolm Turnbull – Malcolm came in late because he's probably been connecting yet another house to the National Broadband Network. Malcolm did more in the first 12 months as the supremo of the NBN than Labor did in five years. So, thank you and congratulations to Malcolm Turnbull.
Isn't it terrific to be here with our Premier Mike Baird and hasn't he done a magnificent job! There was a tremor that ran through our Party right around Australia after two very disappointing results in Victoria and in Queensland. But Mike was absolutely undaunted – absolutely undaunted. Despite a massive spending campaign from the Labor Party and the unions, despite a massive scare campaign from the Labor Party and the unions, despite the lowest of the low, a playing of the race card, a shameful and disgraceful playing of the race card by the Labor Party and the unions, Mike Baird triumphed. Mike's triumph shows what this great Party of ours can do when we set our minds on success. So, congratulations, Mike – it is a great tribute to you but it's a great tribute to our Party.
While I'm talking about our party – I know something about campaign managers, because when things go wrong, I blame them. And when things go right, it's all my doing. This Party of ours has had no more faithful servant than Tony Nutt and please, give him the recognition that he deserves.
Now, friends, my job today is to report to you on the first 18 months or so of your Government.
I can tell you that we are repaying the faith that you placed in us, that the Australian people placed in us, in September of 2013.
We went to that election with a very clear message. We said we'd scrap the carbon tax, we'd stop the boats, we'd build the roads of the 21st century and we'd get the budget back under control and that is exactly what we have done and what we are doing.
The carbon tax has gone – and every Australian household is better off to the tune of $550 a year.
The mining tax has gone – and Australia is once more a safe place to invest.
No less than $1 trillion – $1 trillion, $1,000 billion – worth of new projects have been given environmental approval since the election by this Government and there could be no more clearer demonstration of the fact that this country is well and truly open for business than that.
The boats have stopped. We all know what was happening under our predecessors. Under the Rudd/Gillard government, more than 50,000 illegal arrivals by sea, almost 1,000 boats. Shamefully, more than 1,000 deaths at sea and yes, over $11 billion worth of border protection budget blow-outs. Well, I can say that under this Government, as far as we know, there have been no deaths at sea and for almost 12 months there have been no boats whatsoever. We will keep this country safe – and keeping our country safe starts with keeping our borders secure and that is exactly what this Government has done, that is exactly what this Government will always do.
We said we'd build things. I said that I wanted to be known as the infrastructure Prime Minister and I've got to say in this respect it's a pleasure and honour to be working with the infrastructure Premier. The biggest Commonwealth infrastructure spend in history is now under way. With Commonwealth assistance, WestConnex is being built; NorthConnex is being built; the Pacific Highway is being duplicated; Western Sydney's first airport is happening; and thanks to asset recycling, we are investing in public transport as well. This is a build on a massive scale, but didn't we need it after more than a decade of neglect by state Labor governments.
As always, the Coalition comes to the rescue of our state and our country after years of Labor neglect.
We are cutting red tape costs for business. So far, we've delivered more than $2 billion worth of red tape cost reductions for business.
It's not just about what we do here in Australia, it's about what we do to improve relations with our friends, neighbours and trading partners. Nothing has made me more proud of the work that we've done than the three Free Trade Agreements that we've negotiated with our three biggest trading partners – with China, with Japan, and with South Korea. The Howard government started all three. The Rudd/Gillard government procrastinated for six years and the Abbott Government brought them home. That's what Coalition governments do. Every day, we read the papers, we look at the news, and the papers are full of things, the news is full of things. Most of it doesn't much matter. Most of it will be forgotten in a week, let alone a year and a decade. But know this about these Free Trade Agreements: they will be shaping and changing and improving our country for years and decades to come. They are setting up the future for our children and our grandchildren in a way that very few things that we do actually make a difference.
Our economy is responding to what this Government has done. We learnt a week or so back that since the election, there are 290,000 more jobs in our economy. Jobs growth today is almost four times the rate that it was in the last year of the Rudd/Gillard government. In the March quarter, we had almost the highest growth in the developed world. In the March quarter, export volumes rose by five per cent – that's the strongest growth in 15 years. Housing construction – construction generally – was up almost five per cent, the strongest growth in six years. Services exports were up 8 per cecnt, that's the strongest growth in seven years. Our economy is responding . Confidence is up. The National Australia Bank index showed confidence growing from three to seven compared to just 0.5 on average through the life of the former government. What that shows is when you do the right thing by the people of Australia, the great, the warm, the generous, the decent people of our country respond accordingly and they are responding to the things that this Government is doing to make their lives better.
This country is open for business, this Government means business and this Government will support the businesses of Australia to do what they do best: invest, employ and serving the people of our country.
Every day, that is what we are focused on.
We are focused on building a strong, safe and prosperous Australia for everyone. And every day in the last week, that's exactly what we did. On Monday, we secured Senate support for the passage of the small business budget Bills. On Tuesday, we secured Senate agreement to increase pensions by up to $30 a fortnight for 170,000 pensioners with modest assets. On Wednesday, we actually inked the China Free Trade Agreement. On Thursday, we released the Northern Australia White Paper, to build on the strengths of our great North because if the North does well, Australia does well. Let me dwell on that for just a moment. There is a $5 billion concessional loan facility for economic infrastructure in Northern Australia. There's $700 million over the forward estimates for upgrading roads in Northern Australia. Very importantly, my friends, there is a $200 million water fund to end the dam phobia which has afflicted our country for the last two decades. We know that you can't have development without water and we know that you can't have water without dams and we will get dams built. We will get dams built in this country, particularly the Nullinga dam behind Cairns and the Ord Stage 3 which have so much potential to develop Northern Australia.
While we had quite a good week last week, there was one person who didn't enjoy the week quite so much. You ask, who might that be. Well, on Monday, Mr Shorten attacked us for allegedly doing something to turn around boats, which it turned out that he had done exactly the same, only it didn't work when they tried to do it, because they never turned around a single boat. Then on Tuesday, it became apparent that yet again, Labor was changing its mind on national security.
Now, I want to make it absolutely crystal clear where this Government stands. If you go to Syria or Iraq to fight with a terrorist army, you are committing the modern form of treason. If you go to Syria or Iraq to fight with a terrorist army, you are taking up arms against Australia, because day in and day out these terrorists are enjoining followers and sympathisers to take a gun or a knife to unbelievers, including unbelievers here in Australia. I say that if you take a gun or a knife to an Australian because of who we are, you have utterly forfeited any right to be considered one of us. I say: if you go to Syria or Iraq to fight with a terrorist army, we don't want you back – we don't want you back. If you are a dual citizen, we won't let you back, because you will lose your Australian citizenship. I want to make that absolutely crystal clear. The Labor Party has had three positions so far when it comes to stripping the citizenship from terrorists who are dual nationals. Their first position was that it was dog whistling. Their second position was that they supported it in principle. But courtesy of the Shadow Attorney-General, they now have a third position, which is that if you go to Syria or Iraq to join a terrorist army, we want you back, we want you back here. And they say they'll put you on trial. Well, fair enough, but we all know the perils of that.
I know what the Australian people are thinking. They do not want terrorists loose on our streets. They do not want people who have been fighting with terrorist armies loose on our streets, and this Government will do everything we humanly can to ensure that that never happens.
It didn't stop there – weak on border security, weak on national security, and weak on budget security. What we saw this week was something that I never, ever thought I would live to see. You learn never to be surprised in this business. You learn that all sorts of things that you thought were absolutely impossible can, sometimes for good, sometimes for ill, come true. I saw something absolutely remarkable this week which I never thought any of us would live to see – the Greens being more economically responsible than the Labor Party.
We saw a lot this week, didn't we. We saw a lot emerging at a Royal Commission in Melbourne. We saw the Labor Party getting deeper and deeper into a crisis, an existential crisis, over what it really believes and who it really stands for. Because when senior union officials dud their workers to boost their power, they are saying that they are more important than the workers that they are supposed to represent. What could be more shameful, what could be more embarrassing, for someone who has a sacred trust to represent the workers of Australia than to put himself or herself ahead of the interests whose job it is for them to represent. Yet that's what's happened. That's what's plainly happened. Yes, we know the focus has been on a particular union and on a particular union leader over the last week or so, but this is a crisis for the Labor Party more generally. What it shows is that, as far as modern Labor is concerned, it isn't any more about the workers and their rights, it's about the union bosses and their privileges.
That does bring me to quite an important subject for us too. You see, we can never be in it for ourselves. We can never be in it for our power, our privilege and our influence. We are in this business for the people of Australia. We are in this business to make a difference. We are in this business to realise the great ideals and the great principles which have always motivated our party. It's the Labor Party which is the insiders' club – not us. It's the Labor Party which puts its own interests first – not us. That's why it is so important, over the next few months, that we take seriously the recommendations of the Party Reform Commission led by our greatest living statesman, John Winston Howard. Now, party reform can't belong to me, it can't belong to Mike, it can't belong to Chris or to Tony Nutt or any of the others up here – it has to belong to you. The party reform process is one that we will now be engaged in over the next few months, leading up to our AGM later in the year. But we all know what the Howard commission recommended. We all know that the Howard commission wants to empower every single member of our party. Surely that has got to be at the heart and the core of what we believe in as Liberals. Every member counts – there are no hierarchies of members here. Every member counts. Now, I know that we have to be practical about these things. We do have to be practical. Yes, we have to be pragmatic but I tell you what: there have got to be pretty strong arguments to trump the powerful and persuasive principle that was embodied in the Howard commission report.
Finally, I want to say a few words about something which is usually the great unmentionable at Liberal Party gatherings and that's factions. Now, I have my preferences. We all have our preferences. I have some people I like more; some people I like less. I have some values which I love and I see other values which I love less. There are philosophies and principles which are mine and there are philosophies and principles that belong to others. We all have our preferences and in accordance with our preferences and our instincts, we should make decisions, decisions for candidates, decisions for policies, but let it be what I think and you think and you think. Let it not be what some faction boss tells us to think. So, I hope over the next few months we will do two things – first of all, we will restore this great Party of ours to its members. Nothing is more important than that. Second, we will give more and more people a reason to join our Party. The best reason you can give people to join our Party is to say: join our party and you will have a say. Join our party and you will have a say. You won't just be invited to put your hand in your pocket again and again at fundraisers. You won't just be invited to hand out election after election on polling day. You will have a say in all of the key decisions that our Party makes. That’s the opportunity that we have to restore our Party to its members and the say to the public – join this Party of ours because in this Party of ours you will have a say. Now, as always, it’s one thing to have an aspiration, it’s another thing to make it work, it’s another thing to make it come true, but I believe we are big enough to do this. I believe that we have it in us to be our best selves. I keep saying, day in, day out, to the people of Australia that our best days are ahead of us. I really believe that – I really believe that. I know how good our people are and having known and worked with most of you for the best part of 30 years, I know how good you are. I know you want to be your best.
So, our best days are ahead of us as Australians and our best days are ahead of us as Liberals.
Let’s grab that future and let’s make the most of it.
[ends]


Often, it is in retrospect that particular events assume their greatest importance.
When the English barons gathered at Runnymede to parley with King John, they weren’t thinking of history; they were thinking of themselves.
They weren’t conscious of universal rights; they were conscious of their own grievances.
For the most part, the Magna Carta reads like a log of claims against the king.
Merely to make such claims, though, reveals a clear understanding that the king can’t do what he likes, and that a subject has rights even against a sovereign.
Even in the 13th century, this was not a novel concept.
Even then, the king’s coronation oath typically included a promise to govern according to law.
It wasn’t long, though, before the Magna Carta came to be seen as a constitutional watershed binding all future kings.
So, tonight, we remember the events 800 years ago that have so shaped the way we think about government.
And we celebrate the rule of law without which freedom cannot exist and without which might is the only right.
It is paradoxical that this event, so associated with the rule of law, was the product of a barons’ mutiny.
As Winston Churchill once observed, the English-speaking world “owes more to the vices of King John” than it does to the labours of many virtuous sovereigns.
This birth certificate of democracy owed almost nothing to abstract analysis and everything to a practical bargain between discontented nobles and their grasping king.

It became a landmark in our constitutional evolution because it formulated that growing sense that the exercise of power and the imposition of taxes should not be arbitrary.
That first Magna Carta lasted just ten weeks, but another was issued in 1216, and another in 1217.
Henry the Third re-issued it again in 1225 after more contention with the barons over tax.
In 1258, the Provisions of Oxford further developed the notion that the king governed by consent.
Edward the First inspected and confirmed Henry the Third’s version in 1297 and directed judges to administer it as part of the common law of England.
It would take centuries of further argument to put beyond doubt the principles of Westminster democracy: that taxing and spending requires the consent of parliament; that the monarch governs through ministers; that the executive is subject to the parliament; and that the parliament should be elected through universal suffrage.
Even so, at key moments in our constitutional history, people have looked to the Magna Carta for inspiration and guidance: in the struggle between the king and parliament leading to the Civil War; at the time of the Glorious Revolution and the English bill of rights; and in the build-up to the American War of Independence which the colonists saw as an assertion of the traditional rights of Englishmen against a distant despot.
It’s not so much what Magna Carta said or did as much as what it has come to represent: people’s freedom to live the life they choose; and political authority chosen by the people and constrained by law.
Thus, Magna Carta has come to be seen, in the words of the famed British jurist Lord Denning, as ‘the greatest constitutional document of all time, the foundation of the freedom of the individual against the arbitrary authority of the despot’.
Our longest serving prime minister, Sir Robert Menzies, appreciated the historical significance to Australia of the Magna Carta.
When an impoverished school in the English West Country put up for sale one of just four surviving originals of the 1297 Magna Carta, Sir Robert decided that it should come here.
So while the British Museum refused to budge from its bid of £2000, Australia offered the full £12,500 asking price.
Of course, in 1951, £12,500 was thought an exorbitant amount for a “piece of old parchment”; you could say it was Bob Menzies’ Blue Poles moment.
But he has been well and truly vindicated and this priceless manuscript now resides in this building – the focus of our democracy.
In 1948, when the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Eleanor Roosevelt declared that it would become ‘the international Magna Carta for all men everywhere’.
In pluralist democracies such as ours, it’s tempting to think that democracy and the rule of law represent the universal aspirations of mankind.
Given the option of selecting your rulers, or having them imposed; of submitting to law, or to arbitrary diktat, people’s preferences would indeed seem self-evident.
But things are rarely so clear-cut in the real world.
If Nazi Germany had won World War Two, or if Soviet Russia had dominated the subsequent peace, would the United Nations even exist, let alone the Universal Declaration of Human Rights?
The Nazis and the Soviets paid lip service to legality but in practice Nazi law and Soviet law was whatever the government wanted it to be.
The only check on power was power.
How should a democracy deal with those who would destroy it; how should the rule of law handle those convinced that might is right; and what rights should be accorded to those who don’t themselves respect rights?
It seems that in every generation, liberal democracies must find contemporary answers to these perennial questions.
Freedom can’t be sacrificed in order to be preserved; yet plainly a man with a gun preparing to shoot can hardly be dealt with by a court order.
The citizens of liberal democracies must never be as ruthless or as unprincipled with terrorists as terrorists would be with them.
Still, we have every right to defend ourselves effectively against those who would do us harm.
The rule of law serves just as much to protect us from criminals as it does to protect us from tyrants.
At least in the English-speaking tradition, the executive government has far more often been a protector of people than a persecutor.
The law of the land should be as concerned to protect people from violent criminals as it is to protect them from the excesses of government especially if it’s government “of the people, by the people, for the people”.
Democratic governments can be incompetent and heavy-handed but they are rarely vengeful or ill-intentioned in the way that individuals sometimes can be, even in an easy-going country like Australia.
In New York on September 11 2001, in Bali in 2002 and again in 2005, in London and in Jakarta, Australians were the victims of al Qaeda-inspired terrorism.
This was not political violence over a local grievance.
This was terrorism with global ambitions.
Islamist terrorism boasts that it is coming for everyone.
Especially since the spin-off of Daesh from al Qaeda and the declaration of a caliphate, Islamist terrorism confronts the world with a chilling choice: submit or die.
The only difference between medieval barbarism and Daesh rule is that the beheadings, crucifixions, mass executions and sexual slavery are now recorded for social media.
Daesh currently dominates an area about the size of Italy with eight million people.
Its affiliates are active in large parts of Libya and Nigeria and it is seeking to establish a “far province” in Southeast Asia.
At least 120 Australians are now fighting with terrorist armies in Syria and Iraq among about 20,000 foreign fighters, including nearly 4000 westerners.
At least 160 Australians here are actively supporting them with financing and recruitment.
ASIO is currently pursuing more than 400 high-priority counter‑terrorist investigations.
There have already been two Daesh-inspired terrorist incidents here in Australia: the attack on two policemen in Melbourne last September and the Martin Place siege in Sydney before Christmas.
Police and security agencies have disrupted six imminent terrorist attacks.
Daesh social media routinely urges sympathisers to mount attacks in Australia, sometimes observing that all you need is a knife, a flag, a camera-phone and a victim.
Australians should never abandon our freedoms in order to defend them; but defend them we must.
Arguably, the greatest freedom of all is the freedom to live without fear and dread; particularly the fear, and the morbid fascination with evil, that’s at the heart of this darkness.
Along with our allies, Australia is mounting air strikes against Daesh forces in Iraq and training and assisting the Iraqi army to retake their own country.
Working with local community leaders, and with families, we’re trying to ensure that impressionable young people do not succumb to the lure of this death cult.
We’re trying to prevent people from leaving our country to become terrorists; we’re trying to prevent hardened terrorists from coming back; and we’re striving to lock up any that we can’t keep out.
We have a clear message to young people thinking of joining terrorist armies overseas: don’t leave because you’re likely to be killed; but if you do leave, don’t come back, because Australians won’t have terrorists loose on our streets.
We now have counter-terrorist units at all international airports, have questioned hundreds of travellers to the Middle East, and we’ve cancelled at least a 120 hundred passports.
Still, as things stand, putting Australian foreign fighters in gaol is easier said than done, despite new laws making it an offence merely to be present in designated terrorist-controlled areas.
We can’t readily put informers on the witness stand or always make available intelligence without risk to sources and it wouldn’t usually be possible (nor desirable) in such cases to bring witnesses from the Middle East to testify.
On the standard rules of evidence, without a confession, securing a conviction is hardly straight-forward, let alone for crimes committed offshore in ungoverned space.
Bringing foreign fighters back to face trial in Australia risks leaving them free on our streets rather than in our gaols.
That’s why the government has introduced legislation to strip citizenship from terrorists who are dual nationals.
Since 1948, section 35 of the Citizenship Act has provided that dual nationals who serve in the army of a country at war with Australia automatically lose their citizenship.
This section provides for renunciation by conduct.
An Australian who fights against Australia has automatically forfeited the right to be one of us – provided forfeiture doesn’t make someone stateless.
The government is modernising this section by providing that a person participating in terrorism against Australia, likewise, automatically forfeits citizenship.
Stripping citizenship from terrorists who are dual nationals could mean that up to fifty per cent of those who have gone to the Middle East to fight can’t come back.
I stress that this legislation is directed at terrorists, not dual nationals.
Most dual nationals, in fact, are migrants who have become first-class Australian citizens.
Migrants, after all, have voted with their feet for Australia; hence their massive enthusiasm for our country.
To help demonstrate that this is a national security measure (rather than a dual citizenship issue), as part of the citizenship consultation now taking place, the government will consider further measures to stop Australian foreign fighters with no other citizenship from readily returning here.
Fighting for a terrorist group at war with Australia is the modern form of treason – and those who have left our country to fight against us may require a modern form of banishment.
Foreign fighters and home-grown terrorists present the biggest security challenge we have faced for many years.
They must be dealt with in accordance with the principles of a just and decent society; but they must be dealt with.
The first duty of government is the protection of the community; or as Cicero put it 1200 years before Magna Carta: ‘Salus populi suprema lex’, the safety of the people is the supreme law.
The administration of justice according to law is only possible in a peaceful and orderly society.
So, if you leave Australia to fight for terrorist armies in the Middle East, we don’t want you back – and if you’re a dual citizen, we certainly won’t let you back.
On the 800th anniversary of Magna Carta, we shouldn’t just celebrate the rule of law; we must defend it.
This means ensuring that people trying to kill us, for who we are and for what we believe, should not be at liberty to do us harm.
The Daesh death cult has abundantly demonstrated that the first people it’s coming for are the vast numbers of Muslims who don’t agree with it.
Here in Australia, the right to speak your mind is taken from granted.
“Death to the infidel” has never had any currency here in Australia.
We have become appalled at the very idea of killing in the name of God.  
An Australian, for instance, could freely echo President al Sisi of Egypt’s warning that Islam needs a religious revolution, without fear of official persecution or need of police protection.
In Australia, and other western countries, along with everyone else, Muslims are entirely free to proselytise for their beliefs.
In parts of the Muslim world, however, the wrong proselytism is punishable by death.
If Islam is to further develop an appreciation of pluralism, it may need Muslims protected by the rule of law and the other principles of liberal democracy that Magna Carta so potently represents.
Australians could help to encourage the easy-going versions of Islam that the world so hopes for.
Security under the law is what our tradition has given people; it’s what the Magna Carta represents.
It’s hard to imagine any human progress without it.
[ends]


Ladies and gentlemen, “expect the unexpected” has to be the first law of defence planning.
Prior to the event, who would have thought that Australia would send five thousand troops to East Timor in 1999?
In early 2001, who would have thought that Australia would participate in military operations in Afghanistan later that year; let alone the invasion of Iraq two years afterwards?
Who would have imagined that our subsequent military rotations in Afghanistan, lasting over a decade, would ultimately involve almost 35,000 Australian troops?
Who would have imagined, at the beginning of last year, that Australian personnel would be retrieving our dead from Ukrainian fields under the noses of the Russian army; or that a decade after the execution of Saddam Hussein, another Australian contingent would be in Iraq with no early end in sight to this deployment?
As the world’s 12th largest economy and as a major trading nation; as one of the United States’ principal allies; and as a treaty partner to many of our important neighbours, Australia has global interests and needs some global reach.
The job of Australia’s armed forces is to defend our territory, contribute to a more secure region, and help build a safer world.
First and foremost, our armed forces should be capable of successfully repelling any regional adversary and inflicting very severe damage on any attacker.
But because Australia does have global interests, our armed forces should be capable of contributing proportionately to our allies’ military operations around the globe.
And because the stability of our region is essential for the safety and security of our own country, our armed forces should be capable of mounting independent combat operations anywhere close to home.
Thanks to the decisions made in the 2000 Defence White Paper and subsequently, Australia’s armed forces are now more capable than ever before.
Last year, without assistance, Australia was able to deploy 200 police to Ukraine and 250 soldiers to the Netherlands within just a few days of the MH-17 atrocity.
Just three days after refugees became trapped on Mt Sinjar in Iraq, an Australian Hercules – loaded by Australians with Australian supplies at an Australian facility in the Middle East – was undertaking humanitarian air drops.
Refuelled by an Australian plane, six Australian strike fighters flew virtually non- stop to the Middle East where they now regularly hit targets in Iraq from a base as far away as Sydney is from Alice Springs.
When the HMAS Adelaide amphibious ship joins HMAS Canberra and HMAS Choules and the new air warfare destroyers are operational, Australia will be able to conduct significant amphibious and humanitarian operations throughout our region.
Right now, our armed forces are active around the globe.
Australia has about 500 soldiers training and assisting the Iraqi armed forces to retake their own country.
We have about 350 personnel involved in air strikes against Daesh targets in Iraq and supporting the air campaign over Iraq and Syria as well.
We have about 400 personnel engaged in logistical and transport operations in the UAE and a ship constantly deployed on anti-piracy operations near the Horn of Africa.
We still have some 400 personnel deployed to Afghanistan on a training and logistics mission; and there are still military and police personnel in the Solomon Islands.
Australia seeks no dominion. We threaten no one. We seek only to be a good neighbour, a reliable ally, and a steadfast friend.
But a serious country needs capable armed forces: to defend its citizens, to advance its interests and to uphold its values around the world.
As a peaceful, pluralist democracy, Australia never picks fights.
Our instinct is to settle differences, not to inflame them.
Still, we’ve never shirked our share of responsibility: to help people in trouble, to keep the peace and to deter and defeat aggression.
That’s our record as a good international citizen.
In an uncertain world, we have a responsibility to be prepared.
More than in most other fields, defence preparedness requires continuous effort – not just over weeks and months – but continuous effort over years and decades.
Our 1999 expedition to East Timor did expose very serious gaps in our capability.
The men and women of our armed forces were enthusiastic, determined and professional, but faced serious risks because of the range of operations they simply weren’t equipped for.
The Howard Government swiftly commissioned a new Defence White Paper to reassess our long term defence capability on the basis of these new insights into the challenges we faced.
That White Paper was delivered a year before our perceptions of the world were to change on September 11, 2001 – but it has served us well for over a decade.
The 2000 white paper affirmed that we should pay for the defence we needed; rather than suffer the defence we’d actually paid for.
It faced up to the historical reality that successive Australian governments have tended to put off investing in defence because threats were perceived to be vague or distant.
This short-sightedness has often lulled governments into making short-term cuts or deferring investment to another day.
During the last parliament, for instance, defence funding fell to its lowest level, as a percentage of GDP, since 1938.
As you all know, 1938 was the eve of the greatest ever military threat to our country and our world – yet a nation in denial had allowed its defences to become pitifully inadequate.
While domestic and international circumstances are vastly better now than then, defence decisions are neglected or deferred at our peril.
Our armed forces constantly need new capabilities as they adapt to current and future challenges.
Of course this Government understands that economic security and national security are interdependent.
That’s one of the reasons why the Government is working to repair the Budget.
A stronger budget does mean more capacity to invest in our long-term national security capabilities.
Already, in last year’s Budget, this Government committed $1 billion more to defence – and, in this year’s Budget, has committed an extra $1.2 billion for national security.
That includes $450 million to strengthen our intelligence capabilities, to support metadata retention and to counter terrorist propaganda and violent extremism.
This year’s Budget also includes more than $750 million for defence operations in the Middle East, Afghanistan and Iraq.
At a time when the armed forces of like-minded nations are facing cuts, Australia is boosting defence spending to almost $32 billion next year and $132 billion over the forward estimates.
That is an increase of almost $10 billion compared with the four-year estimates announced in last year’s Budget.
The Defence White Paper to be released in the next few months won’t be an unfunded wish list; it will be a costed, sustainable, long-term plan.
It is now being rigorously tested because it will provide the foundation for our country’s defences over the next two decades.
We’ve listened to the experts from defence, from our intelligence services, from industry, academia, think tanks and broader government.
All the big projects and programmes in the portfolio have been assessed by industry analysts.
For the first time, there has been an externally validated assessment of defence costs so that we can be more confident that defence spending is finally value for money.
Most defence capability projects won’t come to fruition for 10 to 20 years but good planning demands that the money is there when the bills arrive.
A future force structure is at the heart of the coming White Paper.
The Government has reassessed what our armed forces should be able to do.
We understand that our adversaries will hide in cities and caves; that they will exploit the vulnerabilities of modern communications; and that they will take advantage of our diversity and our tolerance to attack our values and weaken our society.
We must expect our opponents and our competitors to use every means to challenge us.
This could include potential use of weapons of mass destruction and offensive cyber capabilities.
So, the White Paper will specify a force structure that enables our military to be even more effective in securing our nation and to make an even more active contribution to regional and global security.
As history has repeatedly shown, the defence of Australia begins far from our shores, sometimes on the other side of the world, so our armed forces must be capable of conducting independent operations in our region and contributing meaningfully to military operations around the globe.
Obviously such a potent, balanced, versatile and sustainable future force does need a range of capabilities – but rather than just list them on a service-by-service basis, there is a joint plan that aligns capabilities with Australia’s Strategic needs.
We need an army that can take and hold ground against a very wide range of opponents; a navy that can deter aggressors, protect our sea lanes, and put our army ashore where needed in the region; and an air force that can strike far afield and support our troops around the globe.
We will invest in the key enablers to make this possible:
• comprehensive intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance to ensure that our armed forces know what is happening around them;
• enhanced cyber and electronic warfare capabilities;
• upgraded communications systems and integrated command and control systems so information can instantly be shared; and
• strong and sustainable partnerships with industry.
We need a strong defence industry to support and sustain our armed forces.
The White Paper will re-set this critical relationship.
It is certainly not necessary or practical that all our defence equipment be made here in Australia but it is necessary that it be sustainable in Australia.
That said, our preference will always be for local build where world class equipment can be obtained at a reasonable price in a way that doesn’t limit interoperability with our allies.
A competitive evaluation process is now underway to choose the next Australian submarine, building on a French, German or Japanese design.
Obviously, we want to maximise Australian involvement in its build, including work on combat systems integration, and this will result in the creation of at least 500 new highly skilled jobs.
And, because there will be more submarines, there will more sustainment work in Adelaide too.
Notwithstanding cost blowouts and delays – very significant cost blowouts and very significant delays – in the air warfare destroyer programme, the ANZAC frigate programme and Austal’s work around the world including for the US Navy, demonstrates that Australia can successfully build surface warships under the right conditions.
It is the government’s intention to develop a continuous build of major surface warships here in Australia to avoid the unproductive on-again, off-again cycle that has done this industry so much damage.
There will be further announcements about naval shipbuilding within the next few weeks.
The White Paper, a Defence Investment Plan, covering major equipment and its sustainment, the Defence Industry Policy Statement, a Naval Shipbuilding Plan and our commitment to increase funding — in combination — will provide the clarity and certainty that the defence of Australia needs.
Today, I reaffirm our commitment to increasing the defence budget to two per cent of GDP by 2024.
In a difficult and uncertain world, and in a region where other countries are spending more on defence, this is the least we can responsibly spend.
In Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere we ask our uniformed personnel to put themselves in harm’s way for our country so we do have a heavy responsibility to equip them properly for the task.
Every decision we take today, every investment we make, must be geared to that goal.
It is not a case of asking defence to do more with less, it is a case of ensuring defence can do even more with more.
For Army, the focus will be on continuing to develop and implement Plan Beersheba, producing a stronger force better prepared for every contingency.
The key to this will be replacing Army’s armoured combat vehicles; preparing for future amphibious operations from the Canberra Class ships; and integrating new intelligence, surveillance and communications technology with other joint capabilities.
The future submarine and frigate programmes, along with the Canberra Class amphibious ships and Hobart Class air warfare destroyers, will be the heart of the future navy.
The air force will move to the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, Growler electronic warfare planes and more unmanned aircraft, and will have significantly stronger command, logistics, transport, and surveillance capabilities.
But succeeding in the future will depend on more than high-end capabilities.
It’s the integration and the sharing of information between platforms and systems that will make our armed forces truly interoperable and allow us to maintain an edge in our region.
Properly knitted together, these capabilities will be more than the sum of their parts and will ensure a more mobile, agile, adaptable, and potent Australian Defence Force.
To make our country safer over the long term, the Government has already identified significant reforms with the Department of Defence itself.
The First Principles Review of Defence confirmed that our armed forces have high international standing and a fine record of delivering on military operations, and in humanitarian and emergency support.
But, and this will surprise none of you, it also identified the empire-building and feather-bedding that tends to build up in large, traditional institutions.
There will be simpler management lines to provide clear direction, transparency and accountability; and we will remove the red tape that causes higher costs and delayed decision making.
This transformational change will be overseen by the Secretary of the Department and the Chief of the Defence Force, there will also be an external oversight board, including all of the members of the review team.
All of this is about making our armed forces better prepared to meet the challenges of the present and the future.
To do so, we must give our serving men and women the resources, equipment and support they need to do the difficult jobs we of ask them.
More than anything else, the most important capability Defence has is its people.
This Government will do the right thing by defence force personnel – with the best equipment, good pay and conditions, and support long after their service has ended.
And we’ll support ADF families – because it’s their resilience and solidarity that makes possible the service of our fighting men and women.
There is a compact between the Australian people and those who wear our uniform. 
It is a compact first settled at Anzac Cove 100 years ago in the baptism of fire that shaped our nation.
Back in 1915 the troops who landed at Gallipoli were from every walk of life.
They were labourers, farmers, office-workers and artisans who volunteered to serve for their mates, for our country, for their King and – ultimately – for the ideal that people and nations should be free.
It’s a very different armed force today, but with the same values at its core.
Today’s personnel are highly trained, highly skilled professionals.
Many are seasoned veterans with extensive operational experience – gained defending the freedoms and the values that we hold dear.
We owe it to those in uniform, we owe it to our country and to our citizens, we owe it to the wider world in which we are a force for good to ensure that our armed forces are becoming more potent and more capable all the time.
This is a task that this Government will never shirk.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………….……………………………………………………………
Our Party went to the last election with a plan to build a strong, prosperous economy and a safe, secure Australia.
Today, my job is to report to you on our progress and to set out our next steps in achieving this goal.
Our plan means backing hard working Australians to get ahead and to fulfil their dreams.
Our plan is not about us; it’s about you.
It’s about you having more control over your pay packet, more control over your bills and more choice over child care, health care and planning for your own retirement.
It’s about keeping you safe: because that’s more important than anything.
From ‘Menzies’ forgotten people’, to the ‘Howard battlers’ and ‘Tony’s tradies’ – we have always been the party that ‘turned on the lights’; that stood ‘for all of us’; and that seeks ‘hope, reward and opportunity’ for everyone.
Today, I can report to you that our plan is working.
Our plan to grow the economy with lower tax, less red tape, more trade, better infrastructure and stronger borders is working.
Since you elected this government, almost 290,000 new jobs have been created.
Economic growth is now stronger than in most developed nations – and stronger than during the last year of the Rudd Gillard Government.
Company registrations are at record highs because people are ready to have a go when they know that government is on their side.
Export volumes are up, as is residential housing construction and retail sales.
And business confidence continues to strengthen.
Our economy and our country are stronger – despite economic headwinds from the end of the mining investment boom and the low iron ore price.
People might have been a little bit uncertain about us; they always are about new governments – but now they know that we are serious: that our country really is under new management and that Australia really is open for business.
The carbon tax is gone – and everyone is benefiting from lower power prices.
The mining tax is gone – and Australia is once again seen as a good place to invest.
New projects worth over a trillion dollars have received environmental approval – and there is no longer a green veto on development.
50,000 pages of regulation have been scrapped – saving businesses and individuals over $2 billion a year – with much more to come in the months ahead.
Free Trade Agreements with China, Japan and Korea are already creating opportunities for tens of thousands of Australian businesses – and new markets mean new jobs.
Projected long-term debt and deficits have been halved because of the difficult, but necessary decisions we made in Joe Hockey’s first Budget.
The largest Commonwealth-funded infrastructure programme in Australian history is now underway. 
We are delivering WestConnex, the Pacific Highway duplication, the Bruce Highway upgrade, the North-South spine in Adelaide, the Midland Highway in Tasmania and major roads throughout Western Australia.
Here in Victoria, there is $3 billion in a locked box waiting for a state government that wants to build the East West Link.
The NBN has passed one million premises and Malcolm Turnbull is turning, another Labor disaster into an asset for Australia.
Most importantly, the Budget is finally on a credible path back to surplus – with the deficit projected to fall by half a per cent of GDP every year. 
Already, we have made over $50 billion in savings to help repair the Budget – and the last sitting fortnight has been the most productive since the election.
The parliament has passed legislation to make the age pension more sustainable – with more assistance to 170,000 pensioners with modest assets.
The parliament has passed the instant asset write-off for small business.
The parliament has passed changes to renewable energy to make power more affordable and investment more secure.
The parliament has passed changes to fuel excise and the parliament has passed changes to the PBS.
We’re making the hard decisions so we can make the necessary investments in our country’s future.
For the first time, Northern Australia has a plan for its economic development – including for new dams – because we can't make the most of Australia unless we make the most of our Great North. 
We aren’t just improving Australia’s economic security – we are improving our national security as well because a nation’s economic security and its national security go hand in hand. 
This government has steadfastly met the challenges of the past 22 months.
We’ve been resolute, determined and have kept the faith.
We’ve stopped the boats – a task that Labor said couldn’t be done – and secured our borders for the first time since the Howard Government. 
When 39 Australians were shot out of the sky over Ukraine, our police and armed forces brought our dead home from a war zone. 
Our people were superb – and I couldn’t be more proud. 
Today, I single out one – my deputy and Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop who criss-crossed the world in the name of justice.
Overnight, we saw again horrors in France, Tunisia and Kuwait.
We are meeting the challenge of the Daesh death cult and the Australians it brainwashes. 
Abroad, Australian armed forces are working with a worldwide coalition against a group as evil as any in human history.
At home, we have provided more resources and more powers to our security and intelligence agencies – because they need whatever it takes to keep you safe.
This week, we sent a clear message to those Australians who think they can fight overseas with impunity. 
Think again.
We will strip Australian citizenship from terrorists who are dual nationals – because terrorists shouldn’t be walking our streets looking to make our citizens their trophies
Our country is confronting the evil of terrorism – and we are also facing up to the evil of domestic violence. 
If there is any place that should be a safe haven – it’s the family home.
There are no excuses for domestic violence. 
Former Police Commissioner Ken Lay, and Rosie Batty, are heading up our advisory panel and you’ll soon hear more about how we’ll tackle this national scourge.
Let’s start by making domestic violence orders national, so violent men can’t chase their families across the country.
And let’s expect the perpetrators – and not the victims – to be the ones to leave home.  
Ken Lay is also helping us to beat the scourge of ice – the most dangerous drug of addiction yet seen.
No one should be lost in a world of fear and fantasy in the best country on earth.
In just a few days’ time, Australia will have completed 24 consecutive years of economic growth – only the Netherlands has had a longer run of economic growth.
But we cannot be a country that lives off yesterday’s achievements; we can’t take growth for granted.
The foundation of the next quarter century of prosperity won’t be bigger government, higher taxes or more debt and deficits.
It will be unleashing the entrepreneurs of our country, particularly our small businesses to have a go.
Since the days of the early settlers, through the gold rushes, the wars and successive waves of immigration, Australians have always been willing to work hard, lend a hand to neighbours, make sacrifices for children and look over the horizon to a better future. 
That’s the Australian way and they’re the Australians that we want to back.
Every day we are making further progress.
We are working to re-establish a tough cop on the beat in the construction industry to deliver billions of dollars in productivity benefits.
We’ll soon release the Agriculture White Paper and – again – there’ll be more money for dams because you can’t grow things without water.
We’ll soon respond to the Harper Competition Review and the Murray Review into the Financial System – because we want all parts of our economy growing strongly.
By the end of the year, we’ll release Australia’s first ever 15 year plan for infrastructure to get more bulldozers on the ground and cranes in the sky.
Work is underway eliminating thousands of mobile phone black spots in regional areas.
Thousands of young people have already been in the Green Army in hundreds of projects to clean up our lands and waterways – and there’ll be tens of thousands more.
We want to support hard working Australians – especially parents who want work or who want more work.
Our Budget childcare measures should encourage more than 240,000 families to earn more, including almost 38,000 jobless families. 
Low and middle income families using childcare will be $1,500 a year better off even before they earn more.
I have said what we will do – let me also tell you what we won’t do.
We won’t increase taxes on superannuation or increase the restrictions on superannuation because your retirement savings belong to you and not the government.
We won’t change the rules on negative gearing because Australians have made decisions based on the rules as they stand – and the last time a government fiddled with negative gearing it caused a crisis in the rental market.
And we won’t be putting a tax on electricity because there are smarter ways of reducing emissions than whacking everyone with a new carbon tax.
For over seventy years, the Liberal Party has built modern Australia – not on ideology, but on backing hard working Australians – people prepared to have a go.
If you’re a young Australian looking for a good job and working for a deposit on your first home – we’re for you.
If you’re a small business person who wants to employ people – we’re for you.
If you’re a young parent trying to balance work and family – we’re for you.
If you’re a migrant who came the right way to build a better life for your children – we’re for you.
If you want to spend less time stuck in traffic to get to work or to pick up your kids – we’re for you.
If you’re working more to get ahead and to provide the best opportunities for your children – we’re for you.
If you believe superannuation is your money and want certainty in retirement – we’re for you.
If you’re on the land despite the ravages of drought – we’re for you.
I should ask: who’s Labor for these days?
I guess the ‘Killing Season’ answered that: they’re for themselves.
They’re the party that promised to be like John Howard, but weren’t.
They’re the party that promised us they wouldn’t restart the boats, but did.
They’re the party that promised surpluses, but delivered record debt and deficits.
They’re the party that said no carbon tax, but gave us one anyway.
The guilty party has not changed.
Almost two years into this term, they still want a carbon tax; they still have no policies to stop the boats and they’re still addicted to taxes and spending.
The choice is clear.
They’re for boats, we’re for none.
They’re for a carbon tax, we’re for lower tax.
They’re for taxes, we’re for jobs.
They do union bidding.
We stand for all of us.
Now I have to confess, I did sneak a peak at that ABC series The Killing Season. 
The one thing that Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard could agree on was: you can’t trust Bill Shorten.
If Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd don’t trust Bill Shorten, why should you?
If the workers of the AWU couldn’t trust Bill Shorten, why should you?
Only the Liberal party and our National Party colleagues can be trusted to build a strong, prosperous economy and a safe, secure Australia.
It’s built by people who believe in our country and who believe that our best days are ahead of us.
When the history books are written, they will recognise my friend, and our Deputy Prime Minister, Warren
Truss as one of the great leaders of this government.
I can report to you that our Coalition is strong. I can report to you that our party organisation, so well led by President Richard Alston is strong.
Our secretariat, led by Brian Loughnane and supported by our state directors, is the most professional political organisation in the country.
But our greatest strength is not our leadership, it’s our membership.
Our party has been built by hundreds of thousands of men and women from all walks of life, from every nook and cranny under the Southern Cross.
We believe in family, in community and that our nation’s greatest achievements come when our people are encouraged to have a go.
We reflect the length and breadth of Australian life: young and old, rich and poor, farmer and suburbanite, indigenous and immigrant, tradies and nurses.
Our party does not demand blind obedience.  We respect differences – because discussing them is how we come closer to wisdom.
We are a party that honours our history – it’s the foundation we build on.  It’s why we are proud to be the heirs of Menzies, Holt, Gorton, McMahon, Fraser and Howard. 
In honouring our history, we remember the good government that Malcolm Fraser led. 
He turned on the lights and we’re grateful.
But, today we’re focused on the future.
We’re making our country safer and more prosperous for everyone.
We’re the optimists of Australian life.
We’re yearning and striving to build a better Australia, leaving our children more than we ever hoped for.
That’s our task; that’s our mission and, for our country’s sake, we will succeed.
[ends]


E&amp;OE……………………….……………………………………………………………
Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Ministers, Premier, ladies and gentlemen, it is a real thrill to be here to help open this sparkling new campus of James Cook University here in Singapore.
I want to start by saying thank you to the team here at the University for introducing me and my colleagues to some of your students just in the brief time before we come together for this ceremony.
There is something marvellous about the enthusiasm to learn of university students. There is something marvellous about the vocation of teaching. There is something tremendous about the intellectual curiosity and the restless striving to do better which is at the heart of all good higher education. Obviously, it is very, very much present here in James Cook Universality, Singapore.
I am also very conscious of the fact that this is the only university, other than Singaporean foundations, which has a stand-alone physical presence here in this great city, this country of Singapore. I guess that means that if you are looking for the characteristics and qualities of an Australian university education, of, if I may say so, a western university education this can be done – this can be had without leaving home – for the students of Singapore.
I think this is quite a special day for higher education here in Singapore and obviously it is another chapter in the story of Australia and Singapore’s long and strong friendship.
One of the great leaders of modern times was, of course, your founder Lee Kuan Yew who didn’t just lead Singapore – he made Singapore.
Lee Kuan Yew believed that people should be the “best they can be” and that the best way to bring that about was through the power of a good education.
Speaking at the Colombo Plan conference in 1974, Lee Kuan Yew said that “the best means to a decent life for our people is through the acquisition of more knowledge and higher skills”.
And hasn’t modern Singapore so marvelously embodied that aspiration of your late founder.
Of course, since the 1950s, more than 130,000 Singaporeans have graduated from Australia universities – many through the Colombo Plan.
I am pleased to say that today, through the New Colombo Plan, just begun by my Government, the tide of students flows both ways.
We are returning the compliment that Singapore has paid to us by learning as much in your country as you have over the decades learnt in ours.
Thanks to what we do today more and more Singaporeans will have the opportunity to study in an Australian university here in Singapore.
As Australia focuses more and more on our north, as Australia focuses more and more on strengthening our links with Asia; universities focused on the tropics, like James Cook University, will be very well placed to reap the benefits.
James Cook University is obviously a flagship for Australian tertiary education here in Singapore.
Students from 50 countries are studying with James Cook University here in Singapore.
This University is respected as a teaching institution, it’s respected as a research institution and it’s respected as an institution which engages deeply with the communities that it serves.
It was good to hear the Chancellor say that this is the first private education institution to attain an EduTrust Star here in Singapore.
I do wish to thank the Singaporean Government for the support that you have given to James Cook University.
I am conscious of the fact that this campus was once a Buddhist secondary school.
While we are re-purposing the buildings, we are still striving to achieve that wonderful Buddhist goal of attaining wisdom through education.
University is about growing as a person, it’s about opening your mind, it’s about enriching your heart and may that long be exactly what happens here at James Cook University in Singapore.


Prime Minister Lee, Deputy Prime Minister Teo – today it is an honour to follow three serving Australian prime ministers in delivering this Singapore lecture.
Yesterday, it was my honour to visit the Kranji War Cemetery where so many of Singapore’s wartime defenders lie.
As the Japanese swept down the peninsula in those years, Australian troops achieved the few modest allied wins of that campaign: the stand at Bakri; the ambushes at Gemas and Jemaluang; and the fighting withdrawal from Muar where the Australians went into battle singing Waltzing Matilda.
Almost 1,800 Australians gave their lives in the fight for Malaya and Singapore, and over 1,300 were wounded.
When Singapore fell, some 15,000 Australians became prisoners of war, and 7,000 perished in captivity.
Australians were some 10 per cent of the defenders but suffered some 70 per cent of the battle casualties.
It was the most disastrous campaign in British military history but it helped to put beyond doubt Australia’s commitment to the region.
Just 73 years ago, Singapore was a burning ruin; today, it is a wonder of the modern world.
Just 50 years ago, when Lee Kuan Yew declared Singapore’s independence, his country was poor, friendless and facing an uncertain future; today, it is rich, well-connected and secure.
Australians of my parents’ generation were haunted by Singapore’s fall; Australians of my generation, and younger, should be galvanized by its rise.
Within two generations, Singapore has moved from the third world to the first; Lee Kuan Yew didn’t just lead Singapore, he built it, he made it.
Once the Gibraltar of the east, Singapore is again a symbol to the world of enterprise, confidence and initiative: of self-reliance and success.
Singapore’s success is founded on the ideas, the drive and the judgement of Lee Kuan Yew; on the talents of the Singaporean people that he unleashed; and on a legacy of law and language that he respected and built on.
Lee Kuan Yew insisted that all Singaporeans learn English; he maintained the legal system built on common law; and even preserved the statue of Raffles, as a sign of the regard that he expected Singapore to have for this heritage.
Back in 1965, Australia was the very first country to recognise Singapore’s independence.
Sir Robert Menzies, our prime minister at the time, deeply respected Lee Kuan Yew; while Lee Kuan Yew said that Menzies was the Australian leader who had most impressed him.
The esteem that Lee and Menzies had for each other was a strong foundation for the friendship between our nations that has grown and grown ever since.
As we’ve heard, Singapore is Australia’s largest trade and investment partner in ASEAN and our fifth largest trading partner overall.
We already have a robust free trade agreement; it’s just the second that Australia negotiated, after Closer Economic Relations with New Zealand.
There are 3,500 businesses with Australian links operating here in Singapore, spanning infrastructure, IT, education, financial services and logistics.
We have invested many tens of billions of dollars in each other – a sure sign of our mutual trust and respect.
Over the past half century, more than 130,000 Singaporeans have been educated at Australian universities under the Colombo Plan and beyond.
The New Colombo Plan, started last year, has already seen nearly 500 Australian students study in Singapore; we are finally returning the compliment that Singapore has paid to us, and hope to learn as much in your country as you have in ours.
Each year over 350,000 Australians now travel to Singapore for business or pleasure; and a similar number of Singaporeans come to Australia.
Almost since Singapore’s independence we have been military partners in the Five Power Defence Arrangements, along with the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Malaysia.
Over the past decade, we have both contributed to military operations in Afghanistan and we are now working together in the skies over Iraq.
For many years, the Singapore Armed Forces have trained in Queensland, and a Singapore Air Force squadron has been stationed in Western Australia.
The Comprehensive Strategic Partnership signed this morning with Prime Minister Lee will produce a whole new level of intimacy over the next decade.
We’re becoming family; not just friends.
In some ways, Australia and Singapore could hardly be more different.
Australia is a country with its own continent, sparsely settled, mostly by European people, with a successful resources economy.
Singapore is a tiny but teeming island, whose people are mostly of Chinese descent, with a dynamic services economy.
But in other ways, we have much in common – the English language, the rule of law, a high and rising standard of living, and support for the US-backed global order which has made the world’s comparative freedom and prosperity possible.
Singapore seeks opportunities to expand beyond its domestic market; Australia seeks investment, especially in our great north; that’s why we have so much to offer each other.
We are natural partners; we could hardly be more complementary.
My hope is that Australia’s relationship with Singapore will swiftly grow as easy, close and familiar as it has long been with New Zealand.
The Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, that Australia and Singapore have concluded today, also moves us towards the closer economic relations that Australia and New Zealand have enjoyed for 30 years.
Over time, I hope that Singaporeans will regard Australia, especially the north, as a frontier of opportunity; and that Australians will regard Singapore, as much as London, as a place to gain the world’s best professional experience.
Soon, I hope that employment and residency rights for Australians and Singaporeans in each other’s countries will resemble those of New Zealanders and Australians.
This will make both our countries even more successful and secure.
In any event, our partnership is deepening as our region is rising.
Over the past few decades the Asia-Pacific region has achieved an economic transformation, unparalleled in human history.
Japan has arisen from the ashes of defeat to become one of the world’s most prosperous democracies.
Korea has moved from the third world to the first in less than half a century.
In an epic improvement, China has emerged from war and internal turmoil to shift hundreds of millions of people from the third world to the middle class.
This is the greatest, fastest change for the better of all time.
And so much of our region’s prosperity has been built on Australian coal, iron ore and gas. 
Now, and far into the future, we can offer the countries of our region the food, energy and resource security they seek.
For Australia, the tyranny of distance has given way to the advantage of proximity.
Our Asia-Pacific region now accounts for over half the global population, more than one-third of world gross domestic product, and about a third of world exports.
Still, continued prosperity depends on continued security.
In our own region, there has been some tension over the disputed islands and reefs of the East China and South China seas.
Australia does not take sides on competing territorial claims; we deplore unilateral moves to change the status quo; and insist that disputes should be settled peacefully, in accordance with international law. 
Like all trading nations, Australia upholds freedom of navigation on the seas and in the air.
Land reclamation on a massive scale not only unsettles the mutual respect upon which our prosperity depends but threatens one of the world’s most complex and beautiful reef systems.
These actions have strained some of the relationships that China has otherwise worked hard to cultivate.
On the other hand, China’s readiness to work with other countries on the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank has meant the emergence of a new Chinese-led international institution with better governance.
As a result, Australia will join Singapore and more than fifty other countries in joining the bank at a signing ceremony in Beijing earlier today.
And there is a lesson here – there is a lesson here: the countries of the Asia-Pacific have too much to gain from cooperation and too much to lose from confrontation.
Participation in ASEAN and then in the East Asia Summit has built the habits of cooperation needed to manage regional issues.
All our regional architecture – including APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum, and the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting – is designed to defuse regional tensions.
History is a bad master but a good teacher – and the hard-earned lesson of our history is that we will all advance together; or none of us will advance at all.
Now it’s harder to be optimistic about Eastern Europe where Russia is continuing to bully its smaller neighbours whenever they look to Western Europe rather than their former Soviet overlord.
Still, western sanctions are hurting; and the reaction to Russian aggression does seem to have produced a more united and more determined Ukraine.
It’s harder still to be optimistic about the Middle East: where hostility to Israel, longstanding tensions between Iran and its neighbours, sectarian splits within Islam, and a pervasive sense of grievance have helped to create the monster of ISIL or Daesh.
I refuse to call this death cult “Islamic State” because to do so insults the Muslims it is killing every day and concedes legitimacy to a movement at war with the world.
Still, Daesh is consolidating its hold over an area as large as Italy with about eight million people.
Its affiliates control significant swathes of Libya and Nigeria and are active in the Arabian Peninsula and the Horn of Africa.
It is seeking to establish a far province in South East Asia.
It is the deadly enemy of all governments and of all people, even those it has enslaved.
It cannot be contained: it has to be defeated.
This weekend’s attacks in France, Tunisia and Kuwait are simply its latest atrocities.
In the past year, Daesh and its imitators have carried out terrorist attacks in Belgium, France, Canada, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Egypt, Nigeria, Denmark and the United States – as well as Australia, in Melbourne and in my home town of Sydney.
I regret to say that we can expect more and worse atrocities as long as even a small minority of people are susceptible to its message.
As the declaration of a caliphate shows, it is coming for everyone on the basis of a twisted interpretation of the Koran: submit or die.
Daesh is using an online world without borders to brainwash our young people and to accustom them to kill for their cause.
More than 20,000 people from over 80 countries have gone to Syria and Iraq to join Daesh.
Up to 300 Indonesians and 90 Malaysians are currently thought to be fighting for Daesh in the Middle East.
Thais, Filipinos, Cambodians and even Singaporeans have also joined, although in much smaller numbers.
And I regret to say that at least 120 Australians are currently fighting in Syria and Iraq, with about 160 at home recruiting for them and funding them.
Our domestic security agency is currently investigating several thousand persons of concern and has over 400 high priority cases.
We have more foreign fighters, more terrorist supporters and more terrorist sympathisers than ever before.
A decade or so back, more than 300 South East Asians had trained with terrorist groups in Afghanistan or Pakistan.
On their return, more than 80 were arrested or killed in counter-terrorism operations.
Of the Jemaah Islamiyah terrorists directly involved in the 2002 Bali Bombings – which killed 202 people including 88 Australians – 11 out of 17 had trained with terrorist groups in Afghanistan or Pakistan.
Of the 25 Australians who had returned home after training with terrorists in Afghanistan or Pakistan, 19 were subsequently involved in terrorist plotting and eight were convicted of terrorism offences.
So this is a daunting precedent, given the many hundreds from our region already fighting in the Middle East right now.
Now living in pluralist democracies under the rule of law, where killing in the name of God is almost unimaginable, it’s hard even to begin to appreciate the motives and methods of an apocalyptic death cult.
Daesh will seek to expand until it’s overthrown – that’s what the logic of the Caliphate demands.
So there are no good options here, but the worst is simply hoping for the best, waiting for something to turn up, or expecting someone else to do the heavy lifting.
The difference between the last American involvement in the Middle East – and any stronger one now – would be that this is in support of the legitimate government of Iraq.
The difference between this outbreak of doomsday fundamentalism and the last, lesser one is that Daesh has united almost every Muslim authority against it.
This is not a fight that can be won quickly or easily, but it can’t be avoided.
Some might question whether we’re at war with them – but they’re certain that they’re at war with us. 
It’s a military and security struggle – but it’s also a struggle inside hearts, minds and souls.
And yesterday, I visited one of Singapore’s de-radicalisation programmes that involves family members, mentoring relationships and a religious engagement to wean people from the idea that serving God means killing infidels.
So we can succeed when we turn our minds to it.
The world should be grateful for Singapore’s solidarity and readiness to be a part of the international coalition against Daesh in the Middle East.
Singapore – along with Australia – has been willing to shoulder its responsibilities to uphold the freedom and security of the wider world.
Now one of the Australian servicemen who arrived in Singapore just a few weeks before its fall was John Gorton.
In late January 1942, he crashed landed after a dogfight with a Japanese aircraft.
As he was being evacuated, his ship was torpedoed.
Gorton would return to Singapore twenty-six years later this time as the Prime Minister of Australia.
He warned, “history shows that … those who neglect security, those who neglect defence, do so ultimately at their own peril”.
And as our foremost historian Geoffrey Blainey has observed: “a nation can be neutral only with the consent of its potential enemies”.
Australia and Singapore are too engaged with the world to avoid its difficulties.
We are too small to change the world on our own but we should never doubt the difference we can make.
We need the world but the world needs us and will be the better for our work together.
Thank you so much. It is an honour and a privilege to deliver this lecture and I am exceedingly grateful for the opportunity to do so.
[ends]


Thank you so much, John. 
It is marvellous to be here in such a throng with the Diplomatic Corps, with my parliamentary colleagues and with friends of America. 
It is an honour to mark the Declaration of Independence 239 years ago and to cherish the friendship between the United States of America and Australia. 
Almost from the beginning, the destinies of our two countries have been intertwined. 
They were intertwined in the 1770s when the English government sought a new penal colony because America was no longer available.
They were intertwined when the fathers of our Federation looked at the deliberations of America’s founding fathers, and they have been intertwined as we have both sought to build our own shining cities on a hill. 
We are natural partners because America's values – democracy, the rule of law, individual freedom and opportunity – are Australia’s values, too. 
We have fought together in the Great War, in World War II, in Korea, in Vietnam and, more recently, in Iraq and Afghanistan. Indeed, General Pershing’s doughboys first went into battle with the Australians at Le Hamel on 4th July 1918 under the command of General Sir John Monash. 
Our destinies are intertwined today, particularly as we meet the scourge of ISIL, or Daesh, which threatens the freedom and the safety of all peoples. 
At West Point last year, President Obama said that America could not be the world’s policeman on its own. 
Australia, like America, seeks to defend our interests, our citizens, our values and our friends. 
America will have more important friends. 
Occasionally, America will have more useful friends. 
But America will never have a more dependable friend than Australia. 
My message, on this anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, is that America is not alone. 
America has been able to exercise world leadership because it is the only country in the world that has been prepared to take risks for its values as well as for its interests. 
America was, is, and will be the indispensable nation – the one reliable bulwark against a world where might is right. 
You have been, in President Kennedy's words, “ready to pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe in order to assure the survival and the success of liberty.” 
Our own Prime Minister, John Gorton, said about 40 years ago, “I wonder if anybody ever thought what the situation for the comparatively small nations in the world would be if there were not in existence the United States, if there were not this giant country prepared to make so many sacrifices for others.”
So, as we approach this 239th anniversary of the Declaration of Independence, as we honour that light that was lit then and which burns bright around the world today, as it always has, American leadership is as necessary as ever and in providing it, you won’t just have Australia's gratitude, you will have our support as well. 
So, Ambassador, thank you to you and to Curtis for your hospitality and, on this day, may I repeat with you: May God bless America. May God bless Australia. May God keep our countries and our world safe and free.
[ends]


Admiral, it’s a privilege to be on the ship. It is an honour to be introduced to some of the ship’s company and it is good to be able to say on behalf of the Australian Government and people how grateful we are for your participation in Operation Talisman Sabre and how appreciative we are of the work that the U.S. forces do with our forces right around the world.
It is a very, very important alliance. It’s a very important relationship and right now we are facing quite significant challenges in many parts of the world but particularly in the Middle East.
So, I am very appreciative of everything our two countries do together.
Thanks so much.
[ends]


Obviously, footy fans right around Australia woke up to terrible news this morning. It was a dreadful, dreadful, dreadful tragedy.
Phil Walsh began his AFL career here in Hamilton. He was a very well-known and very well respected local from a very large and very well respected local family.
There is a pall over Hamilton, there is a pall over AFL more generally today and, like Dan, I certainly would want to extend my deepest condolences to his family, to his friends, to his colleagues and perhaps we might just pause for a moment or two of silence.
Thanks very much ladies and gentlemen.
[ends]


Ted, I want to thank you for being on our team.
I want to thank all of the great team that I have, that you – the LNP – have in Canberra, led by our remarkable Deputy Prime Minister, Warren Truss.
And isn't it fantastic that the newest member of our team in Canberra is Joanna Lindgren, a great niece of Neville Bonner.
And isn't it significant that we now have a third Indigenous member of our national Parliament and two of them represent our Coalition. It just goes to show – this is a Coalition for everyone.
Now, I presume you were all watching television on Wednesday night? Weren't the Ashes fantastic – it was just great – really, really good. It's a great start. Let's hope it can be a good finish. Actually, when I spoke at this gathering 12 months ago I was told not to mention the football – and that's advice I propose to take again!
I want to start these observations by saying a very big heartfelt thank you to the members of the LNP, and if I may say through you, to our membership right across the country: thank you.
None of us could be Members of Parliament, none of us could be Ministers in Governments, none of us could lead a Government, but for you. You are out there – week-in, week-out; month-in, month-out; year-in, year-out; election-in, election-out – you are there doing the hard yards so that your representatives can sit in the Parliament and Australia can have better government.
We owe it all, though, to you – and we don't thank you enough, but I thank you today for everything you do for us and I thank you for everything you do for our country. Our country needs you, and sometime within the next 15 months we will have to do it again, but I am absolutely confident that with your help we can continue to give Australia the good government that Australia needs, and that the Australian people deserve.
I know that sometimes we test your faith. I know we test your faith sometimes, because we are all too human, but I thank you for believing in us. I thank you for sustaining us.
I want to particularly thank you for all the support you gave to my friend and your former premier, Campbell Newman.
And I want to say this: the longer the Palaszczuk Government lasts, the better the Campbell Newman Government will look.
I also want to say thank you and good luck to Lawrence Springborg, who should be the next premier of Queensland.
I want to say thank you to Bruce McIver, your President, and for the whole of the Queensland LNP executive team. Bruce, you are a tower of strength in this great state.
I also want to say thank you to Brad Henderson. I know the last campaign was a terrible disappointment, but you have run some magnificent campaigns and I hope you might have one more in you. I know that's a vexed family question, but my hope is that you might have one more in you!
My job today is to report to you on how your Federal Government is going and I said to you before the last federal election that we had a clear mission: we would stop the boats, we would scrap the carbon tax, we would build the roads of the 21st century, and we would get the budget back under control.
That's what we said we would do, and that is exactly what we have done. The carbon tax is gone, the boats have been stopped, the roads are building and thank God the budget is coming back under control.
It hasn't been easy, but it has been necessary and I want to assure you, I want to assure Liberals and Nationals right around Australia, I want to assure every citizen of this great country that every day your Government is striving to build a strong and prosperous economy and every day your Government is striving to produce a safe and secure Australia.
That is what you need. That is what you deserve. That is what you have a right to expect of your Government and that, I believe, is exactly what we are doing.
I said on election night, back in September of 2013, that Australia was under new management and it was once more open for business. I did that for a very good reason. You see, we understand in a way that no other political movement does, that you cannot have strong and cohesive communities without strong economies to sustain them, and you cannot have strong economies without profitable private businesses.
That's what we understand.
We understand that you cannot have a job without a business to employ you. And you cannot keep your job if that business doesn't continue to make a profit. We get this. We understand this, and, frankly, we are the only political movement in our country right now that does.
So, we scrapped the carbon tax – which was a useless and unnecessary burden on business, and a useless and unnecessary burden on everyone, and every Australian household is better off to the tune of some $550 a year.
We scrapped the mining tax – and that big flashing red light over investment in Australia has gone.
We have scrapped some 50,000 pages of useless and redundant regulations and that is only a start, because there are a lot more useless and redundant regulations that must go.
I know you'll be pleased to know that the Environment Minister, Greg Hunt, has provided environmental approvals for $1 trillion worth of new projects. These are projects which will help to build the jobs and the prosperity of the future. But Greg Hunt, he's done a remarkable job. Not only has he provided environmental approvals for $1 trillion worth of new projects, he's also taken the Great Barrier Reef off the endangered list.
This, if I may say so, is an important, indeed, an historic achievement.
You all know as Queenslanders how much you care for the Great Barrier Reef. You appreciate that, yes, this is a world asset, this is a national asset, but it's also your asset and you want to look after it and water quality in the reef is getting better all the time, and thanks to the efforts of this Government it will just get better and better in the years and decades to come.
Thanks to the remarkable work of this Government, we now have three Free Trade Agreements – three Free Trade Agreements that the Howard Government started and the Abbott Government finished – and I have got to say, they floundered and were going nowhere fast in the intervening period, but thanks to the three Free Trade Agreements that this Government has finalised, some 95 per cent of our exports to 60 per cent of our export markets to China, to Japan, and to Korea, will enter duty free.
You know, a lot of Governments have talked about putting cranes in the sky and putting bulldozers on the ground, but this Government is actually delivering.
The biggest Commonwealth-funded infrastructure programme in our history – some $7 billion of Commonwealth spending to flood-proof the Bruce Highway, some billion dollars to ensure that the Gateway Motorway upgrade goes ahead; the Toowoomba Range Crossing – all of these things are happening because this is a Government which believes in building things; this is a Government which believes in getting things done.
And yes, we have had to make some tough decisions.
Last year, we had to bring in a budget for saving. It was a difficult budget. You all know that. You probably had to stand in the street and argue with your neighbour to defend what the Government did last year. But we had to get that message out to our people that you have got to live within your means.
And every time we see something going on in other countries, which haven't lived within their means, every time we see problems overseas, let us be grateful that at least in this country now there is a Government which is determined that we will live within our means, because the only way we can guarantee prosperity for our children and our grandchildren is to ensure that we do not put them in debt and this Government will never do that.
But because last year we were prepared to make some very difficult decisions, because we were prepared to do the hard yards last year, this year, we were able to bring in a budget for confidence.
Last year it was a budget for savings, this year a budget for confidence and I am so proud, and I know my colleagues are so proud that for the first time in living memory, we have a Government which doesn't just talk about doing the right thing by small business, but which actually delivers for small business.
Small business tax cuts started on 1 July, and one of the reasons why our shops and our warehouses have been so crowded over the last few weeks is because something like two million businesses right around Australia, including a half a million businesses here in Queensland, have been eligible to take advantage of the instant asset write-off.
Anything under $20,000 that small business buys can be written off against tax and you can do it again and again and again and again. It's not one off. Every item under $20,000 can be written off against your tax.
But we aren't stopping there. We aren’t resting on our laurels. Every day we are determined to make the life of our people easier, every day we are determined to make it easier for small business in particular to invest in their staff, in their customers, in their business.
We released the Northern Australia White Paper just a couple of weeks ago and I want to thank Senator Ian Macdonald in particular for the work he's done on the Northern Australia White Paper.
The Northern Australia White Paper is not just about Northern Australia, because if we want our country to flourish, our great north must flourish. If we want our country to reach its full potential, Northern Australia must reach its full potential, too.
I'm pleased that under this White Paper there is $700 million more for roads.
I'm delighted that under this White Paper there is a $5 billion concessional loan fund for economic infrastructure north of the Tropic of Capricorn.
I'm pleased that there are visa changes to ensure that it is easier for people to live in Northern Australia and make a home in Northern Australia and to build a life in Northern Australia.
I'm pleased about this, because it's not just good for Northern Australia, it's good for all of us.
Then, of course, last week, we had the Agriculture White Paper, and I want to thank Barnaby Joyce for the work that he did, the extraordinary work and the insights that he brought. Yes, and he's a kind of an ex-Queenslander, I understand! He was particularly conflicted on Wednesday night, but anyway. What, do you think some atavistic loyalty remains?! 
But we built on the budget benefits for small business with instant asset write-off extensions. The water infrastructure – the on-farm water infrastructure – can be instantly depreciated. The on-farm fodder infrastructure can be depreciated over three years. And all those new fences that were only repairs, now can be treated honestly for the first time. You put a fence on a farm and you can write it off straightaway. So, we are making honest farmers of the farmers of our country!
But one of the things that I'm most proud of is that at long last we are breaking the dam-phobia which has afflicted our polity for far too long.
In the Northern Australia White Paper and in the Agriculture White Paper, there is a $500 million fund to ensure that we get the water storages that we need, because if you want to grow things, you've got to have water and if we want our farming sector to expand and flourish, if we want our north to expand and flourish, we have got to have water. It is absolutely critical to the economic success of our country, and I look forward, thanks to the water fund that we have created, I look forward to the Ord Stage 3 going ahead, I look forward to the Nullinga Dam behind Cairns happening. I really do look forward to the water storages of our country actually happening for the first time in 30 years.
There is always more work to be done.
You know there is a tax reform white paper now well under way. I want to assure you that as far as this Government is concerned, what we want is lower, simpler, fairer taxes. We aren't on about increasing taxes. We aren't on about dreaming up new taxes. We are on about making taxes lower, simpler and fairer.
While I'm on that subject, I want to tell you that one thing we will not do is increase tax on super.
Your hard-earned savings – yes, they might be tax advantaged – but your hard-earned savings, they belong to you. They aren't a piggy bank for government to raid whenever it's in trouble and this is one of the key differences between us and our political opponents right now.
Another thing that we are not going to do, we are not going to fiddle with negative gearing because the last time a Labor government fiddled with negative gearing it destroyed the rental market in most of our major cities.
Another thing that we are never going to do is come back and hit you with a great big jobs-destroying carbon tax, which, of course, is the first thing that any re-elected Labor government might do and why it's so important that this Government be returned whenever the next election is held.
I know some of you have been taking a little bit of time out of celebrating Queensland's State of Origin win to watch things that have been happening in a certain Royal Commission over the last little while.
I'm not going to offer a running commentary on Royal Commissions. I'm not going to offer character assessments of our opponents, but while the Labor Party is thinking about itself, while the Labor Party is worried about its political success, this Government, this political movement, is worried about what will work and what will help the people of Australia.
And what will best help the people of Australia is restoring honesty and good governance to the trade union movement and that's why we have got a Bill before the Senate – the Registered Organisations Commission Bill – to bring to the union movement the same high standards of governance which have always been expected and required of companies. That's what we want to do – the same standards of integrity, of selflessness, the same standards of honesty – that's what we expect of companies and of union officials alike and that's what we are determined to deliver.
We have also got legislation before the Parliament to ensure that there is a strong, tough, cop on the beat in the construction industry. We need the Australian Building and Construction Commission back, and if the Labor Party wants to demonstrate that it has learnt the lessons of the rorts, rackets and rip-offs now being exposed by this Royal Commission, it will pass this legislation – it will pass this legislation.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, this is a great city in a great state, in a great country. You know, one of the privileges of being a Member of Parliament, one of the privileges of being your Prime Minister, is to see Australians in all the circumstances in which we live.
We have seen Australians in bad times, and in good.
Today, I just want to close these observations by telling you of the experience that Wyatt Roy and Teresa Gambaro and I have just had at River City Labs. River City Labs is a place where the smartest and the bravest and the most adventurous young entrepreneurs come together to talk about ideas, to challenge each other, to share ideas, to work out what they think can actually succeed, and then to make it happen.
And I can tell you, exciting though it was to watch that contest on the football field during the week, it's in places like River City Labs that the battle for our future is being won. That is where the future of our country is being secured, by our best and our brightest coming together to test each other, to stretch each other and to make it happen – and I want to say how proud I am to see that so many good things are happening in this great state of Queensland.
That is what we want.
We want to see a country which really does grasp its potential.
We want to see a country where each of us really can be our best selves.
That is what this Government, your Government, is striving for every day: to challenge each of us, to empower each of us, to encourage each of us, to be everything that we can be and to be the very best that we can be.
That is the mission of this Government: to help every single Australian to be the very best that he or she could be.
I am so proud to have the privilege of leading this nation.
I am so grateful for the support you give me every single day.
Thank you so much.
[ends]


The names of the Australians killed in the MH17 atrocity a year ago today are etched on this plaque just as they are etched in our hearts.
The plaque is set in soil that one of our police officers brought back from Ukraine.
He knew that the place where MH17 came to rest was sacred and that a piece of it should come back to Australia.
It was a humane and decent thing for him to know and do.
It was a contrast to the savagery that brought down the plane.
So today we remember our dead, we thank those who brought them home.
But most of all, we acknowledge the suffering of the bereaved.
You have had the worst year of your life.
Hardly a moment would go by when you don't think of a parent, a child, a sibling, a friend, present in your thoughts but painfully absent from your life.
Today our nation pauses to acknowledge your tragedy.
May this permanent memorial to your loved ones, close to the memorial to those killed in Bali, be of some comfort.
We won't forget them and we won't abandon you.
[ends]


Today we remember the 298 passengers and crew of flight MH17 lost a year ago this day.
At this service, we honour all who perished but especially the men, women and children who called Australia home.
They were innocent people living their lives to the full, advancing careers, celebrating birthdays, visiting family, enjoying retirement or taking the holiday of a lifetime.
They deserved to be welcomed home not shot out of the sky in a war of aggression by one country against its smaller neighbour.
Their passing leaves a void that can never be filled and a pain that still throbs.
Nothing that's said or done can bring them back.
Little can ease the grief that all who knew them still feel.
Still this national acknowledgment of that grief may be of some comfort to all who mourn.
Today our nation pauses to remember the bereaved of MH17 and to will you the grace and strength to cope.
Those of us who have not been so tested and who pray that we never will be stand in awe of those who have and who have kept going through suffering that's almost unimaginable.
Invariably the families of the victims have been as concerned for others as for themselves.
In the worst of times, you have displayed the strength of giants and the grace of angels and I am humbled by your example.
In the very worst of times there have indeed been many Australians who were at their very best.
One bereaved family told me that but for the words and deeds of the consular service they are not sure they could have survived.
So today, we comfort those who grieve and we honour those who serve.
Within a few hours of the atrocity, consular staff  were talking to victims' families. Within a day officials had been dispatched to Europe and within a week Australians were on the ground in Ukraine as part of Operation Bring Them Home.
We salute the officials who worked around the clock with families here in Canberra and all over Australia.
We salute the police, soldiers and forensic experts on the ground in Ukraine within range of Russian guns.
We thank Sir Angus Houston who coordinated the Australian recovery effort in Kiev and Julie Bishop who masterminded the UN Security Council resolution in New York along with her Dutch counterpart.
So now we owe it to the dead to bring the guilty to justice.
So now we owe it to the living to work for a more just and humane world, a world where people can turn their faces to the sun with the shadows behind them like the sun flowers blooming again in the fields where MH17 came down.
As the Maslin family so beautifully put it, love conquers hate.
May it be so – yesterday, today and always.
[ends]


Colleagues, thanks – it’s great to have you all here at Victoria Barracks.
It is a historic setting for what I hope will be a historic occasion.
We have got a lot on our plate.
Our challenge is to reshape our federation for the future.
It is a federation which has served our country and our people very, very well for more than a century.
It is a good, strong federation, but it is not perfect and our objective over the next day or so is to talk about some of the more substantial changes that we can make to deliver better services for a better Australia.
I think there has been a terrific spirit to our discussions so far.
I think we are determined to look for solutions rather than to pick fights and, frankly, I think that is what the public expect of us.
I think the public expect us to be as big as they are, the public expect us to be our best selves and I think that we can rise to this challenge.
So, let's have a pretty good discussion today and tomorrow.
[ends]


This conference will cover many subjects, but improvement in all things depends upon improvement in one thing: our economy. 
So, that’s what I want to address today – our economy, and the heart of our economy, which is trade. 
A short walk from here, in Macquarie Place, is a statue of Thomas Sutcliffe Mort, a leading merchant of colonial New South Wales.
Mort helped to start the international wool trade that was the foundation of our early prosperity.
He also founded the Australian Mutual Provident Society, which became today’s financial giant, the AMP.
I mention this because what we do makes a difference and because then, as now, prosperity was generated by trade.
Then, as now, jobs were generated by trade.
Australians today are wealthier and our country is more prosperous and more influential because we have grasped the opportunities of trade.
As you all know, Bob Hawke was one of the founders of the Boao Forum.
Better than many others and sooner than many others, he understood that Australia’s future prosperity rested on our trade with China.
Australia is now poised to realise the Hawke vision and to complete the work begun by Prime Minister John Howard over a decade ago, when the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement passes through our Parliament in the next few months and enters into force. 
This is a decisive moment for the economic future of Australia.
It is as vital to our long-term prosperity as floating the dollar and deregulating banking was in the 1980s.
The FTA with China will change Australia for the better, it will change China for the better and it will change our region and our world for the better.
It will secure the employment of generations of Australians to come.
It will provide massive new markets for our entrepreneurs.
It will provide investment opportunities that will enrich the Australian people and the Chinese people alike.   
It is an agreement that is fundamentally fair, giving our nations unprecedented access to each other's markets.
It removes barriers to Australian agricultural exports including beef, dairy, lamb, wine, horticulture and seafood, so much so that Meat and Livestock Australia forecast that their sector will benefit by $11 billion over the next decade.
The FTA means duty free entry for 99.9 per cent of our resources, energy and manufacturing exports within four years, so much so that the Minerals Council of Australia says that this will remove nearly $600 million in costs from the bilateral minerals and energy trade. 
Remarkably, China has agreed to Australia gaining the most substantial market access of any of its FTA partners apart from Hong Kong and Macau. 
Australian banks will be able to expand branch networks in China, Australian fund managers will be able to invest overseas on behalf of qualified Chinese institutions and Australian insurers will be able to provide third-party motor vehicle insurance in China.
Over 400,000 Australian workers are employed in financial services. 
This agreement makes their positions more secure and it will help open new opportunities in this vital sector. 
For China, the FTA liberalises the screening threshold for Chinese private sector investment in Australia and it puts Chinese businesses in the same position as those of our other major trading partners.
To protect Australian investors in China, there’s an investor-state dispute settlement provision.
We’ve secured this protection for Australian investments in China, so it’s only fair that we give the same protection to Chinese investors in Australia.
But I must say this: the FTA’s critics have forgotten their history.
After all, we have investor-state dispute settlement provisions in our FTAs with South Korea, Singapore, Chile, Thailand and ASEAN.
We have investor-state dispute settlement mechanisms in no less than 21 investment protection and promotion agreements and we’ve had an investor-state dispute settlement provision with China since the Hawke Government first signed a bilateral investment treaty with China way back in 1988.
The evidence of some 27 international agreements is that these provisions protect Australian investments.  
And likewise, the FTA’s labour mobility provisions protect the integrity of our labour market while allowing businesses to get skilled workers here where labour shortages exist.
Everyone working in Australia will be employed under Australian wages and conditions and will have to meet Australian standards for qualifications.
That’s fair, that’s reasonable and that’s what we’ve agreed to. 
The FTAs signed in the past year with Korea and with Japan as well as with China account for nearly 40 per cent of Australia’s two-way trade in goods and services. 
Our Free Trade Agreements with South Korea and with Japan are only months old and yet we are already seeing increased exports, like a 34 per cent increase in frozen beef prime cuts to Korea and a 56 per cent increase to Japan in just 12 months.
Macadamia exports to Korea have more than doubled and Japan is importing 66 per cent more of our rolled or flaked oats. 
There have been increases in wine, in lamb, in horticulture and other products as well.
Here in Sydney, one business alone, RBK Nutraceuticals, has increased its export sales to just one major customer in Korea by almost 170 per cent in a year and it’s now fielding more inquiries from China in anticipation of the FTA coming into force.
Barossa Valley winery, Seppeltsfield, has clinched deals that more than quadruple its sales of premium wine to China to four million litres, in fact, which is about 10 per cent of Australia’s total wine sales to China. 
So these businesses, and thousands like them across this country, are demonstrating that FTAs mean stronger Australian businesses and more jobs for Australians.
Now, in an uncertain world, I’m often asked about Australia’s jobs of the future.
The answer is absolutely crystal clear: the jobs of the future will be found in the markets of the future.  
Our efforts to secure these free trade agreements are all about better markets, more trade and more jobs.
As you know, our Trade Minister, Andrew Robb, is now hoping to finalise the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement. 
The talks are at their final, critical stage. 
If the Trans-Pacific Partnership is concluded, it will be the world’s largest regional free trade agreement, accounting for around 40 per cent of the global economy and involving almost a billion people, with almost unlimited potential for our businesses.  
These free trade agreements are too important for our country; they’re too important for our businesses and too important for our children to be sacrificed at the altar of short-term xenophobic politics. 
So, I hope that our opponents will end their flirtation with the ideas and the fears of the past.
As the former trade minister, Simon Crean, put it: “World trade is a multiplier of economic growth. If people are looking for job opportunities and advanced incomes, the path to that is in opening up trade.” 
It was, after all, Gough Whitlam who signed the first trade agreement with China 42 years ago last Friday.  
Likewise, it was a vision for deep engagement with the region that drove Bob Hawke and Paul Keating.  
So right now, the Labor Party should recall its recent history and listen to the sane economic voice of people like Simon Crean and Martin Ferguson.
After all, a deal is a deal. 
To amend one part is to re-open it all with big risks to Australian businesses, Australian exports and Australian jobs.
This is a test of character for Labor which first welcomed the China FTA but is now trying to stop it.  
Freer trade is an essential part of any credible plan to build a strong, prosperous economy for a safe, secure Australia.
Freer trade will strengthen and deepen the relationship between Australia and the nations of our region.
Australia has nothing to fear and everything to gain from freer trade.
We gain and the world gains as well.
Indeed, so much of our region’s prosperity has been built on Australian coal, iron ore and gas. 
I am proud to lead a country which has done so much to drive the extraordinary economic miracles that we have seen in the countries to our north over the last half-century.
Australia can give the countries of our region the resource security, the food security and the energy security that we all seek for the future. 
We are in the right place at the right time with the right spirit and as far as I am concerned, we must and we will seize this moment. 
[ends]


Mr Speaker,
I move that the House record its deep regret at the death on 21 July of Mr Don Randall – the Member for Canning since 2001, and the former Member for Swan from 1996 to 1998 – and place on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service and tender its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.
Mr Speaker, this House quite frequently notes the passing of the great, the good, and the famous, but there's a shock and a poignancy when we remember someone who was actually sitting amongst us just six weeks ago.
Six weeks ago, he was a part of our deliberations.
Six weeks ago, we could talk with him, joke with him, dine with him, and, on occasion, be chided by him – and now he's gone.
Don Randall was a man who had kept bees, tended roses, caught rabbits, played the violin and trained horses.
He had more than a passing interest in footy, golf and good wine.
Along the way he'd been a jackeroo, a rodeo rider and a local government councillor.
For 20 years he was a teacher.
His work included helping children with intellectual disabilities.
All this reflected a natural inquisitiveness and an interest in people that made him well suited to public life.
Don was elected the Member for Swan in the Howard landslide of 1996. He lost in 1998. But he came back in 2001 in the seat of Canning.
In fact, John Howard named Don and Bob Baldwin ‘the Macarthurs’ because they did return.
In 2001, his margin in Canning was just 530 votes, but by 2013 his margin was 20,900 votes and he won every single booth.
2013 was his biggest victory, but 2010 was his most satisfying.
In that year, Labor had chosen Alannah MacTiernan as its candidate, known throughout the state as an effective minister. In the end, though, Don won by over 3,500 votes.
Three years later, when Alannah was elected Member for Perth and took her first trip across the continent, she found Don Randall in the seat next to her.
I'm sure we will hear from the Member for Perth because a friendship developed between these two fierce political warriors.
Don's motto in the electorate was “You talk, I’ll listen.”
Over here, especially in the Party Room, it was sometimes a case of "I'll talk, you listen" – at least to leaders.
He was fearless – absolutely fearless – and utterly impervious to political correctness, but he did have a natural affinity with people.
He put that gift to work by doorknocking week in, week out.
More than a decade and a half of doorknocking created its own legends.
His car was known as a mobile maintenance unit.
In the back of his car were the tools to fix everything from phones to sewers.
On one occasion, Don doorknocked a house to discover a constituent in deep distress. The family's pet rabbit had died.
Without missing a beat, Don went to his car, took out a shovel and gave the rabbit the burial it deserved.
On another occasion, he visited an elderly lady’s home and noticed that the roses needed some tending, so out came the secateurs and the roses were pruned and in the years that followed, Don returned to prune those roses again and again.
Of course he was chased and bitten by dogs and on occasions, as we learned at his funeral, he was met by all sorts of people – once by a lady just out of the shower who was wearing little more than a bath mat.
He was one of those MPs who preferred to make a phone call than to write a letter because he knew that personal engagement was the way to get things done.
In many respects, he was the classic Australian male yet he had a deep inquisitiveness of other cultures.
He was the chair of the parliamentary friendship groups for Japan, Cuba and Sri Lanka and the relationships formed through these friendship groups were real and sustaining.
To give one example, he quietly made small payments to a family in Sri Lanka to help them buy a sewing machine which they turned into a family business.
That was always his approach: to build relationships, one person and one household at a time.
The anchor of Don's own life was his family.
He was married to Julie for 31 years. His love for Julie and for his children Tess and Elliott was abundantly reciprocated and we welcome them to the Parliament today.
Early in this parliament, Don said, “The next Member for Canning – may they that be well into the future – will probably win his seat by being on social media, but the old-fashioned way of getting out there, shaking hands, putting up a placard and telling people who you are and listening to them still works. I am interested in what my people have to say. I do not always agree with them and I cannot always deliver for them but I am interested in listening to what they have to say.” He went on, “That is why we come to this place, to represent the people in our electorates. There is a pretty cynical view about politics in this country, that politicians are just here for themselves, but if we are here for the people,” he said, “they will continue to give us the benefit of the doubt.”
Mr Speaker, Don was not one of those MPs who set out ostentatiously to change the world – but he did change people’s lives.
Thanks to Don, the Perth to Bunbury Highway became an Expressway.
Chiefly thanks to Don, there are now special Commonwealth programmes for children with autism
And thanks in part to Don, the Clontarf programme for Indigenous footballers now attracts public and private support.
Mr Speaker, thanks to Don, this parliament does not sit on Fridays. A few years back, when a certain Prime Minister decided that MPs would be in Parliament on Fridays but not the Prime Minister, it was Don who brought ‘Cardboard Kev’ into the chamber, firmly establishing the principle that if it was important enough for the Parliament to sit, it was important enough for the Prime Minister to be here too.
Mr Speaker, every one of us here is striving to make a difference.
We all so want our lives to be worthwhile.
Don – yours was. Yours was.
Farewell, Don.
You will live on in the hearts of your friends and your family, to whom we extend our deepest condolences.
[ends]


On this day 70 years ago, our nation and much of the world celebrated the greatest victory ever known.
We celebrated with unrestrained joy.
On VP Day, as soon as victory was announced, Australians quite literally dropped everything and spontaneously flocked into the streets.
Church Bells peeled, flags waved, bonfires blazed and a party began.
As Prime Minister Ben Chifley declared, "The war is over, let us offer thanks to God and remember those whose lives were given that we may enjoy this glorious moment and may look forward to a peace which they have won for us.”
So today, in awe and in gratitude, we honour a generation of Australians who helped turn the tide of history.
You fought in the air and on the sea, in the jungle and in the desert. You fought to defend our country against fascism, Nazism and militarism.
You fought against evils that sought to destroy human decency and you fought to build a lasting peace.
In the words of King George VI, "You fought in Brotherhood". And to our eternal gratitude, you fought and you won.
Almost a million Australians – men and women – served in World War II.
Over 30,000 became prisoners of war and over 8,000 died in captivity.
Almost 40,000 died in total.
Among them, Captain Lionel Matthews. He was from Stepney, here in Adelaide, and his mates nicknamed him the Duke because his moustache made him look like the Duke of Gloucester.
Captain Matthews fought in Malaya and was awarded the Military Cross before being captured by the Japanese at the fall of Singapore.
As a prisoner of war at Sandakan, he set up an underground intelligence organisation and arranged for the delivery of badly needed supplies.
Betrayed and tortured, he refused to reveal the names of his collaborators.
He was executed on the 2nd of March 1944, faithful unto death and was posthumously awarded the George Cross.
That's the spirit in which all of you served.
That's the spirit that we honour and commemorate today.
So to all who have served in Australia's name, I say on behalf of the rest of us, we owe you a debt of gratitude that can never fully be repaid.
At great cost you won the war.
With great resolve you built the peace and we live today in a region which is safe and secure because that's how the World War II generation rebuilt it.
On this 70th anniversary of the war's end, we acknowledge all those who died in the service of our country, all who made unknown and untold sacrifices and we remember the enduring grief of those left behind.
We thank you for the free and democratic Australia that is your true legacy and we resolve always to strive to be worthy of your sacrifice.
Lest we forget.

[ends]


It is terrific to be here to help celebrate the 70th anniversary of the Federal Women’s Committee and to honour the work of women in our Party.
That tradition began more than 70 years ago when Sir Robert Menzies sought to unify the conservative side of politics.
The Australian Women’s National League was one of the strongest of the groups that Menzies summoned to discuss the formation of our Party.
In return for joining the new Liberal Party, League President Dame Elizabeth Couchman insisted on the equal representation of men and women in senior party positions, at least in the Victorian division.
This was the first occasion that a quota was established for female political representation anywhere in Australia – and it happened in the Liberal Party and under our founder.
It entrenched the place of women in the structures of our Party and provided a springboard for some to enter parliament.
The first woman ever to be elected to an Australian parliament represented the conservative side of politics; the first women to be elected to parliament in most states and in the House of Representatives were Liberals; and Liberal women were the first to achieve ministerial rank at state and national level.
Women like Enid Lyons, Annabelle Rankin, Ivy Wedgwood, Marie Breen and Margaret Guilfoyle were trailblazers for our country and for our Party.
In more recent times, people like Margaret Reid, Kathy Sullivan and Julie Bishop, my deputy, have added to the litany of firsts for Liberal women.
Menzies’ declaration, back in 1944, that “men and women will, side by side, be members of this organisation”, reflected his aspiration to create a party that was beholden to no one and open to everyone.
Menzies was ahead of his time when it came to female participation and representation.
He understood that if the Liberal Party was to become the party of aspiration then it had to be the party of aspiration for all.
Ever since, we have tried to be the party that embodied people’s hopes for a better life and confidence in their own capacities to achieve it.
Ever since, Liberals have believed in an Australia that’s better tomorrow than it is today.
I am proud to lead a party that’s not a collection of union officials but of Australians from all walks of life who want to have a go.
We’re the party of Dame Enid Lyons – the first woman to enter the ministry.
We’re the party of Neville Bonner and Ken Wyatt – the first indigenous people to take their places in the Senate and the House of Representatives.
We’re the party of teachers and nurses and police officers; of soldiers and farmers and business people.
In our party, you don’t have to serve your time as an office bearer in order to enter parliament; our party prides itself on choosing the best and the most electable candidate for every seat, and not just taking the factions’ pick.
It’s precisely because merit should be all that matters, that I ask myself: why isn’t our party selecting more women members of parliament?
Why isn’t our party, as relatively advanced on this today as we were 70 years ago?
Why haven’t we remained ahead of our time in promoting women; and is that one of the reasons why we no longer attract the majority of women voters?
On this anniversary, we owe it to ourselves and to those who have gone before us to pose this question.
As many of you know, I grew up in a household of strong women.
My mother went to university and entered a profession at a time when that was not common for women.
At the family dinner table, I had to hold my own with three strong-willed and opinionated sisters.
You often hear one of my opinionated sisters right now.
I live in a household of strong women who were raised and educated to believe that there should be no artificial barriers to their achievement.
I work with strong women – who help to keep me aware of the ways that women can still be made to feel like outsiders.
Our party must always be a welcoming forum for women to argue their case, to win on their merits and to realise their ambitions because they’re very good at their job.
Yet there is consistently low female representation across our party.
There are relatively few women in leadership positions in the lay party; there are relatively few women in the parliament; and because there are relatively few women in the parliament it’s harder to get more women into the cabinet.
Regrettably, the percentage of Liberal women in both chambers has plateaued since John Howard came into office.
In the national parliament, women hold one in five of our seats in the House of Representatives and about one in six in the Senate; or to put it the other way, men hold four in every five of the House seats and five in every six of our Senate seats.
It’s hard to believe that politically-committed and meritorious conservative men outnumber like-minded women by at least four to one.
Naturally, I do acknowledge differences between men and women – but when it comes to political aspiration, we’re just not that unlike.
Equally with men, women are interested in jobs, growth and community safety.
Equally with men, women aspire to be all they can be.
And equally with men, women have at least as much faith in their own judgment and capacity than in the benevolence and omniscience of officials.
I love this Party, as you do, and I want it to be the very best it can be; and that has to include a determination to give a fair go to politically interested and able women.
If even the Australian Army can become less blokey, then so must we.
If the leaders of Telstra, the Commonwealth Bank, Woolworths, Rio Tinto, and Goldman Sachs can be “male champions of change”, so must the men of the Liberal Party.
To be serious about winning elections, we must be more serious about engaging, pre-selecting, and sending to parliament the representatives of 50 per cent of the electorate. 
Today, the Menzies Research Centre is releasing its report, Gender and Politics, pointing out that the lack of female representation is reducing our capacity to reach voters.
It’s a statement of the obvious – but it needed to be said – and it now needs to be addressed.
As it happens, governments often hold themselves to account by setting targets.
For instance, this government has a target to create a million jobs within five years – and, two years on, I can report that we are on track to meet that target.
We have a target to cut a billion dollars a year every year from red tape costs – and we’re meeting that target and helping our country’s small businesses along the way.
We have a target to return the Budget to a strong surplus within a decade – and we’re on track for that target too.
We have a target of zero boats – and we’ve met that over the past year.
We have emissions targets – that we’ve more-than-met to date – and this week, we announced further targets for 2030.
And we have targets for public servants and for directors of government boards in order to make government more representative of the people it serves.
So it would be entirely reasonable for our party to have – not a quota – but a target to increase the number of women in the parliament and in our government at every opportunity.
Of course, the right representation at any time depends upon the choices available.
Of course, it’s up to every pre-selection panel to choose the best candidate regardless of gender.
But if we don’t get the percentage of women up, we will be letting ourselves down.
At every election, at every reshuffle, we should aim for a higher percentage of women than before.
Right now, federal Vice President Rosemary Craddock is preparing a report to the Federal Executive on making our party more representative. 
I have asked Senators Cash, in her capacity as minister assisting me for women, and Reynolds, as a former Assistant National Director of the Party, to support this report by ensuring that the views of all our female members of the House of Representatives and the Senate are included.
As a member of the Federal Executive myself, I hope that the report will canvas specific steps to lift our female parliamentary representation and propose specific targets and goals for the years ahead.
If we lift our female representation, we should improve our overall representation and maximise our longer term chances of consistently winning elections and holding government.
We need to have a platitude-free conversation inside our party about how we can make more of ourselves by making more of those women who are natural Liberals.
Every one of us needs to be alert to encouraging smart, liberal conservative women to consider a future in public life.
This is not abandoning our history but being true to it.
After all, it was Menzies himself, who said that we stand for the “forgotten people” and it was Howard who said that we stand for “all of us”.
We stand for the women who start their own businesses – and we should want them to stand for us.
We stand for the mums who seek a better future for their families – and we should want them to stand for us.
We stand for all the women who work hard, pay taxes, volunteer in our communities and save for their retirement.
We stand for them; we stand with them; and we should want more of them to stand as our representatives – for our party’s sake and for our country’s.
Seventy years ago, the federal Women’s Council was founded largely thanks to the tenacity of Dame Elizabeth Couchman.
Dame Elizabeth never made it to the Senate despite Menzies’ observation that “she would have been the best cabinet minister I could have wished for”.
Her legacy, though, has been to ensure that the women who followed her had a stronger voice in our party and more opportunity to pursue the political career that she was denied.
So today, we recommit to that legacy and to making this great Party of ours the very best that it can be.
[ends]


Your Excellency, distinguished guests, war veterans – especially war veterans – led tonight by my friend Admiral Guy Griffiths – it is a tremendous honour to be speaking to you.
 
As I begin – could I ask all of our Second World War veterans either to stand or to raise your hand so that we may salute you.
 
On behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia, I thank you for defending liberty, for opposing tyranny and above all for building a lasting peace.
 
For all our problems in these days and for all the perils that we face now, these are the best times in human history and that’s largely thanks to you.
 
For every one of us who is not of the wartime generation, it is an honour to be with every one of you who is.
 
You fought, you suffered, you won, you made history, and you shaped our world.
 
On this day, seventy years ago, our nation and our allies celebrated the greatest victory the world has ever seen.
 
Our country had emerged from six atrocious years with our alliances secure, our values upheld and our freedoms safe.
 
As Prime Minister, Ben Chifley declared on this day 70 years ago: “The war is over. Let us offer thanks to God…and remember those whose lives were given that we may enjoy this glorious moment and may look forward to a peace which they have won for us.”
 
So, on this anniversary, we remember the exhilaration of victory and we remember the grim struggle by which victory was won.
 
Australians had fought in the air and on the sea; in the jungle and in the desert.
 
Australians had suffered in prison camps.
 
Australians had kept families together while spouses, parents and siblings served far away.
 
Everyone who lived through those times was caught up in the struggle to defend our country and to preserve our freedom.
 
Almost a million Australians, men and women, served in the Second World War.
 
Almost 40,000 died.
 
To all of them, to all of you, we owe a debt of gratitude that can never fully be repaid.
 
So, today, tonight, we honour the volunteers of the Second Australian Imperial Force who pushed the Italians out of North Africa and the French out of Syria.
 
We honour the veterans of the Greek and Crete campaigns, including those who spent long years in captivity.
 
We honour the Ninth Division at El Alamein – one of the decisive units in the decisive battle where the tide of war turned.
 
We honour the men of the Royal Australian Navy for their part in the British victories in the Mediterranean and the US victories in the Pacific. 
 
We honour the Australians flying in our own squadrons and in the Royal Air Force who helped to win the Battle of Britain and who took the war to Germany.
 
On this anniversary of Victory in the Pacific, we honour the Australians who harried the Japanese down the Malayan peninsula, who defended Singapore, and who dealt the Japanese their first defeat on land at Milne Bay.
 
We look back in awe at the men who fought through the mud and blood of New Guinea and the other islands and we remember with pity those who starved and died on the Burma railway.
 
Here in Brisbane, we remember those aboard the Australian Hospital Ship Centaur, torpedoed off Stradbroke Island and we thank our American comrades in arms, to whom we turned in our dark hour.
 
We acknowledge all who served, all who suffered, all who died in the service of our country; and all those they left behind.
 
We thank them, we thank you, for the democratic and free Australia that is your true legacy, and we resolve always to strive to be worthy of this sacrifice.
 
On this day 70 years ago, addressing the people of the British Commonwealth and Empire, King George – the Queen’s father – had this to say:
 
“Great is our responsibility to make sure…that the peace gained amid measureless trials and suffering shall not be cast away…For great as are the deeds that you have done, there must be no falling off from this high endeavour. We have spent freely of all that we had. Now, we shall have to work hard to restore what has been lost and to establish peace on the unshakeable foundations, not alone of material strength but also of moral authority…If you carry on in the years to come as you have done so splendidly in the war, you and your children can look forward to the future, not with fear, but with high hopes of a surer happiness for all.”
 
The King concluded, “It is to this great task that I call you now and I know that I shall not call in vain.”
 
So let us for a moment consider what has been achieved in the post-war world: 70 years of peace in western Europe; 70 years of peace between China and Japan; a rules-based international order, guaranteed by the United States, that has fostered the greatest expansion of safety, of prosperity and of democracy that the world has ever seen; with many hundreds of millions of people, especially in Asia, moving from the Third World to the Middle Class in just two generations
 
Let us savour that.
 
Let us ponder the epic nature of this achievement no less than the achievement of victory 70 years ago.
 
Now, of course, there is always more to do; there is always injustice to be overcome; there is always the evil, alas, that lurks deep in the human heart and can never quite be banished; yet the world that the heroes of World War Two created has been golden beyond the imagining of any previous generation.
 
The wartime generation built a lasting peace because you never let the grim necessities of war harden your hearts or misshape your characters.
 
You rose to the challenge of war and you rose again to the challenge of peace and all of us are your beneficiaries.
 
Perhaps you were the first generation in human history to be as resolved to build a peace as you were to win a war.
 
Perhaps you took to heart Churchill’s dedication of his war memoirs: “in defeat defiance, and in war resolution; but in victory magnanimity, and in peace, goodwill.”
 
You certainly rose to the challenge King George posed and the faith he so beautifully expressed.
 
Men like Gunner Russell Savage of the Second/Tenth Field Artillery Regiment, in a prison camp in Northern Japan, when the war ended; asked by a liberating comrade: “Which of these bastards do you want shot?” he shrugged off the question.
 
“We were beyond caring about past atrocities,” he said, “and simply wanted to be away home.”
 
Men like my former constituent, Captain Norman White, a Japanese POW for more than three years, who eventually ran a friendship circle for Japanese business people in Sydney.
 
Whether it was your grace, or your humanity, or just your exhaustion, there was a substantial lack of the reprisals, the retribution and even the reparations that had marked every previous war won.
 
There was little “victors’ justice” but a rare and fragrant abundance of victor’s goodwill and magnanimity.
 
It’s this that allowed Germany and Japan to rise again in peace and freedom so swiftly; to become exemplary international citizens.
 
It was the grace of Russell Savage, the generosity of Norman White, the goodness of “Weary” Dunlop, and the decency of countless others of the wartime generation that paved the way for initiatives like the Colombo Plan and the Japanese trade treaty and all the other measures that, in the post war world, have turned strangers into friends and enemies into partners.
 
This is your world.
 
I hope that you are proud of it; for we could not be more proud of you.
 
You have set a standard of strength and decency – a gold standard to which every future generation should aspire.
 
I thank you.
 
[ends]
 


As someone who has never served in our armed forces, I stand in humble awe of all who have – particularly, the decorated veterans I see before me.
Your Excellencies, Chief of the Defence Force, Opposition Leader, Minister, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen.
We gather today to remember those who served in the Vietnam War.
From the arrival of the Australian Army Training Team in 1962 to the final withdrawal of the Embassy guard 11 years later, over 60,000 Australians, including army, air force and navy personnel, served in Vietnam – 521 of them died.
Over 3,000 were wounded.
Many suffered unseen scars that never healed.
This year marks a half century since the first contingent of the 1st Battalion Royal Australian Regiment departed and today marks the 49th anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan.
It was at Long Tan that 108 Australian and New Zealand soldiers prevailed in the pouring rain against an estimated 2,000 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong troops.
As their commander Lieutenant Colonel Harry Smith said, “although nowhere near the same scale, Long Tan will be remembered alongside Kapyong, Tobruk and Gallipoli.”
As always, victory came at a high price.
Long Tan was the most costly action single action by Australian soldiers in Vietnam, with 18 dead and 24 wounded.
Courage, determination, resourcefulness and unflinching loyalty to mates marked that battle and, indeed, the entire Australian experience in Vietnam.
At Long Tan, at Fire Support Base Coral, at Fire Support Base Balmoral, at Binh Ba and in countless contacts and fire fights throughout that war, Australian soldiers proved themselves worthy successors to the Anzacs, as did our naval and air personnel who provided vital logistic support.
I regret to say that back home we did not always appreciate that at the time.
People were entitled to question the war, but they should never have doubted our soldiers.
Eventually we would see what was always true: that in you, was and is, the best of Australia.
Eventually we saw the duty, the courage, the integrity and the examples of men and women at their best.
That is what you were, and are.
Australia is proud of you and we honour you for your service to our country.
The former Chief of Army David Morrison observed that the soldiers who served in Vietnam laid the foundations for the modern professional Australian Army.
The friendship that now exists between Australia and Vietnam owes much to veterans determined to befriend their former foes as the Anzacs did two generations earlier.
Today, we remember all who served in the Vietnam War.
We remember those who died.
We remember those who were scarred physically and mentally.
We remember their families, and their loved ones, that suffered with them.
You did your duty.
You remain an example.
Your sacrifice should never be forgotten by the country you served.
[ends]


Thank you, Sussan.
Women’s sport does matter and today I’m pleased and proud to say that women’s sport takes centre court here in our national Parliament.
Today we salute our world champion netball team – the Diamonds!
Not only the Commonwealth Games medallists, but World Cup winners thanks to an absolutely thrilling victory over New Zealand.
And that thanks to you – the Diamonds – Australia has now won 11 of 14 netball World Cups.
As your captain, Laura Geitz, said, it is "Bloody sensational".
I have to say that the team showed tremendous character to come back from an early defeat and tremendous grit personified by your vice-captain, Julie Corletto, playing the second half of the final with a broken foot.
And Julie is, as we speak, at the orthopaedic surgeon to get fixed up.
With a million players, netball rivals Australian Rules as our national winter sport.
But, it has remained a grass roots game, without the big licensed clubs, without the massive corporate sponsorships, netballers – even champions – don't play for material reward but for the thrill of competition and the love of being the very best that you can be.
I have to say to our Diamonds today, that we in this Parliament admire you.
We absolutely admire you and we have even, in our own way, tried to emulate you with a team called the Owls – the parliamentary netball team. You may not have heard but they did take on New Zealand. What turned out to be a stacked New Zealand team. You can't trust those Kiwis. It was a New Zealand parliamentary team stacked with Silver Ferns, so if any of you are invited to apply for pre-selection, it is to improve the quality of the Owls around this place.
In the Abbott household, netball is a family passion. My girls played, my wife coached and I cheered.
Yes, Sussan, I have long been a netball dad, but today I am very proud to be a netball Prime Minister.
Well done, Diamonds!
Sporting success does help to lift our national morale and thanks to you our spirits have soared.
[ends]


Unlike some prime ministers, I haven’t been a cricket tragic. I wasn’t much of a cricketer. In fact, as I think I’ve said previously on this occasion, I was taken down to the nets in year seven at St Ignatius College and after they watched me bowl a wide and you know, a swipe outside off stump they said, ‘off you go to the rowing sheds, that’s where you’re going!’
But then, of course, years later I found myself in the United Kingdom as a student at Oxford and I discovered the only way to get a drink in the afternoon was to play cricket because the bar at the cricket ground was open all afternoon and didn’t close between 2.00 and 5.00 as the pubs did in those days in the United Kingdom. So, I became a very enthusiastic cricketer!
I was the captain of the Queen’s College Middle Common Room XI and under my captaincy, the Queen’s College Middle Common Room XI did more fixtures than any other team in the College. So, I have been a very enthusiastic cricketer at different times of my life and it is an honour to be associated with this Prime Minister’s XI.
It was started, of course, by Bob Menzies, then there was quite a long gap and this fixture was renewed by Bob Hawke and very enthusiastically continued since then, particularly by John Howard.
Now, I just hope that this year my team can do better than in the two previous seasons. In the two previous seasons the only game where England got any joy was the game against the Prime Minister’s XI and so I’m hoping this year it will be a better outcome for Australia.
I’m really pleased that Mike Hussey has agreed again to be the captain. As you know, Mike has played 79 tests for Australia, he played 185 one day internationals, his test average was over 50 and his one day international average was almost 50 – an absolutely extraordinary record. So, Mike, thank you so much for agreeing to captain the team again and let’s hope this time nothing intervenes to prevent you taking the field!
I’m also pleased that this is going to be the first game, as I understand it, played with a pink ball which has been specially designed by Kookaburra Australia to be visible in night matches. So, that’s something that I’m very pleased about.
I’m also pleased that in our Anzac centenary year, the beneficiary for this match will be the Returned and Services League. The RSL do a magnificent job. Not only do they represent our veterans at a living level, not only do they advocate for our veterans at a policy level but they do tremendous work amongst our veterans to try to ensure that they live the lives and receive the recognition and support that they deserve.
So, I’m thrilled that this will be an exciting game and hopefully it will help to set up a great summer of cricket.
I should also note that in a couple of hours’ time, Michael Clarke will begin his last game as Australia’s test captain. He has been a most distinguished test captain. We have been extremely blessed in our test captains but Michael Clarke has been a very worthy member of an extraordinarily distinguished group of Australian cricketers. It’s also going to be Chris Rogers’ last game for Australia and when Mike was unavailable to actually take the field last year in the Prime Minister’s XI, Chris Rogers was a tremendous stand-in. While last year’s game didn’t get the right outcome, it was certainly a tremendous spectacle with something like 700 runs being scored.
So, again, let me say how pleased and proud I am to be here to launch this season’s Prime Minister’s XI. I’m delighted to support our national summer game and I’m also delighted to support cricket here in the ACT and thank you so much for having me.
[ends]


It is a tremendous honour for me to be here at the final resting place of Eddie Koiki Mabo.
He was a giant of your island and of your people.
He was a warrior who fought for justice and now he rests amongst the other warriors of your people.
He was your father, your brother, your kinsman and he’s our citizen.
All Australians now embrace Eddie Koiki Mabo.
Yes, at the time there was much contention.
He fought for justice. For many years justice was denied.
Eventually – too late perhaps – but nevertheless, eventually justice was granted and now we are a people on the path to reconciliation in large measure because of what Eddie Koiki Mabo and his brothers and sisters fought for.
The struggle for justice, justice sought, justice granted and people moving forward together as Australians – that is what we must all seek and thanks to Eddie Koiki Mabo, that is something to which we are closer to today than we have ever been in our history.
[ends]


It is a real honour for me to be here on your island, on Mer Island. It is an honour for me to be here on an island which now resonates right around Australia as the place where native title was first acknowledged.
Many Indigenous Australians yearn for justice, but it was one of yours whose grave I will soon visit who first found justice at the hands of a country and a court system which had long been unsympathetic to the claims of the Indigenous people.
The fact that your brother was able to sustain the search for justice, the fact that – eventually – our country had it in its heart to accord justice reflects well on Indigenous people and, in the long run, on all Australian people.
So, it is an honour to be here on this island which has been so significant for Indigenous people and is now so significant for all Australians.
[ends]


Thank you very much to everyone for making me so welcome. It’s a real honour to be here at Bamaga School in the NPA.
It’s a real thrill to be spending some time in this part of Australia and I am very pleased that with me, with you here today, I’ve got a number of my ministerial colleagues. We’ve got Senator Nigel Scullion who is the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, we’ve got Mr Scott Morrison who is the Minister for Social Services and we’ve got Senator Simon Birmingham who is the Assistant Minister for Education.
So, all of them have a very significant influence on the lives of people here and by coming up to Bamaga, by spending time in the Torres Strait, we are getting to experience what your life is like, we get more insights into how the Government in Canberra can be more helpful to you here in Cape York and the Torres Strait.
Now, kids, I just want to say a few words to you if I may. I hope you like school because school is very important. When I was your age – quite a long time ago, I regret to say – when I was your age there were some days when I thought, “Why am I bothering to go to school? What’s the point? I’ve had a fight with some of my mates at class, the teachers and I are arguing, what’s the point of coming to school? I don’t like some subjects, what’s the point of coming to school?”
Well, the point of coming to school is that it actually sets you up for the rest of your life. Yes, you’ve got lots of friends here. Yes, you’ve got teachers who care for you and that’s good, but the point of coming to school is that it sets you up for the rest of your life.
If you want to be a nurse or a teacher or a police officer or if you want to have a business, going to school is really, really important because you’ve got to learn to read, to write, to count, to think. You’ve got to understand things, not just about life here in Bamaga but about life in the big cities, not just about the history of your family but about the history of our country and our world. All of this you get at school.
So, I want to say thank you for being here at school. You honour your parents, you respect your teachers and you serve yourself when you come to school every day.
I had the pleasure of meeting up with some of you and your colleagues at Injinoo School and at the senior school earlier today when I was on the bus with Robert, your attendance coordinator, and I want to say how pleased I was to see you all there. When I asked some of the kids on the bus what they wanted to do with their lives, they all had good ideas – all had good ideas about being and doing good things when they leave school.
So, this is important and I’m really pleased to be here.
I hope you enjoy the day and I hope you come to school every day, not just some days, but every day. Every day matters and every day you are here, you are setting yourself up to have more and more good days for the rest of your lives.
So, thank you kids, thank you teachers. I know that this is a very good school, particularly by the standards of remote Australia, and thank you parents for sending your children to school. It really does matter and just about the best thing you can do for your kids is make sure they go to school every day.
Thanks everyone. Lovely to be here. I look forward to saying hello to all of you later on.
[ends]


It is fitting that Albury Wodonga should be the first stop on the journey of the Spirit of Anzac Centenary Experience, because this has been a significant place in Australia’s military history.
Within weeks of the declaration of war on 4 August 1914, men from Albury and Wodonga and from all around the district had enlisted – men like Archie Rapsey, a farmer from Bonegilla.
Private Rapsey was killed in action at Pozieres on the 18th of August 1916.  He was 24 years old.
This exhibition tells his story.
It also tells the story of Private Harry Derrick from Tallangatta, a prisoner of war, who died in Germany the day after the Armistice.
And it tells the story of Private Tom Snowden of the 8th Infantry Battalion, who came back from the war and went on to serve as the President of Wodonga Shire.
To us, the soldiers of the Great War are legends.
But in their day they were parents, children, cousins, mates and friends – and we should never forget that. 
Their lives were as joyous, as sad and as complex as our own.
We must never forget the 400,000 who volunteered from an Australian population then of under five million; the 330,000 who served overseas; the 155,000 who were wounded; and the 61,000 who never returned.
When the injured did return, some blinded, some missing limbs, some with wounds it seemed impossible that a human being could survive, they would change trains at Albury and the women of the Red Cross would go and help them where they could.
It is hard to fathom the scale of loss.
But that conflict – that loss – was not purposeless.
It was for country, empire, King, and the ideal that people and countries should be free.
It was for duty, loyalty, honour and mates: the virtues that outshine any cause.
The Great War was the crucible that forged our nation and that’s why the Centenary of Anzac is an important commemoration for everyone.
As the historian Les Carlyon has said: if we remember them, if we remember what they did, they are still alive in our hearts. 
So we do remember.
We remember the terrible victory on the Western Front as well as the magnificent defeat at Gallipoli.
Ninety-seven years ago this week, the Australian Army won the Battle of Mont Saint-Quentin and helped to seal Germany’s defeat.
It was in fact, in the words of Sir General John Monash, “the finest feat of arms of the war”.
The centenary of Anzac does not – will not – glorify war.
Rather, it commemorates what is best in the human spirit, what is noblest in our character and acknowledges that the worst of times can bring out the best in us.
We all owe the Commonwealth Bank and Telstra a debt of gratitude for the generous support that has helped to make this travelling exhibition a reality.
It was, after all, the Commonwealth Bank that managed the pay of soldiers on the front line during the First World War and it was the Postmaster-General’s Office which managed communications between the front line and the home front.
I should also acknowledge the Minister for the Centenary of Anzac, Senator Ronaldson, currently in China, but who, along with his Department, has overseen flawless commemorations this year.
I congratulate the Australian War Memorial for the care that has been put into this exhibition, to bring the Great War back to the towns and cities who gave up their young men to fight in the service of their country.
I hope that all who pass through the doors of this exhibition gain a better understanding of that heroic generation whose sacrifice shaped our world and whose spirit still breathes over our country a hundred years on.
I hope that as many people as possible will visit this exhibition over the next couple of years.
It was a privilege and a wonder to walk through the exhibition this morning.
It is a truly remarkable feat to bring to life those lives, those times, that struggle – those lives, those times that have shaped so significantly our lives and our times – and it would be a terrible disappointment if millions of Australians did not take advantage of this over the next two years.
Thank you.
[ends]


Monday is the second anniversary of the election of this Government – this Abbott Government.
For two years now, every day we have been delivering on the plan that we put to the Australian people in that campaign.
On 7 September, I said, “Australia is under new management and once more open for business”.
I said that if you elected us we would build a strong and prosperous economy for a safe and secure Australia.
I said that we would back hardworking Australians.
I said that every day our focus would be jobs, growth and community safety and two years on I can report to you; our backers, our supporters, our fellow MPs, that the plan is working.
Here in Tasmania there are almost 10,000 more jobs today than there were in September 2013.
Thanks to a good government in Canberra and over the last 12 months or so a very good government in Hobart.
Tasmania has gone from being just a great place to live and a great place to visit to being a great place to work and a great place to invest.
Over the last year, business investment is up 5 per cent here in Tasmania. Private investment is up 8 per cent here in Tasmania and construction investment is up 15 per cent here in Tasmania – confidence is surging back into the Tasmanian economy.
Now, right around Australia confidence is coming back because right around Australia the people who want to have a go, the people who want to get on with their life know that there is a government in Canberra which is backing it.
Since September 2013, our economy has created 335,000 more jobs.
Yes, in the first instance that is due to the creativity and the dynamism of Australian businesses.
And yes, in the second instance that is due to the hard work and the commitment of our labour force, of Australian workers.
But in the final instance, very importantly, that is due to a government which is working with people not against them.
That is due to a government that is working to back the hard working people of Australia, all the people who want to have a go.
If you are someone who wants your business to succeed – we are for you.
If you are a migrant who wants to join our team – we’re for you.
If you're someone who is saving for your retirement out of your own pocket – we're for you.
If you're a parent who wants to see your children going to better schools with better teaching – we're for you.
We are for the decent people of Australia who are striving to help their families, their neighbourhoods, their communities, their businesses. All of those people are the people that every day we are saying yes to.
So, all these good things are happening here in Tasmania because this is a Government which is delivering on its commitment to spend $400 million on the Midland Highway, to spend $40 million putting the international back into Hobart International Airport, to make Hobart the Antarctic research capital of the world with a $25 million investment and since the election there's been a $60 million commitment to the second tranche of the northern Tasmania irrigation scheme and isn't it terrific to see dams once more being built in this state and in this country?
And most recently, most recently, a $200 million commitment to ensure that the fabulous exports of this great state don't just get to the mainland but get to the world beyond.
That's what I want to see, more of these clean green products of Tasmania going out to the wider world so that the world will know that if it comes from Tasmania it is very, very good indeed.
Right around Australia, our policies every day are helping to lift the burdens off people; they're helping to encourage people who are having a go.
The carbon tax is gone and every household is $550 a year, on average, better off.
The mining tax is gone and that threat over the safety of investment here in Australia has been lifted.
Small business has had the biggest tax cut in history and any small business that invests $20,000 again and again and again and again in its business gets the instant asset write-off.
We haven't forgotten farmers. Farmers who invest in on-farm fencing, on-farm water infrastructure; an instant write-off. Farmers that invest in fodder infrastructure can write that off over three years.
So, wherever you look, this is a Government which is doing everything it can to say yes, to say yes to the hard working people of our country who want to have a go.
You know, since the election, after years of environmental logjams, since the election, thanks to a decent Environment Minister in Greg Hunt, we've said yes – yes – to new projects worth more than $1 trillion.
And we've cut red tape to the tune of some $2 billion a year every year for small business.
So, the plan is working and we're sticking to it. We are sticking to our plan. Our plan for lower taxes, our plan for more jobs, our plan for more infrastructure, for more trade and ultimately for far more prosperity for our country.
Every day there are further instalments of our plan and today I can announce what I believe will be a $72 million boost to the Tasmanian economy.
Many of you would remember that during the election the Liberal National Coalition committed $16 million towards a plan to upgrade the fabulous Cadbury's chocolate tour – something which the chocolate lovers of this room have probably experienced. I know I've experienced it and it's not been good for my waistline but by God it's been good for my enjoyment.
It was one of those marvellous Hobart tourist attractions which had fallen on hard times and we committed $16 million to help upgrade it. It was part of a $70 million upgrade of the Cadbury's works.
You all know that about 12 months or so later Cadbury decided that for all sorts of reasons they didn't want to go ahead on quite as ambitious a scale and they weren't going to be calling upon that $16 million.
Well, I don't want Tassie to miss out. I never want Tasmania to miss out and I have to say that there are some local members of parliament here. They go under the title of the three amigos. They don't want Tassie to miss out either.
Some people have looked at my ears and they say, "Did you get those ears from boxing in England or did you get those ears from playing rugby at Sydney university?" And I say, "No, the three amigos gave me those ears. By God, they're chewing on those ears every day."
Every day they're chewing on those ears and so I can today announce that there will be a $24 million co-investment fund here in Tasmania, $16 million from the Commonwealth Government, $8 million from the State Government – thank you Will Hodgman – we expect that to be matched on a $2 for $1 basis by private investors, that's $72 million boost to the Tasmanian economy thanks to that $16 million that would otherwise have gone to Cadbury.
And can I tell you that this is typical of the way this Government tries to work. We want to work in partnership.
First of all with state governments and, where possible, with local governments because if you've got the wisdom of two governments you're normally better off than if it's just the officials in Canberra operating on their own.
But above all else, we want to work with people who are prepared to put skin in the game because if they’ve got skin in the game, they haven't got their hands out, they're seeking a hand up.
That's what good government should do, work with people who are prepared to work for themselves, who are prepared to work to help themselves and that's why this $16 million in Commonwealth taxpayers' money – money that we have to respect – is not just going to be given out on a whim, it's going to be given on a competitive basis to people who come forward and say to us, "We have a project and we are prepared to match taxpayers' funds on a $2 for $1 basis."
That's what we're going to do and I think it will be very good for the workers, for the businesses and for the people of Tasmania.
But that's what we're always working to do. We are always working to help people who are prepared to go and have a go and this is what everything that we do between now and the election, which must be only about 12 months off, that's what we'll be doing all the time.
We will be looking to back hard-working Australians, we will be looking to deliver a tax cut to those people that are out there having a go for themselves and for their families, we'll be looking to deliver further tax relief, particularly to small businesses which are out there having a go every day, putting their lives on hold, putting their houses on the line so that they can invest, employ and serve our community.
That what we'll be doing.
Now that people have seen for two years this Government in action, now that people have seen us delivering on commitment after commitment, whether it be to scrap the carbon tax, to stop the boats too, to bring the Budget back under control, to get cracking on the roads of the 21st century, now that people have seen us for two years, they will have a very clear choice and, as always, it will be about who do you trust?
Do you trust a Government which has actually got us back on to a path to a sustainable surplus, reducing the deficit by a half a percentage point of GDP every year or do you trust a Labor Party which gave us a quarter trillion dollars of deficits in six years? The six biggest deficits in our history.
Do you trust a Government which is building up our defences to 2 per cent of GDP spending every year or a
Labor Party which cut $16 billion from Defence and which did not place a single naval ship building order with an Australian yard in six years.
Who do you trust with border protection? Do you trust a Government which has stopped the boats or do you trust a political party that put out the welcome mat for the people smugglers?
Who do you trust to deal straight and honestly with you? A Prime Minister who has kept commitments or an Opposition Leader who back-stabbed two Prime Ministers?
It is going to be a very clear choice. A very clear choice.
If you look at the commitments that the Labor Party has made already, they've committed to bring back the carbon tax, they've committed to at least a 40 per cent reduction in emissions.
All the modelling says that that will require a carbon tax of at least $200 a tonne, at least six times what we experienced under Labor before.
They've already committed to a 50 per cent renewable energy target, that means an $85 billion over-build of generating capacity in the next 15 years.
They've committed to bring back the mining tax, they still support a bank deposit tax, they want to slug the retirees of Australia with extra superannuation taxes and then of course there's Bill Shorten's piggy bank tax, all those inactive bank accounts that he himself, as the relevant Minister, put confiscatory taxes on when Labor was in Government.
You see, what Labor are doing is that they are saying no to all the things that are vital for a decent and prosperous future, for us and our children.
They're saying no to cleaning up the union movement.
They're saying no to an expansion of our resources sector, conniving with green activists to stop the Carmichael Mine in Queensland even though it will be a $20 billion investment with 10,000 jobs.
And above all else, they are saying no to the Free Trade Agreement with China.
I want to dwell on that for just a moment.
They are saying no to the Free Trade Agreement with China.
I know that here in Tasmania we got a pretty good idea of the potential of the Free Trade Agreement with China, not for nothing did President Xi Jinping visit Tasmania; make a point of coming here to Tasmania last November.
I don't think it was the bottle of Sullivans Cove whiskey that I presented to him earlier in the year.
It wasn't just that.
It wasn't just the abalone I had sent up to him earlier in the year.
He came to Tasmania because he knows what this State can do for his country and in helping his country with clean, green exports, the people of Tasmania also help themselves and their children to have a better future.
That's what free trade is all about.
Trade means jobs and more trade means more jobs and more jobs means more prosperity.
It's as simple as that.
Now we all know just how half-hearted Labor are about the Free Trade Agreement with China.
It was an agreement which John Howard started and which this Government finished.
It's an agreement that went absolutely nowhere in the six years of Rudd, Gillard and Rudd.
Under this agreement, more than 95 per cent of our exports to China, our wine, our beef, our  lamb, our cheese, as well as our services, as well as our resources, more than 95 per cent of our exports to China will be entirely duty-free.
That is what this agreement offers.
It's the only free trade deal that China has yet done with a major overseas economy.
It's a better deal than they did with New Zealand and New Zealand's exports have quintupled over the last five years under their deal with China.
This is a remarkably good deal for Australia.
It doesn't involve changing any workplace relations laws, it doesn't involve changing any migration laws. It doesn't involve reducing existing labour market testing and labour market protection.
Every way you look at it, this is a good deal for Australia.
Bob Hawke thinks it's a very good deal for Australia.
Bob Carr thinks it’s a very good deal for Australia.
Simon Crean thinks it's a very good deal for Australia.
The Labor Premier of Victoria thinks it's a very good deal for Australia.
The Labor Premier of South Australia says it's a very good deal for Australia.
The Labor Premier of Queensland says it's a very good deal for Australia.
The only people who don't say it's a good deal for Australia are Bill Shorten and the CFMEU and by the way there's one other person, someone called Brian Green. I believe he says it's not a good deal for Australia either. So you've got Bill Shorten, you've got Brian Green and you've got the CFMEU – what a unity ticket.
I think that Bill Shorten needs to worry about the company that he's keeping.
Right now, whenever he moves it's the CFMEU that are pulling his strings and whenever he opens his mouth it's the CFMEU's voice that you hear.
I say to you, my friends, this Government will fight for our future.
This Government will fight to make sure that the China Free Trade Agreement happens, that the exports to China deal happens.
This will set our country up not just for a day or a week or a month or a year. This will set our country up for decades and this Government will fight for our country's future.
And you know that we're capable of doing it.
I give you this pledge: we will fight just as hard for the China Free Trade Agreement as we fought to stop the carbon tax.
We will fight just as hard to say yes to the China FTA as we fought to say no to the carbon tax.
I believe in this country. I believe in our future. I know that when we get a chance we'll take it. I know, give us a level playing field and we are better than anyone else in the world and this China FTA is our chance to prove it.
We've spent most of the last couple of decades quite rightly saying to ourselves that we live in the Asia Pacific region, that this is the Asian Century and the last thing that we should do, living in the Asia Pacific, living in the Asian Century, is to snub Asia's strongest economy.
It's the last thing we should do and it's the one thing we will never do under this Government.
So my friends, we have many challenges but I know that we are more than a match for them.
Public life always involves choices. Public life always has challenges. But the choices have never been more important. They've never been more important and we have made our choices, our choices are for trade, are for jobs, are for development, they're for honest workplaces and they're to back the decent people of our country.
Thank you so much for your support.
I am so proud to be here.
[ends]


Mr Speaker, I do wish on indulgence to mark the passing of Bart Cummings just a few days ago.
Bart Cummings AM was one of Australia's greatest horse trainers, if not the greatest trainer in our horse racing history.
Mr Speaker, few people have dominated a sport the way Bart Cummings has.
He won his first major race way back in 1958 and went on to dominate horse racing for almost six decades.
He was the trainer every jockey wanted to ride for, every owner wanted to engage and every punter felt safe betting on.
Twelve Melbourne Cups, Mr Speaker, he had to his name, more than twice as many as any other rival.
He also holds the record number of wins in the Caulfield Cup, the Newmarket Handicap, the Australian Cup and the VRC Oaks, and, Mr Speaker, in 1989 and 1990, he achieved the unprecedented treble of topping the Trainers Premiership in Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney.
Mr Speaker, horse racing was in the Cummings family’s blood and it is still in his family's blood.
Bart's father, Jim, taught him and Bart taught his son, Anthony, and Anthony and Bart taught grandson, James.
As Anthony once said of his father, “Dad showed me and told me everything I know, but he didn't show and tell me everything he knows.”
Mr Speaker, Bart was a man of few words but they were often very well chosen ones.
For instance, when the jockey Darren Beadman told Bart that God wanted Beadman to go to Bible college and leave jockeying behind, Bart said to him that he needed to, and I quote, “Seek a second opinion.”
Bart was appointed a member of the Order of Australia for service to the racing industry way back in 1982.
He was inducted into the Racing Hall of Fame and the Sports Australia Hall of Fame.
I, certainly, on behalf of the Government, extend sympathy to Valmae and to Bart's children, grandchildren and great grandchildren.
Race day will not be the same without him.
[ends]


Mr Speaker, I now rise to acknowledge the passing of one of our country's most generous philanthropists, Leonard Gordon Darling AC CMG, who passed away at the end of August.
Gordon Darling was the scion of a famous family – a very famous family – many of whose members have excelled in a whole range of fields.
His grandfather, John, was one of the founders and later chairmen of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company Limited and after distinguished service in the Australian Imperial Force in World War II in the Middle East and in New Guinea, Gordon was the longest serving director of BHP and was in fact the last family member to serve on its board.
Gordon Darling appreciated that a wealthier and more productive economy meant more opportunities for philanthropy.
He wasn't just a businessman.
He was someone who wanted to use the fruits of business to serve the community more widely.
He was the inaugural chairman of the board of the National Gallery of Australia from 1982 to 1986.
In 1991, he established the Gordon Darling Foundation which continues to provide funding and staff development opportunities for public art institutions right across our country.
Gordon and his wife, Marilyn, were the founding patrons of the National Portrait Gallery and they have done magnificent work with this splendid institution.
They funded its beginnings and they drove its establishment as one of our best, best institutions.
In his own words – and I’m quoting him – he said, “All those things, much to my surprise, have been much higher profile and a much more rewarding experience than 40 years in business.” 
So, Mr Speaker, on behalf of all Australians, I acknowledge the legacy that Gordon Darling has left to our nation.
I extend my deepest condolences to his wife, Marilyn Darling AC, herself a remarkable philanthropist in her own right, and to his family, his children and his grandchildren.
[ends]


Mr Speaker I move the motion relating to the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement in the terms in which it appears in the Notice Paper.
Mr Speaker, it’s important to remind the House just how big a deal the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement is, just how big an opportunity for our exports and for jobs in Australia the China Free Trade Agreement is. Already, Mr Speaker, China takes about one third of our exports, China is already the strongest economy in Asia and soon China will be the biggest economy in the world and what the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement, what the China-Australia export agreement does is give Australia and our exporters privileged access to the biggest market in Asia and what will soon be the biggest market in the world. And it’s important for people in this Parliament to understand that this is the only free trade agreement that China has done with another G20 country. This is by far the best agreement that China has done with any significant developed economy.
Now, as Members right around this Chamber should know this agreement has been 10 years in the making. It was started by the Howard Government and it was finalised, it was concluded by the Abbott Government. It’s also important for people right around Australia to understand that under this agreement more than 95 per cent of our exports to China will enter duty free, will enter without any tariffs at all. That’s why this agreement gives us absolutely unparalleled and absolutely unprecedented access to the world’s – certainly to the biggest market in Asia – and what will soon be the world’s biggest market. And this is something which applies right across the board when it comes to our exports, our resources will go in on a better basis than now. Our agricultural exports will go in on a better basis than now and there will be unprecedented access for Australian services to the Chinese market because of this particular agreement.
Now, we all know Mr Speaker that about five years ago New Zealand successfully concluded a free trade agreement with China. We probably don’t know, but we should, that under this agreement New Zealand’s exports to China more than quadrupled, they more than quadrupled at a time when our exports to China merely doubled. New Zealand’s exports to China more than quadrupled because of the free trade agreement that they had and we lacked and Mr Speaker our free trade agreement with China is a much better agreement than New Zealand’s. It’s a much better agreement than New Zealand’s because ours involves services too.
I have to point out to the House that the agreement that was negotiated by us with China, the agreement that was so carefully and painstakingly finalised by the Minister for Trade and Investment, the Member for Goldstein, with China, it is a done deal. It cannot be renegotiated. It is a done deal. It’s a deal that we either take or leave and I put it to the House that it would be absolutely unconscionable, unconscionable for us not to take the deal as negotiated by this Government with the Chinese.
I have to say that on a momentous day 10 months ago in this very Chamber the Leader of the Opposition said to this House and I quote: “Labor welcomes the prospect of a trade agreement between our two countries. A decade of hard work has gone into creating this opportunity for Australia; from Prime Minister Howard to Prime Ministers Rudd and Gillard and now Prime Minister Abbott.”  That’s what the Leader of the Opposition said 10 months ago in this Chamber, in the presence of President Xi Jinping himself. He said Labor welcomes the prospect of a trade agreement between our two countries. So that’s what he said in this Chamber when President Xi Jinping was here on his historic visit to our country. What’s happened since? Well what’s happened since Mr Speaker is that the CFMEU has come out and condemned the deal and as soon as the union movement started to condemn the deal, what happened was that the Leader of the Opposition started to shift his position and the problem Mr Speaker, right now, that the Leader of the Opposition faces, and I invite him to come into this Chamber and speak on the deal because unless he is to come into this Chamber and speak on this motion, the very strong impression will be created in the minds of the people of Australia that every time the Leader of the Opposition moves, it’s the CFMEU that’s pulling the strings and every time the Leader of the Opposition speaks it’s the CFMEU’s voice that we hear. 
Mr Speaker, notwithstanding all the advantages of this agreement, this export agreement for Australia, the CFMEU has already spent what’s estimated to be $12 million. $12 million undermining, sabotaging and telling lies about this agreement; this agreement vital for the future of our country, and right on cue Mr Speaker, right on cue, as soon as the CFMEU and other unions started attacking this agreement, what did the Leader of the Opposition say? The Leader of the Opposition on cue says ‘it’s a dud deal.’ Well he now has his chance, he now has his chance to stand up in this Parliament and say exactly where he stands because right now what we’ve had is Labor Member after Labor Member taking their cue from the union movement, standing out and threatening to block this deal, this deal which is vital for Australia’s future.
Now let me make it absolutely crystal clear to Members opposite what this deal involves, what this deal will involve in this Parliament. In this Parliament, acceding to the China-Australia Free Trade Agreement involves no legislation to change the Fair Work Act; it involves no legislation to change our immigration laws. The only bills that will be before this Parliament to put the China free trade agreement into practice, to put it into effect, are changes to our tariff laws – so there’s no changes to the protections for workers, no changes to protections built in to our immigration laws, none whatsoever. So there is absolutely nothing possible under this agreement with China that is not already possible – let me repeat that Mr Speaker – there is no absolutely nothing possible under this agreement with China that is not already possible, that is not already possible, including under free trade agreements negotiated by Members opposite when they were in government. Including under deals negotiated by Members opposite when they were in government. So absolutely every single thing which is envisaged under this free trade agreement was envisaged under free trade agreements negotiated by Members opposite when they were in government and it’s absolutely critical to note, Mr Speaker, that there is absolutely no possibility of placing any foreigner in an Australian job without labour market testing. There is no possibility of placing foreigners in Australian jobs without labour market testing – that was the situation under Members opposite when they were in government and that is the situation under this Government under this agreement.
So what have we got here? We’ve got a campaign of lies Mr Speaker, it is a campaign of lies – xenophobic at best, racist at worst, a campaign of lies being peddled, principally by the CFMEU, taken up by the ACTU more generally and being connived at by Members opposite, being articulated by Members opposite. I just want to make it absolutely crystal clear: the only free trade agreement that Members opposite have complained about is the free trade agreement with China. The only free trade agreement that Members opposite have complained about is the free trade agreement with China. What have they got against China? Why is it that they are preparing to snub the strongest economy and the strongest power in Asia? What is it that Members opposite have got against China? And I say: why is it that Members opposite seem to be channelling the ghosts of the federation parliament, echoing the kinds of sentiments that were heard in the federation parliament at the time of the white Australia policy?
Mr Speaker, let me make it absolutely crystal clear; Members opposite talk about the Asian Century, Members opposite talk about the Asian Century, this agreement makes us part of the Asian Century, why are Members opposite against an agreement which makes us part of the Asian Century? So Mr Speaker I’m pleased that the Leader of the Opposition has finally deigned to enter the Parliament and I hope he is going to contribute to this debate, I hope that finally the Leader of the Opposition is going to tell us exactly what he thinks is wrong with this agreement – if indeed there is anything that he can come up with which is wrong with this agreement – because Mr Speaker we know exactly where other significant Labor leaders stand, we know exactly where other significant Labor leaders stand – Bob Hawke supports this agreement, Bob Carr supports this agreement, Simon Crean supports this agreement, the Labor Premiers of Victoria, of Queensland and South Australia support this agreement, where does the Leader of the Opposition stand? Whose side is the Leader of the Opposition on? Is he on the side of Bob Hawke, Bob Carr, Simon Crean and the Labor Premiers of Victoria, Queensland and South Australia? Or yet again is the Leader of the Opposition listening to the CFMEU? That’s the challenge that I put to the Leader of the Opposition. Just for once tell us where you stand. Just for once stop playing politics. Just for once, put the interests of Australia first and back this agreement.      
[ends]


In recent days, for obvious and understandable reasons, there has been a great deal of concern on all sides of this Parliament about the unfolding humanitarian crisis on the borders of Syria.
I deeply respect the contributions that Members of Parliament have made and I now wish to update the House on decisions that the Government has taken to respond.
Obviously, Mr Speaker, all of us were shocked as a nation at the disaster that we saw on our television screens and all of us as a nation wanted to help.
If I may say so, Mr Speaker, that’s the Australian way: when we see a problem we roll up our sleeves and do what we can to help.
That’s what we have always done.
Collectively and individually, at home and abroad, that's always what we have done.
But it is important, Mr Speaker, as always to think before we act and it is important that the Government has considered the report from Minister Dutton in Europe and spoken to our expert advisers and officials here in Australia in preparing this response.
As the House knows, Minister Dutton consulted with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. He also spoke to senior representatives of the International Organisation of Migration and the Red Cross.
It was obvious after discussions in Europe that the immediate need in order to help people stranded on the borders of Syria is for more money.
It's also obvious from discussions in Europe and here at home that there are many, many people, members of persecuted minorities currently displaced from their ancestral homes, who will never ever be able to go back to their homes in Syria.
So, I can announce today, Mr Speaker, that the Government will make available an additional $44 million.
This will assist some 240,000 people currently in camps with food, clothing and shelter as winter approaches and this will take the total Australian Government contribution – humanitarian contribution – to people on the borders of Syria and Iraq under the former government and under this Government to some $230 million.
I can also advise the House, Mr Speaker, that we will take an additional 12,000 people from the Syria-Iraq conflict over and above our existing refugee and humanitarian programme.
This is an important and generous act by Australia.
I stress that we are taking people who are persecuted minorities.
We are determined to prioritise women, children and families on the borders of Syria in Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan.
All of the people that we bring will be subject to the usual health, security and character checks. We will bring people as quickly as we can, but we do owe to it the Australian people to get these checks done and to bring people in in ways that resettlement services can cope.
Why are we doing this, Mr Speaker? We’re doing this because people are suffering.
And why are they suffering? In part, Mr Speaker, they’re suffering because of the activities of the Daesh death cult.
We have seen on our screens what this death cult has done. We have seen the beheadings, the crucifixions, the mass executions, the sexual slavery. We have recoiled in horror from our screens as we have seen the new and ever more barbaric ways of killing people that this death cult has devised.
As Members know, our armed forces have been engaged in military operations in Iraq for the best part of 12 months. In particular, the Royal Australian Air Force has been conducting air strikes against Daesh targets in Iraq.
At the invitation, at the request of President Obama, the Government has decided to extend our airstrikes to include Daesh targets in Syria as well.
We are doing this under Section 51 of the UN Charter which gives countries the right of collective self-defence.
Iraq is threatened by Daesh forces based and supplied from Syria and Syria is unable or unwilling to act against those forces. So, in conjunction with our coalition partners Australia will act.
Can I say, Mr Speaker, that I am proud of the work of our armed forces who, as always, have acted in our name and under our flag with courage, professionalism and commitment.
But, most of all, may I say, Mr Speaker, I am proud of our country.
Today, we act decently in the best traditions of the Australian people.
[ends]


PRIME MINISTER:
I thank all of you for your presence here today.
We all know that the situation in Syria and Iraq is dire. It’s diabolical inside Syria, it’s dire on the borders of Syria and that’s why, amongst many other things, the Australian Government announced a couple of days ago that we would take an additional 12,000 people displaced by the conflict in Syria and bring them to this country for permanent resettlement.
This is the kind of thing that Australia has done before, although obviously it is on unprecedented scale because of the nature of this particular conflict and the fact that there are many communities, many ancient communities, in this part of the Middle East which realistically have no hope of returning to their home given the developments that we’ve seen.
There are two fundamental purposes to this particular meeting. The first is to thank all of you – representatives of our community – for your offers of help. Certainly your offers of help made it easier for the Government to make the decision that we made because we knew that there were people in our community with practical experience of helping to resettle people in our country who were there rallying to help those who we were proposing to bring in.
The second thing, I suppose, is to just stress that all of us now have to work together so that the people that we do bring into our country will have the best possible experience so that it will be good for them and good for our country as a whole. Obviously the Australian Government has no wish to see anyone fleeing anywhere but given that people are fleeing, it is very important that we focus on those persecuted minorities, on women, children, and families because they are the most vulnerable people in a conflict such as this.
Obviously, many of my ministers have been working very hard over the last few days. I want to say how proud I am of Peter Dutton and Scott Morrison and Senator Connie Fierravanti-Wells. Peter has done sterling work overseas. Scott and Connie have been doing great work with you so that we’re in the best possible position to receive people in this country. I am very, very proud of the work that my senior colleagues have been doing in recent days.
I also want to say how magnificently our community as a whole has responded to the developing crisis in Syria and on that note I might ask Paris Aristotle to say a few words.
PARIS ARISTOTLE: 
Thank you, Prime Minister. If I could just start off by thanking you personally and I’m sure from the conversations I’ve had on behalf of everybody in this room, and on behalf of all of the refugees that we’ve settled here so far but in particular the 12,000 that we’re about to begin settling out of Syria. It’s an incredibly powerful humanitarian gesture on the part of the Government and one that I think everybody applauds. If I could echo your congratulations and thanks of Minister Dutton and Minister Morrison and Senator Fierravanti-Wells who I know have been working incredibly hard on this with you.
So, it’s an extraordinary thing to think that there will be 12,000 people whose lives will be literally saved from a miserable set of circumstances that are not of their making and they will be brought to a country like Australia where they will be able to be embraced and looked after and fashioned a new, hopeful, bright future for themselves and their families. I want to say that we are the best country in the world at resettling refugees.
The quality of our services are second to none and that’s been mentioned on several occasions at the UN by Antonio Guterres, the High Commissioner for Refugees. I think you can be confident that the good will of those settlement services and with all the church agencies that are around here today, we will be able to put together a package of services and a programme that builds on what we already have to ensure people are well looked after, that they can function, they can move on into education and employment and get on with contributing to Australia as well as establishing a brighter future for themselves.
It’s an incredibly positive thing that the Government has done and I can’t thank you enough for doing it.
PRIME MINISTER:
Thank you so much, Paris.
[ends]


It’s always a real pleasure to follow Barnaby Joyce and I followed him from the Roman Empire, through Queen Victoria, through the geopolitics of the Middle East, back to the inland railway, dams and defending the family! It was a good journey, Barnaby: a very good journey indeed!
Barnaby is a good man to have on a long journey. Nigel Scullion is a good man to have on a week in remote Australia and one of the many good things about my annual weeks in remote Australia with Indigenous people is that I have the company of Nigel Scullion, and you couldn’t find a better man and you couldn’t find a man who knows more about remote Australia.
But this is a gathering full of good people. This is a gathering full of people who are the beating heart of our country and it is a real honour to be here, not as the Leader of the National Party, but as the Leader of this Liberal-National Coalition which is so important for the future and for the prosperity of our great country.
I speak to you today at the end of a week which marked the second anniversary of the Abbott-Truss Government. We took a plan to the last election. Every day we are doing our best to deliver on that plan and I can tell you that that plan is working. And if you look for evidence that the plan is working, you’ll find it in the employment figures that were released this week because what they showed was that since September 2013, this country, this economy of ours, has created more than 300,000 new jobs.
We can talk all we like about policies, we can talk all we like about visions, but if our vision and if our policy doesn’t produce the things that matter most to the people of our country, we’ve got to think again – but our vision and our policies has done what the people of Australia really want: it’s created 300,000 more jobs since the election. That’s 300,000 more people who are making an economic contribution to our society. That’s 300,000 more families that are better off today than they were two years ago.
And it’s not just the jobs. The other indicators show that our economy is strong: housing approvals are at near record levels, motor vehicle sales are at near record levels, company registrations are at absolute record levels, and bankruptcies are at near record lows. This doesn’t happen by accident. This happens because there is a Government in Canberra which from day one has been open for business and everything that we have done has been about backing hardworking Australians.
It’s been about getting behind the people in our country who are having a go.
That’s why we repealed the carbon tax – a useless handbrake on economic activity.
That’s why we repealed the mining tax – a great big flashing neon sign over Australia to investors saying ‘don’t come here.’
That’s why we brought down a budget this year that was all about the biggest small business tax cut in our history, because we know that small business people are out there having a go every day – and we didn’t just focus on small business people generally, we focussed on the small business people who are at the heart of our economy, our farmers.
So, as well as the $20,000 instant asset write-off in this year’s budget and the Agriculture White Paper, there is an immediate write-off for on farm water infrastructure, there’s an immediate write-off for fencing and I know no one has ever built a fence before now, but by god there’s been a lot of repairs! But now you can build a fence and write it off straight away.
It was so good to hear Barnaby talking of the water infrastructure which is once more being built in this country, the big water infrastructure which is once more being built in this country because, as Barnaby says: dams mean wealth, wealth means prosperity and success, and it’s high time that this country overcame the dam-phobia which has afflicted us for the best part of three decades.
So, it’s been two years of relentless constant focus on jobs, on growth, on community safety.
Its two years of putting into practice our plan for a stronger economy and a safer Australia which means lower taxes, more roads and freer trade. That’s what we’ve been doing every day. But this has been an interesting week. This has been a week where we have seen our country shoulder its responsibilities and seek to grasp its opportunities. We are a decent and compassionate nation and this week our country responded with decency and with strength to the problems of the wider world. We’ve all seen the utter tragedy, the heartrending misery faced by people fleeing conflicts in the Middle East; people who don’t enjoy the kind of civil society that we here in Australia take for granted, and rather than just say it’s none of our business, rather than just say that it was someone else’s duty to do something, we have risen to the challenge. And I want to say congratulations to Peter Dutton, the Immigration Minister, who has masterminded our plan to bring 12,000 people from persecuted minorities: women, children and families, to start a new life in Australia.
And if there’s one thing that should be remembered about Peter Dutton’s week – it’s that.
This is the week that he masterminded the plan to bring 12,000 needy people to this country, to bring 12,000 people to this country who we know will be so pleased and so proud and so happy and so relieved to come to a country which respects them, which will give them a go and will allow them to build a better life for themselves, their children, and their descendants – that’s the kind of country we are.
But we don’t just respond with decency, we respond with strengths as well and that’s why our planes are now striking at terrorist targets inside Syria, as well as in Iraq, too.
We didn’t just respond to international problems this week. We are seeking to grasp our opportunities and there is no greater opportunity than that which is presented by the free trade agreement with China.
China is already by far the strongest economy of Asia. By some measures, it is already the strongest economy in the world. Certainly, it is an absolute economic powerhouse of these times and the free trade agreement that we have negotiated with China is the only agreement that China has concluded with any other G20 country. This is an extraordinary chance. No other sophisticated economy of our size has been given this kind of an opportunity and under this free trade agreement, beef tariffs go to zero, lamb tariffs go to zero, wine tariffs go to zero, dairy tariffs go to zero, health product tariffs go to zero – all of our exporters have a potential bonanza before them under this agreement. New Zealand did an agreement with China five years ago, and in that time their exports to China have quintupled. Yes, we’ve done well, too – our exports have doubled – but with a free trade agreement New Zealand’s exports to China quintupled. That is the prospect which now beckons this country if this agreement is successfully finalised.
But I regret to tell you that there is one leader in our national parliament who doesn’t like this deal at all. There is one significant organisation in our community that doesn’t like this deal at all. The organisation is the CFMEU and the person in our parliament is the Leader of the Opposition, Bill Shorten. That’s the tragedy of Australia this week. On a week when we shouldered our international responsibilities, we risk squandering our domestic opportunities because every time Bill Shorten moves, it’s the CFMEU who are pulling his strings, and every time he opens his mouth, it’s the CFMEU’s voice you hear.
We talk about the Asian Century and what the Opposition in this parliament wants to do is to snub the strongest economy in Asia. It is almost unimaginable folly. And I want to say to all of you: this Government will fight, this Government, this Liberal-National Government, will fight for our future. We’ll fight for our exporters. We’ll fight to ensure that this free trade agreement actually happens.
You know, when it comes to campaigning we are pretty damned good, we are pretty damned good. And I want to tell you that we will fight as hard and we will campaign as hard for this free trade agreement as we fought against and campaigned against the carbon tax – it’s that important, it is that important for our country. Don’t let anyone tell you that this is just another bit of argy bargy in the Parliament. Oh no. This matters for our country in a way that almost nothing else does.
This is about our prosperity. It’s about our employment. It’s about our standard of living. This is about our very future because if we don’t have markets, if we don’t have exports, we hardly have a life. That’s why this Government is utterly determined, utterly determined, that this is something that will go through the Parliament and will go through the Parliament as soon as we can make it.
What we saw this week in the Parliament was an Opposition Leader who doesn’t really know what he stands for – apart from Green preferences and protecting dodgy union officials – but we know exactly what we are for.
We know exactly who we’re for.
If you’re a farmer struggling against drought, we’re for you.
If you’re a parent who wants children to go to the best possible schools, we’re for you.
If you’re an older person saving for retirement, we’re for you.
If you’re a small business person prepared to put your home on the line to invest, to employ, and to serve the community, we’re for you.
If you’re a migrant eager to build a better life and join our team, we’re for you.
We know who we stand for.
We know what our values are.
We know we are backing every Australian who wants to have a go and I’ve got to say that there is no stronger person when it comes to backing those who are having a go than the Leader of the National Party, Warren Truss.
We need a strong Coalition and that’s exactly what we have. We have a strong Coalition because we have a man of strong values and strong character in the Leader of the National Party, Warren Truss. Warren has been at the heart of all the big decisions that this Government makes. He is the steady and calm voice in all of the essential decision-making bodies: the Cabinet, the leadership group, the Expenditure Review Committee and the National Security Committee of the Government and he has been a steady and calm voice in our Party Room, in the counsels of our Coalition and our Government for a quarter century.
I can see he’s thinking back on those 25 years and I want to say to you, Warren: every one of them has been worth it. In every one of them you have been a great contributor. You know, one of Warren’s best qualities of all is his patience. When he was elected 25 years ago as a young Member of Parliament, he said in his maiden speech that he wanted to “stop” – and I quote – “this miserly attitude towards road funding.” That’s what you wanted to do 25 years ago: “stop this miserly attitude towards road funding.” Well, 50 billion bucks later, I think we can say that you have well and truly succeeded! You, in fact, are presiding over the biggest infrastructure programme in Commonwealth history.
Ladies and gentlemen, would you please make welcome your Leader, and my Infrastructure Deputy Prime Minister, the Honourable Warren Truss.     
[ends]


