
PM: Good morning and given it's a cold Canberra morning and I think you are standing in the rain we'll get on straight with the job. Today obviously is my first day as Prime Minister. Today I will conduct the first Cabinet meeting of the Gillard Government. Whilst of course I will not be discussing in detail matters that are to be dealt with by Cabinet, the purpose of today's Cabinet meeting is to be discussing the changes we will make to get the Government back on track.
In addition to today's Cabinet meeting I am of course speak to world leaders to introduce myself as the new Australian Prime Minister.
This morning I have already had the great honour and privilege of speaking with President Obama. I spoke to President Obama and spoke about the strong friendship between our two nations, the strong and enduring friendship and alliance between Australians and Americans. We are close as nations, we are in an enduring strategic alliance, we are close as people. We have fought together around the world and we continue to fight together in Afghanistan.
I assured President Obama that my approach to Afghanistan will continue the approach taken to date by the Australian Government. I fully support the current deployment and I indicated to President Obama that he should expect to see the Australian effort in Afghanistan continuing. We spoke about, of course, the cost that this causes to our nations, we have seen the loss of life of Australian soldiers, obviously too President Obama in his nation have families who grieve for those who have been lost in Afghanistan, but our determination to continue the deployment continues.
I also recorded my apologies for not attending the G20 in Toronto. President Obama understood that given events here in Australia I would not be able to attend. Wayne Swan is attending the G20 meeting on my behalf and will shortly leave Australia to go to Toronto for that very important meeting.
I assured President Obama that any time he chooses to travel to Australia he will be very, very welcome indeed. Welcomed by the Australian Government but even more importantly welcomed by the Australian people. I would imagine a visit by President Obama would be greeted with a great deal of enthusiasm by Australians. He indicated that he would very much like to travel to Australia, he regrets that he has not been able to travel here to date, he advised me that he has got such fond memories of this country from coming here particularly as an eight year old when he travelled unaccompanied to this nation, he has strong and fond memories, particularly of Sydney.
During the course of today I will also speak to the President of Indonesia, the Prime Minister of Malaysia, the Prime Minister of Canada and to him I will convey directly my apologies for not attending the G20 meeting and the Prime Minister of Britain. I had the opportunity yesterday to speak briefly to the Prime Minister of New Zealand, we are obviously very close as nations except when we are engaged in combat on the sporting field and he offered his congratulations on my appointment as Prime Minister. I of course have met him before.
So the Government is down to business, it's pressing ahead with the hard work and the changes that we need to make to get the Government back on track.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, what would you say to the thousands of people who are flooding our emails with angry comments about the manner in which you were appointed Prime Minister and is this the nature of politics now? And won't those same factional warlords come after you with knives if you don't turn the polls around and win the election?
PM: Well there are several assumptions in those questions so I'll try and unpack those assumptions. I offered myself for consideration by the Labor Party to become its leader and to become Prime Minister because of the obligation I felt to hard working Australians. The only judgement that ultimately matters to me, the people that I seek serve, are those hard working Australians who rely on decent government services and rely on having a job and decent rights at work.
I understand that Australians watching the events of yesterday would have seen the hurt felt by former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd. Leading the nation, Government, is about the national interest, it's about the affairs of the nation, but it's also a job undertaken by flesh and blood human beings who have emotions, who have feelings, who feel hurt and exhibit pain and obviously yesterday was a very, very difficult day for Kevin Rudd, for this family, for his friends and for many, many others. But I took a decision because I believe it was in the best interests of the Australian people for the Government to get back on track and that is what I am determined to do.
I'll go Matthew and then Dennis.
JOURNALIST: With regards to the RSPT, yesterday in Question Time I think you were asked three times to commit as to whether you expect it would raise the $12 billion that was planned under the design. You didn't answer that, so is it fair for people to assume that you are now working on, in you negotiations with the mining industry, to are prepared to accept less revenue to find a deal, a situation, that is acceptable to industry and also gives Australians a greater share of mineral resources.
PM: What people should assume is that I will do what I said I would do yesterday, and that is we will genuinely negotiate with the mining industry. So that those genuine negotiations can start I have met this morning with Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan and with the relevant Minister Martin Ferguson to work on the Government's negotiating strategy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what other areas are you looking at changing in the broad, and have you spoken to Mr Rudd and is he in the Cabinet meeting today?
PM: I have not personally spoken to Mr Rudd, I will of course be speaking to Mr Rudd in the time period to come. Consequently Mr Rudd, we haven't made new ministerial arrangements so obviously the Cabinet that is meeting today is the continuing Cabinet of the Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Mr Rudd and also what the decision with Lindsay Tanner, will he be Finance Minister to the election or not?
PM: Well obviously former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd is no longer Prime Minister, he's surrendered his commission as Prime Minister and I have been appointed Prime Minister. On that basis of course, Kevin Rudd will not be in today's Cabinet meeting. We will make new ministerial arrangements, I am working on those arrangements now and I will announce them in due course.
If I can say a word about Lindsay Tanner. I was not aware until Lindsay came to see me yesterday that it had been his intention to leave the Australian Parliament at the forthcoming election. As I indicated in the Parliament yesterday, I known Lindsay Tanner all of my adult life, he's done a fantastic job as Finance Minister, I will be talking to him as I strike the new ministerial arrangements, I'll advise of them in due course and we will work on them carefully. The ministerial arrangements are my decision but I will obviously consult with my colleagues before I make the decision, including consulting directly with Kevin Rudd about his future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister (inaudible) priority for you in getting the Government back on track?
PM: My priority as we look through the issues of the Government is to make sure that in every area we are working hard for Australian families, we are working hard for those Australians who work hard themselves; who set the alarm clock early, who get up in the morning, get the kids to school and go to work and work hard. I want to make sure that we are working with them. I obviously have become concerned that there are a set of issues where the Government needs to better engage and better manage in the Australian interest.
The mining tax question is clearly one of those and I've indicated my intentions and we have already taken a major step forward in getting good will into the conversation with both our ads and the mining industry ads being taken down. I think that that is progress.
We'll continue to make progress in other areas that concern Australians. I'm doing to do this a step at a time, I'm going to do it methodically and I'm obviously going to make announcements to Australians about what the Government is doing to get back on track.
Patricia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the ultimate of mining requirement when you seek a consensus. Following on from Dennis' question, what other areas do you think the Government needs to change positions?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I thought Dennis was going to answer the question then, he loomed over your shoulder and I thought he was starting a sentence but nothing else came out - very distracting.
My priority obviously is to ensure that we deal with the question of the mining tax. It has caused uncertainty, I think that uncertainty has caused anxiety for Australians. I want to make sure Australians get a fair share of our mineral wealth but we want to genuinely negotiate so on my first morning of my first full day as Prime Minister a priority has been sitting with Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan and with the Minister for Resources Martin Ferguson to work on the Governments negotiating strategy.
I obviously believe Australians want to hear us speak too on what we are doing now to deal with climate change and we will do that. But they want to hear what we are doing to manage our borders and I will be speaking about that in the future, but broadly across the area of Government I will be going through and making sure that we are delivering what is incumbent upon us to deliver and that is the services and assistance that working families need and expect from Government. They expect the Government to lead a strong economy, to make sure that they've got the benefits and the dignity of work. They expect the Government to be delivering quality education, they expect the Government to be working with them to meet their health care needs and of course, they expect the Government to be doing those things that are necessary to prepare for the future including tackling the challenge of climate change.
We'll go over to Andrew, then to Malcolm and back through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just get back on leadership and the circumstances in which you've got it, would it be fair for the public to think that the leadership of the Labor Party is only secure as long as you're popular and does that mean that therefore that you will only go for timid reforms?
PM: Well both of those things would not be true to conclude, not true to conclude at all. I was motivated to step forward for this position as Prime Minister because I thought a good Government had lost its way. What concerned me was the national interest and governing in the interests of hardworking Australians. And what also concerned me is that I thought I had an obligation to make sure, at the next election, that we did everything we could to prevent this nation going back, back to the days of Work Choices, back to the days of cutbacks in health, back to the days of indifference on education and what needs to be done to make sure that every Australian child gets a fair chance at a great life. That is what has motivated me to step forward and take this position.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Australian Worker's Union and various MPs of its patronage made a lot of noise about opposing Kevin Rudd and backing you in as the next Prime Minister. Whether you like it or not, aren't you now part of that patronage?
PM: I think that that's a curious assumption indeed, if I can say that to you Malcolm the only thing that ultimately matters in the position of Prime Minister, the constituency that matters is the hardworking Australians around this nation. And of course I can understand that the Opposition and others will try and put a character in the events of recent days, I understand that, but I also believe, standing particularly in this place with the people who are here today, that across my life in politics since I was first elected in 1998, people would say the following things about me. It is completely absurd for anybody to look at track record in this place and to conclude anything other than that I have made my own decisions, I am a person of strong mind and I made my own decisions.
The other thing it would be completely absurd to conclude is that I am not prepared to stump up to hard reform, and I would refer people to me track record as Deputy Prime Minister, a record of reform. A record of reform like getting rid of Work Choices and introducing the Fair Work system with a Senate in which we did not hold the majority.
Reforms like getting national health and safety laws for this country, something bureaucrats had been working on for 25 years. On the day that that went through the ministerial council some of them cried, they had been working so long to get that reform and we did it.
Reforms like national curriculum that the country has been talking about for two decades, politicians came and went and talked about national curriculum, no one got anything done of substance until I stumped up and drove that reform.
Reforms like the My School website, once again, chat about transparency very fashionable, getting it done very hard and I have got it done. So on a track record of hard reform, difficult reform, contested reform, I think my track record speaks for itself.
Paul Bongiorno?
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Aren't you at all concerned that you have a record of being prepared to waste money as the Opposition accuses you of especially with the building of the Education Revolution. How are you going to address that perception if it's not a reality?
Well we have worked through the Building the Education Revolution. I obviously want to see value for money, I've made that clear. And consequently I've taken a series of steps to make sure that we are getting value for money. The creation of the Building the Education Revolution taskforce was a big step led by an Australian business person Brad Orgill with all of that commercial expertise. And then relying on his advice, we are withholding some payments to New South Wales to drive some of the changes we believe are needed for some of the schools in that state. These are appropriate steps to make sure that we get value for money.
Katharine?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there is a lot of criticism under Kevin Rudd obviously about his top down leadership style, about lines being issued centrally, about Cabinet ministers being neutered and not able to carve out their own political identities and put their own positions forward. How would you foreshadow your own leadership style? Are you more relaxed about your colleague around the Cabinet table having opinions that they are able to express publicly and prosecute publicly? Or are you more inclined to put a premium on discipline and on central messaging which was really the whole mark of Kevin Rudd's leadership. How would you describe your own attitude to those things?
PM: Okay there's no truth in the rumour that I'm prioritising redheads in the press pack, I don't want that to take hold. My style is this and will be. I believe that you get the best from people if you have them work as a team. I believe we're all strengthened if we work as members of a team. I believe the office of Prime Minister is there to focus on and to drive the strategic questions that confront this nation.
I trust Ministers to get on with the job in their portfolio. I will obviously work with them side by side on the strategic questions that confront the nation and confront them in their portfolios. I intend to run a straight Cabinet system of Government. I intend to rely on my colleagues to come to the Cabinet table with the best of their advice, with the best of their intelligence and the best of their labours as we work together to get the Government back on track.
I think as people have looked at the things I have done in public life and indeed even before I was in public life, I am someone who wants to work with the team; who wants to be there with a team. You have in your question created what I think is a false divide, between teamwork and discipline, I see no such divide. I actually think that the best discipline is obtained when people work together and work together well. I think that holds true from the top echelons of the national government to local football teams. The best way of making sure that everybody works together is to make sure that they all see a place in the team. That they are there being treated respectfully, their ideas appreciated, their labours understood; and that is the approach that I will take.
JOURNALIST: On a personal level, you've been talking to world leaders, you're about to chair a Cabinet meeting, has it sunk in as to exactly that you're Prime Minister? When and what did you do last night? Any celebrations?
PM: Well, I think obviously in some ways the weight of it has sunk in. I think for some of the more personal reflections that will probably have to wait to a time when I've got the time to take a moment for the more personal reflections. On what I did last night, I worked here in this building including a series of interviews ending with an interview with a very famous redhead Kerry O'Brien. I then went home and ate some takeaway food with my partner Tim and with a few friends who were in Canberra. I've been back here in Parliament House since early this morning.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Right. Okay, so you've obviously been speaking to my Aunt Millie, is that right? Aunt Millie who still lives in Cwmgrach which is the mining village from which my father is from. My father is here, obviously, alive and well in Australia. They breed them tough, the Gillards, they breed them tough. He is one of seven, he is the second youngest and most of his brothers and sisters are still alive. Most of his brothers and sisters stayed in the mining village in Cwmgrach and either went mining or married miners. Aunt Millie is telling a story about when our ship pulled up in Australia I dropped a koala bear that they'd given all the kids as a welcome present to Australia and I hear I dropped it over the side, accidentally. Aunt Millie's recollection is not quite right, in fact as my mother has recounted to me on many occasions, a very heroic officer on the ship actually went and somehow delve to where it had fallen between the ship and the pier and got it back out for me and gave me back the bear.
JOURNALIST: You clearly met Bill Shorten before the events of Wednesday night. At any point did you go to Kevin Rudd to seek an alternative to change the direction of the government without necessarily causing a spill? Why was there no alternative to a change in leader? What had Kevin Rudd done wrong?
PM: Look, I talked to many of my colleagues, and obviously my colleagues formed the same view I did that it was necessary in order to get the Government back on track that a good Government had lost its way. It was necessary to get the Government back on track with me as Prime Minister. That was obviously a view formed broadly and deeply by my caucus colleagues. Not unanimously, I certainly don't say that, but broadly and deeply, by my Cabinet colleagues.
I am not, today or on any other day, going to go through the details of conversations I had with Kevin Rudd, either in the lead up to yesterday's events or conversations we had when he was Prime Minister and I was Deputy Prime Minister. I think that would be improper.
But what I will say is this. Obviously I formed a view about the future of the Government, about the future of the national interest, I am a person who is frank and obviously I discussed that view within the government but I am not going to canvass the details of conversations with a former Prime Minister.
JOURNALIST: Were you really upset about that article in the Herald? Those that installed you said it was the catalyst.
PM: As author of the article, you and Peter I think, you may have interest in saying something flamboyant or dramatic about it. I am afraid I am going to deny you that. The decisions I have made this week have been decisions about profound matters of national interest. They have weighed heavily on me. They were not easy decisions. I have taken them because I thought they were the right thing to do. I've not taken them because of any newspaper report.
JOURNALIST: How do you feel personally about the 40 per cent rate? Kevin Rudd used to say it was about right. What's your personal view as to those issues in the mining tax?
PM: Well, the Government is going to and I've been working on this today, the Government is going to have a negotiating strategy here. What I've said, my previous position, I've indicated it strongly yesterday, I' m indicating it again strongly today is that we need to harness the goodwill that has been generated within the mining industry and build on it in the national interest. We will work through that, with the negotiating strategy, we'll do that in a careful way. As those negotiations take shape and I'm in a position to report the Australian nation about what is coming through from those negotiations I'll do so.
JOURNALIST: So as the Prime Minister, do you commit to resolving those issues on the mining tax before calling an election?
PM: We will work through. Obviously, when you're negotiating, there's more than you in the room and so the attitude of others is important to this. My view is that this task needs to be undertaken as quickly as possible. We need to work through with goodwill and we will.
JOURNALIST: Do you have any advice from the federal police as to whether you can actually stay in your flat?
PM: No I haven't. No I've haven't.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible) What are your foreign policy priorities?
PM: Well obviously, I believe speaking to President Obama today was very important. The calls that I am making now are introductory calls. In terms of our near neighbours, obviously discussions particularly discussions about people movement are important and they will be a priority.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Which particular marginal areas will you be targeting when you do go out?
PM: I will engage in a balance. I think it's important to be out there talking to the Australian people. But I also think it's important in coming days that I am here for long periods of time in Canberra. We need to get the government back on track, to do that we need to step by step take a series of decisions and that is bets done while I am here in Canberra. Okay, thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much to the assembled throng and their capacity for sound effects, that was very impressive.
I'm here today with Simon Crean and with Stephen Smith to announce the details of my reshuffled ministry. Obviously I became Prime Minister because I believed it was important to get the Government back on track. I particularly believed it was important to renew our focus on strengthening the economy and delivering the services that hard working Australians need. In order to do this you need a steady hand, hard work and methodical work. So in considering the question of a reshuffle I have determined that it is best to have as limited a reshuffle as possible to keep the maximum stability amongst the team and to keep our focus on the work that Australians need the Government to be doing.
In that spirit I have invited Simon Crean to take over my portfolios of education, employment and workplace relations and social inclusion.
Of course Simon Crean comes to this task having served in an earlier Labor Government as Minister for Employment, Education and Training. He also comes to this task having been a President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions and I think when he served in that capacity, being recognised as one of the people who assisted in the modernisation of Australia's union movement and in making sure that our union movement understood the demands of a complex and dynamic economy and understood the need to work productively with employers.
Simon Crean is too our longest serving Cabinet Minister. He has served in the Hawke Cabinet, the Keating Cabinet, the Rudd Cabinet and now of course will serve in this capacity in the Gillard Cabinet. Obviously Simon Crean is a very safe pair of hands for portfolios that are very, very close to my heart.
I have asked Stephen Smith, who has been doing a great job as Minister for Foreign Affairs to also take over being Minister for Trade.
Stephen has served as a Shadow Minister for Trade, he is consequently familiar with the trade issues and as people would be aware the one Department, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, deals with both questions and consequently Stephen can easily work with the entire Department in his new capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Trade.
I have in recent days had conversations with Kevin Rudd about his future.
What I have said to Kevin Rudd is, and he has confirmed to me, that it's his intention to seek re-election as the Member for Griffith, so consequently what I have said to Kevin Rudd is I would be absolutely delighted to see him serve as a senior Cabinet Minister in the team if the Government is re-elected.
Obviously our focus is on delivering to hard working Australians a strengthening economy and a renewed focus on services. I am not making any assumptions about what will happen on election day; this will be a close, hard fought contest, but if the Government is re-elected I will be very delighted to welcome Kevin Rudd into the Cabinet in a senior position.
I'm very happy with those words to take questions. Yes.
JOURNALIST: What was Kevin Rudd's response to that, was he seeking an appointment earlier or is he happy to wait?
PM: Look there is nothing about this period of time that is easy or happy for Kevin Rudd.
As I've said at earlier press conferences and I genuinely believe this is a tremendously, tremendously difficult time for him and his family, I understand that. What I said to Kevin is that I think this is the best course and it would enable him, if he chose to do so at this time, to spend more time with his family, which I know is one of his key priorities in life is love of family, of Therese and the children, and that would give him the opportunity to spend some time with them. But he would be very, very welcome, very welcome indeed, if the Government is re-elected, serving in a senior capacity in the team.
We'll go to Paul and then to Matt.
JOURNALIST: Does this leave Queensland unrepresented in your Cabinet?
PM: Well the Deputy Prime Minister of this country is a Queenslander, Wayne Swan. Yes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister does your mining tax, we know what steps you've put in place to resolve that issue, can you guarantee though that would be, that this matter would be resolved before the election. Don't Australians have a right to know what you are planning to do on this matter before they vote?
PM: Well I can guarantee today that I'm doing all I can, working with my team, particularly Treasurer Wayne Swan and Minister Martin Ferguson, to expedite negotiations to make sure that we are having clear, focussed, genuine negotiations about the mining tax.
I had assumed you might want to ask some more questions about the reshuffle but given you've gone to other matters, what I might, you've taken me by surprise, what I might do at this point is invite my colleagues to say a few words and then we'll go onto general questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) can you give guarantee-
PM: Well why don't we do this first and then I'll come back to your questions, stay in order, I like doing that as you know.
CREAN: Well thanks Prime Minister and of course I'm delighted to have been made the offer by you to resume some of the unfinished business in the portfolio that I had a great deal of involvement with in the past.
I genuinely believe that employment is fundamental to the economic security of this nation so anything that can be done to connect people much better with the workforce, to develop its skills, to give people the opportunity to continue developing those skills in a lifelong learning sense is fundamental to sustainable economic fortunes for the nation, as well as opportunity for individuals.
It's also essential we do everything to increase the retention rates in school, lift participation in school, because that produces a more prosperous nation, so this portfolio is intricately linked with the economic future of the country but with the opportunity for individuals within it.
As for the workplace relations area, whilst I haven't had portfolio responsibilities, I have had some experience in this field as well.
So I look forward to combining the tasks, look forward to working with Julia and the team to the re-election of the Government but we take nothing for granted, the task ahead is a hard one, and I look forward to playing whatever constructive role I can in developing the policy framework from which we hope we get the ultimate reward from the Australian people.
Thank you.
PM: We'll just go to Stephen then you can ask questions of all three.
SMITH: Well Prime Minister thank you very much. Obviously I'm very pleased to serve the Gillard Labor Government in the capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade.
One of the very important fundamentals which have secured Australia's prosperity historically has been being a great trading nation and our trade efforts of course have been not just bilateral, but regional and multilateral, and Simon has been an absolutely devoted Trade Minister who has been inexhaustible in his efforts to secure multilateral, regional and bilateral trade improvements.
Can I start but welcoming very much the decision by the G20 leaders' meeting over the weekend to put renewed emphasis on a successful conclusion to the Doha round.
Australia, in particular Simon, has been at the forefront of urging the international community to bring the Doha round to a successful conclusion and we welcome very much the G20 leaders' meeting decision to give added priority to the Doha round and to consider it again at the next G20 meeting in Seoul.
On the regional front, Simon has been instrumental in helping to ensure that a very important but under-appreciated regional trade agreement, the Australia-New Zealand-ASEAN trade agreement, came to fruition and we're now working very hard on the TPP, the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is another very important regional trade agreement for us.
On the bilateral front, we continue to pursue a number of very important free trade agreements where we either have negotiations under foot or where we have preliminary studies in hand - in particular and importantly India and Indonesia.
So, I look forward very much to working in all of these areas.
I, of course, will benefit from the fact that we have one department, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, to assist in this task. It, of course, is of considerable advantage to any minister for foreign affairs and trade that we are served by one of the great departments of state, and so the fact that the department performs both roles will be of great advantage to me in the weeks and months ahead.
Can I finish by thanking the Prime Minister for the opportunity, but also by again complimenting and congratulating Simon on the terrific achievement to set a very firm foundation for Australia's trade role and performance into the future.
Thank you.
PM: OK, Mathew, on the Resources Super Profits Tax, obviously the Australian people will be able to judge the Government on the Resources Super Profits Tax at the time of the election. I welcome the judgment on that. We are working hard to collaborate with our mining community in a spirit of good will to resolve details associated with the tax.
Patricia.
JOURNALIST: You were criticised for having too much on your plate with all those portfolios. Do you think that that would be a problem for Simon Crean as well? Why did you not take an opportunity to split those portfolios and give them more attention through (inaudible)
PM: Well, obviously, I didn't think it would be a problem for Simon to perform this work, and that's why I've invited him to do it, and the premium that I have put in making these new ministerial arrangements is on stability, on making sure that we can continue to get on with the job of ensuring the Government is on track and doing what we need to do to meet the aspirations of hard-working Australians.
Dennis. Sorry, hang on, hang on, hang on - Dennis, then we'll come across.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) and the new education minister, will there be any changes in the investigations into the BER and Mr Orgill's taskforce?
PM: Dennis, if I can answer that and if I can thank you for your remarkable focus on this question.I think it would a be a little bit unfair to suggest to Simon Crean before he's sworn in or briefed on any of these matters that he should put a view. Obviously, I formed the view that the taskforce led by Brad Orgill is doing good work on the question of value for money.
JOURNALIST: Would you expect a much bigger reshuffle, with new faces, if you win the next election, and do you see any merit in Caucus and the factions resuming control of who should be in the ministry?
PM: Well, can I echo Simon's words, because I think he's put it well. Our focus is on governing for the nation now, and then when the election is called our focus will be on campaigning to gain again the trust of the Australian people to be their Government. Consequently, I'm not really wanting to be drawn on, you know, speculation for the days beyond. Our focus is about that election and the contrast between the Government and what is being promised by Mr Abbott, and they are stark contrasts.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Just hang on, hang on, hang on. They are stark contrasts. I think it is appropriate that as leader, in a consultative way, I work, I form a team and work with a team. I've said one of my hallmarks as Prime Minister is I intend to take a consultative approach. Once it comes to the moment of decision, the decisions are mine, but I intend to take a consultative approach along the way.
Andrew.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the mining tax, (inaudible) could you at least confirm that the original consultation phase (inaudible) and that is one that ends at the end of the year?
PM: The Treasurer, I think you will find, has clearly said that there were two phases to the consultations and that we were in the second stage. He said that a number of days ago.
Obviously, as incoming Prime Minister I have taken additional steps to make sure that we are meaningfully negotiating with the mining industry in the spirit of goodwill, which is why I took the Government advertisements off our TV screens and I was very, very pleased to see that the mining industry reciprocated.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could you consider disbanding SPBC and would you ensure that all major policy decisions go to the full Cabinet?
PM: I've already said, and in case there was any ambiguity about it, I'm happy to clarify it, my intention as Prime Minister is to run a Cabinet system of Government; run by a Cabinet system of Government means all substantial decisions will go to the full Cabinet.
Yes, Latika.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Sorry?
JOURNALIST: What's happening with Lindsay Tanner?
PM: Sorry, I assumed that almost went without saying, but let me clarify it, make it express, obviously, I have asked Lindsay Tanner to continue in his position as Finance Minister until election day and, you know, from an abundance of caution, so all things are clear, there will be no further appointments to Cabinet. There will be no further ministerial appointments. There will be no further parliamentary secretary appointments.
The team is the team that you see here with everything else staying as you know it. Simon Crean has taken every part of my portfolio.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, by leaving Mr Tanner in the Finance portfolio, don't you open yourself up to claims from the Opposition that we won't know who's in charge of the nation's purse strings if you're indeed re-elected?
PM: Well, let me say if the Opposition wants to start that argument, gee, I'll be in it quickly.
We obviously have Treasurer Wayne Swan and Finance Minister Lindsay Tanner working together on the nation's finances and the economy. This is in stark contrast to an Opposition that appears to have absolutely nobody doing it.
If we are re-elected, then of course I will be ensuring that we have a strong Finance Minister in a future team, but our approach as a Government has been to do what we needed to do in the economy, in the global financial crisis, to keep people working, to bring the budget back to surplus and we will do that in 2013, and I think it is very interesting that the Deputy Leader and Treasurer Wayne Swan is attending the G20 on my behalf. There, countries around the world are saying they'll aim to halve their deficits by 2013. We will be in surplus in 2013.
Right, we'll go back here and then across. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Will you nominate a Finance Minister before the election if you are indeed re-elected?
PM: No, what I will do about positions is what I've indicated here today.
Our focus is on election day.
We take nothing for granted, nothing for granted.
If I am re-elected as Prime Minister and the Government is re-elected, then, following our election, I will shape the team at that point.
We'll go here, and then across to Michelle. Yep?
JOURNALIST: Sorry, your Cabinet has no regional voice. Is that a concern to you?
PM: Well, I think when you look across our whole Cabinet, when you look across our whole ministerial team and across who we represent in this parliament we have some very, very strong regional voices who are heard each and every day as the team goes about making its decisions. I've...
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, the decisions, the decisions of the Government, obviously Cabinet, is important.
We've got Lindsay, we've got Anthony Albanese there, working to represent regions, working in contact with Local Government.
Very recently in this Parliament House I attended a very important event that he had, an annual event, to make sure that we are talking to Local Government around the country, to make sure we're understanding the perspective of regions around the country.
We're a Government that's taken the Cabinet around the country to get the benefit of those perspectives.
We've got great regional Members, you know, Janelle Saffin, Kirsten Livermore and the list goes on and on and on, Jim Turnour, and so the list goes on, their voices are well and truly heard. Can I go to Michelle? Yeah, no, and I'm coming over here, I'm not-
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister Gillard, will you consider the pursuit of an Asia-Pacific Community?
PM: Look, on questions of foreign affairs policy, I'm not here to make a statement today about foreign affairs policy. Obviously I will rely on advice from Stephen Smith in shaping future policy announcements by the Government. Okay, Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much Prime Minister. Back to the structure of Cabinet, the Cabinet structure. The so-called kitchen cabinet or gang of four was one of a number of cabinet sub-committees. Have you abolished that system of sub-committees, and with it the so-called kitchen cabinet?
PM: What I have done is I've said to my colleagues that we want to have a proper system of Cabinet Government.
That means that my colleagues in the Cabinet will shape the Cabinet committees and the rules that will govern the operation of the Gillard Government. We have commenced work on that, on that set of Cabinet arrangements and rules. But I couldn't be clearer here about my end point and my intention. I want to see a traditional system of Cabinet Government where the Cabinet is the highest decision-making body in the Government, in the Executive.
Phil Coorey.
JOURNALIST: What was the tone of your conversation with Mr Rudd, and was he happy to accept a delay until after the election, or did you have to convince him to do that?
PM: Well look, I'm not going to go to details of what I believe to be private conversations. And I've obviously indicated there is nothing, nothing about this period that is happy or easy for Mr Rudd. It's obviously a very, very stressful, difficult time. Yes, Patricia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do your modest changes that you've made to your frontbench indicate something about election timing? Do you want to go into a quick election considering you made such minimal changes?
PM: No. The modest changes I've made to my frontbench indicate that my key focus is to have a steady hand, methodical work delivering for Australians.
Yes Mark.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday you talked about some of the concerns of people in Western Sydney about population. Their biggest concern is transportation, buses, trains, cars getting them into work, getting their kids to school. What can you offer people in outer urban areas in terms of improved transportation?
PM: Well I, look, I think there are a set of concerns that people in Western Sydney feel, and many of those concerns do go to the question of how you manage growth. And they've seen a lot of growth, and as I said yesterday, they hear figures like 40 million and 36 million and they don't want to see Australia hurtling towards 36 million or 40 million, and I think they will welcome the opportunity for the nation to take a breath, to work on the policy, to reflect on how we want to manage this future. Including how we want to manage getting the services to people that they need; the roads they use, the transportation systems they rely on.
It would be easy for me to make it a set of glib statements which would be interpreted as promises about new services. I'm not going to do that.
You know, we've got to take a measured approach here, a balanced approach. Anything to do with transport costs real money. And my focus is on making sure we deliver that surplus in 2013.
I have asked Tony Burke as the Minister dealing with questions of sustainable population to look at this area as part of taking a breath and planning our future.
Matthew to Simon.
JOURNALIST: On the question of education, it seems to me that Julia Gillard always made a big play about a Labor Government having to provide equality of opportunity. I'm interested to know whether you believe Australia has further to go in that area, and whether you are going to be developing (inaudible) policy in that area to take to the next election.
CREAN: Well I fundamentally believe that education is the great enabler for individual development. And I've- one of the reasons I joined the Labor Party was to advance that. I was a beneficiary of a good education, and I believe others should be entitled to be able to access that.
What Julia has done is to create a framework that lays solid foundations for advancing that.
What we have to do is to get ourselves elected so that framework is not dismantled.
I recall when I was last Employment and Education and Training Minister, we set up many of these things. We built them, only to see them dismantled. That's the fundamental difference between us and our opponents when it comes to things like education.
I see important opportunities to build again, but I inherit a great platform on which to do it. And I'm delighted to have the opportunity to continue in that direction.
PM: Okay, we'll take two more questions before everybody freezes to death. We'll go to Phil, with the two Phils.
JOURNALIST: Just back on the population thing, can you explain what Tony Burke's been tasked to do, given what Kevin Rudd had already tasked him to do?
PM: What I have asked Tony Burke to do is to develop a set of policies that enable us to have a sustainable population.
What you put at the forefront of your decision-making and thinking here, matters. And what I'm putting at the forefront of our thinking is the set of environmental concerns that come with an increased population, and the set of concerns about planning and where population goes.
As I said yesterday, I live in Melbourne's west, where across two growth corridors, my electorate lies across two growth corridors, in a place like that, Melbourne's west, in Western Sydney, in the Brisbane-Gold Coast corridor, people look at what has happened with growth and they hear figures like 36 and 40 million and they say 'where are these people going to go?'
At the same time, I travel to the northwest of this country and I meet industry leaders and communities that are crying out for more people and more workers. So I think we've got to get a balance here, and that is what I've asked Tony Burke to do.
Last question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just to clarify, is the CPRS still Government policy, or are you going to scrap that and start with something new?
PM: Well, I'm going to say to you exactly what I've been saying over the last few days.
The Government took a decision about the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and assessing in 2012 the degree of international movement on questions of climate change, and having done that assessment would then make a final decision about reintroducing the legislation for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
I'm very clear that climate change is caused by human activity; that addressing climate change means that we will need to have a price on carbon. But I'm also very clear in my own mind that there is a lot of work to do to build the kind of lasting and deep community consensus we need to have the kind of transformation in our economy and the way we live that pricing carbon will require.
In the coming period, I will have more to say about what this nation can do and how Australians can work together to address the challenge of climate change.
Thanks very much.



PM: It's good to be here in Darwin today and to have the opportunity to directly see and experience the remarkable work that is done by our Border Protection Command. We have today been on a training exercise on one of the patrol boats.
Obviously we have these patrol boats, we have assets securing our borders. Currently, we have 18 boats and 18 aircraft available to secure our borders. This is more assets than we have ever had before patrolling our waters. We are committed to providing 8 additional - sorry, 8 new I should, say - 8 new patrol boats, obviously with additional capabilities that can be used to patrol our borders.
It's been a great pleasure to be joined in this task and training exercise by the relevant Minister, Brendan O'Connor, Minister for Home Affairs, Justice and Customs; by the local Member for this area, the Member for Solomon, Damian Hale. I'm also joined today by David Bradbury, the Member for Lindsay in Western Sydney, who's come to see this work first hand.
I understand, as Prime Minister, whether you reside in Darwin, you reside in Sydney's west, or you reside in any other part of the nation - Australians are concerned when they see boats on our horizon and they want to make sure that the Government is actively managing to protect our borders.
Yesterday, I made a major public statement of my attitudes to protecting our borders. I particularly signalled that I will relentlessly pursue- through regional cooperation- creating a regional processing centre.
This is important because it will disrupt the business model that people smugglers sell. There's no point getting on a boat if what happens when you get off the boat is you are returned to the same regional processing centre.
I said yesterday, and very clearly, that this is not a quick fix. It's going to require a lot of discussion and a lot of work with partners in our region. I thank them for the cooperation they've shown to date as the region addresses irregular people movement. I particularly thanked the Indonesian Government yesterday, and we will be working on that goodwill as we pursue the discussions about the regional processing centre.
I'm very happy to also be here today to say that in a further step indicating the depth of our cooperation with the region, that the Minister for Justice and Customs and the Minister for Home Affairs will be making available additional police resources and equipment in our region. These new resources will be particularly directed at Indonesia, at Malaysia, at Thailand, and at Sri Lanka, amongst other countries.
These new resources include an additional seven Australian Federal Police officers, who will join other Australian Federal Police officers already deployed in our region. These officers are having success in disrupting people smuggling ventures. They've disrupted ventures which have prevented 5,000 people making the dangerous journey by boat.
The additional resources will also be focussed on Indonesia, with additional patrol and aircraft capability; with additional resources to assist in the forensics of police work; with additional resources to assist the police there. We have cooperated well with the Indonesian maritime police, and with these new resources and capabilities, obviously that cooperation can be strengthened.
I just want to make one remark on another matter before taking questions.
Today, Senator John Faulkner has publically confirmed that if the Government is re-elected he will not seek re-appointment to Labor's frontbench. John Faulkner is currently serving as the Minister for Defence and will do so until election day.
John has done a great job as Defence Minister and enjoys the respect of all of those who have worked with him. John is a legendary Labor Party and Labor movement figure. He's devoted 30 years of his life to active political involvement, full time.
What I have asked him to do, I've prevailed upon him to do, and he has agreed to do, is to seek re-election as a Senator and stay in the parliament. I believe he's got a further contribution to make as a member of the parliament and as a member of the team, but it's his personal wish, and it's been a long time coming, to take a step back from the added pressures of being a senior minister in government.
So, I thank John for everything that he's done today across his working life to support the Labor Party. I thank him for his ongoing support for Labor. I thank him for ceding to my pleas and agreeing to stay in the parliament.
It's my intention that when we move to the election that John Faulkner will travel with me as we go about election campaigning. He's a very senior person, a very wise head, and I very much rely on his wisdom and counsel and will continue to do so.
I'm happy to take any questions. We'll sweep through. We'll start over here.
JOURNALIST: The presence of Bradbury behind your shoulder, there. Doesn't that just confirm that this is a short-term political stunt, the Dili solution as it's been called?
PM: What I think it confirms is that there is concern across the Australian community about the question of border protection and asylum seekers. What I'd say is David Bradbury, as the Member for Lindsay, is he has, as a man very much in touch with the feeling in his community, indicated these concerns. Yesterday, when I spoke to the Australian nation through my speech, I indicated that I understand these concerns.
People want to see effective border management, and that is what we will provide.
On the question of timeframe, I couldn't have been clearer yesterday. There is no quick fix. I am not presenting a quick fix to the Australian people. I'm not presenting a slogan. I am indicating my determination to have new arrangements in our region, including a regional processing centre, and that's what I intend to pursue as Prime Minister, step by step and piece by piece.
We'll just go here and come back. Yes?
JOURNALIST: Perhaps you can indicate some idea of what the timeframe might be? Is it going to be a really long time or (inaudible)
PM: Look, I'm not going to give any timeframe on fostering this kind of regional cooperation. We need to be working with all of our neighbours.
I am thankful that the President of East Timor has indicated a preparedness to be involved in this discussion. I am thankful that the Prime Minister of New Zealand has also indicated that he is prepared to be involved in this discussion as a resettlement country for people who are genuine refugees.
The aim here is to stop people risking their life at sea in a dangerous journey in a boat; to stop having all of the safety at sea issues that presents for the individuals involved as well as those who bravely work for our Border Protection Command; and to end the people smuggling business in the sense that people smugglers would no longer have a product to sell if the end result of getting on a boat was that you went to the regional processing centre.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: On the Muckaty Station and the nuclear waste dump, you said the decision to build it there would be led by science, but the science shows that the Tennant Creek areas is prone to earthquakes and that the best place in country is a site near Woomera. Will you re-visit the decision to put the dump at Muckaty and actually institute a process that is based on science?
PM: Look, as Prime Minister I am staying with the same arrangements that people would be familiar with to date. We need, as a nation, to solve the problem of where we will store low- and medium-level waste. That waste is generated in processes valuable to the whole community like nuclear medicine.
There is a further process to go through in relation to Muckaty and we will go through that process.
We had a question over here? Yes?
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that you've brought forward a meeting of New South Wales Labor candidates and if so, why have you decided to bring that forward?
PM: I actually don't set such meeting dates. That's not something I do as Prime Minister. Those dates are set by our Labor Party officials. I did not make the decision to move the date. I was not involved in the decision to move the date. All of those arrangements are made by those who assist us on the campaign and were made separately to me.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given that PNG is a signatory to the Convention on Refugees and was at the time of Manus Island, given the fact that refugees or asylum seekers on Nauru were processed in that Tampa period with the assistance of the UNHCR, how can what you're proposing be different on East Timor? Isn't it the same?
PM: Let's just remind ourselves of a little bit of history, here. Of course, the Pacific Solution was announced by the Howard Government as a unilateral action of that Government and it was announced as an urgent response. It happened very, very quickly when we had the Tampa and other pressures. That processing was then undertaken on Manus Island and Nauru.
That's not my approach. It's not what I'm seeking to achieve. What I'm seeking to achieve through an open conversation with regional partners is a regional change in how we deal with irregular people movement.
Obviously, as Australia's Prime Minister, standing here with great representatives of the Australian people in the national parliament, our focus is on people movement to Australia, but we are not the only country that is experiences people movement. East Timor experiences people movement itself. It therefore makes for the region to work together, to cooperate to take away the product that fuels an evil trade and that is the trade of people smuggling.
That's my approach. I haven't made a quick announcement. I'm not putting this forward as a quick fix. It will be a process. It will build on, of course, the Bali process that has been in train for some time. These options have been canvassed within Government for some time.
What's new is my determination to proceed with and to pursue this solution.
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, Damian Hale wants the Federal Government to pay compensation to traditional owners so Territorians can fish for free. Should southern taxpayers be funding that sort of measure?
PM: Look, I am going to indicate now I am not a person with a great personal familiarity with fishing. I would rely on others for the best of their expert advice. I understand this is an issue that Damian has raised as a local community representative and that's absolutely appropriate and we'll have a discussion about that.
JOURNALIST: But it's in your court. Will you make federal funds available for that?
PM: Best thing for me to do always is to work it through a step at a time. I can understand Damian's concern about local community members, obviously, for any decision that's got financial implications. We're running a Government which will get back into surplus in 2013. Any decision we make is taken through proper processes and prudently, so I'm not going to be announcing any decision today.
We'll take one more question here and then I must admit I have to go.
JOURNALIST: What does John Faulkner's decision today do for the credibility of the Government going into the next election?
PM: Well, look, I think John Faulkner will be missed at ministerial level. He is a senior and very, very capable figure. But he has made it clear that personally for him, that he feels that this is the right time to move from a ministerial career, and can I indicate this feeling by John is not a new one. Shortly after the 2007 election he indicated to the then Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd, and to me, that he thought he had one term in him as a Minister. When the question came up about a new Minister for Defence John re-affirmed then to the then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, and to me, that he, in stepping up to the job as Defence Minister felt he really only had one term in him - the 2007 electoral term - as a Minister. He's now pursued that political and personal decision, a decision based on how he personally feels about where he is in his life.
But I very much wanted to keep his talents and abilities available to me as Prime Minister, and to the Labor team. That's why I've asked him to work as a key strategist with me when we do have the election period, and that's why I've asked him to stay in the parliament and I'm very, very grateful, very grateful, that he's taken the decision to stay.
Thank you very much-
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one more question.
PM: Very, very quickly.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) so now we're, sought of, buying them off with our asylum seekers. How do you think that's going to look (inaudible)
PM: Well, look, I think that the best people to speak to the East Timorese people are the representatives of the East Timorese people. This is a new democracy. It has a President. It has a Prime Minister. Obviously, the President has indicated a preparedness to talk through these issues, and I welcome that.
Thank you very much.
ENDS



PM: Well I'm here today with the Minister for Defence John Faulkner. We are in Darwin to attend to funeral of Scott Palmer, a brave soldier, and we've come to Darwin today to mourn his loss with his family and friends.
Overnight I was very saddened to learn that we have lost another soldier in Afghanistan. We pay tribute to him and we mourn his loss. Of course today his family and friends will be feeling the pain of his loss very, very acutely. This is a tragic day for them, full of shock, grieving and sadness. I'm sure the thoughts of the nation are with them as they absorb this dreadful news.
There will be Australians today who are asking themselves in the face of this loss in Afghanistan, why as a country we continue to pursue our mission there. We pursue that mission because Afghanistan has been a safe haven for terrorists, for terrorists who have reaped acts of violence against Australians in 9/11 and in Bali. And we are determined to pursue our mission there, to train the Afghan National Army, to end Afghanistan being a safe haven for terrorists. This is clearly difficult and dangerous work and our soldiers and defence personnel in Afghanistan are at the forefront of this really dangerous task. We have obviously seen the results of that danger here today, Scott Palmer's funeral, we have mourned the loss of two other soldiers during the past week and with this news overnight that we have lost another soldier.
Obviously this hits everyone hard: family, friends, the nation, the people who serve alongside them in our Defence Force. But we are determined to continue to pursue this mission in Afghanistan.
Can I say to the family and friends of the soldier we lost overnight who will be in such difficult circumstances today, our thoughts are with you. As the Minister for Defence and Chief of the Defence Force have made clear, obviously we are not in a position to release details about this soldier or the incident in which he died at this time. Obviously as details can be released they will be released.
There was another soldier injured in this incident, our thoughts are with him and we obviously hope that he will make a very speedy recovery. As I have been advised by the Chief of the Defence Force, he is not badly injured but our thoughts are with him.
I'm happy to take any questions but obviously I'm shortly due at Scott Palmer's funeral.
JOURNALIST: Does this lift the total to 17 people who have been killed in Afghanistan since 2001?
PM: Yes.
FAULKNER: Yes it does. This will be the 17th death of an Australian in Afghanistan. Of course let me also say to you, we've had 143 Australians wounded in Afghanistan as you would be aware.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister can I just ask you obviously are involved in reconstruction and training. Do you feel that they're being protected adequately enough?
PM: I believe our Defence Force personnel are professionals, they go about their task with complete determination and with high skills. I believe led by Angus Houston - who is with me today, obviously also due to attend the funeral of Scott Palmer - that our soldiers are going about this difficult and dangerous task as best it can be done. But there is no degree of skill or training or equipment that can take away the dangers, this is dangerous work and we are seeing the outcomes of the dangers that our soldiers face.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what effect has it had on you, this news overnight?
PM: Well I've obviously been very, very saddened to learn about this loss overnight. Today I'm here attending the third funeral of a brave soldier that I've attended as Prime Minister, so the danger and loss and sadness that is caused from these incidents in Afghanistan is obviously with me and very present with me.
This is a tough time, a particularly tough time for those families who are mourning the loss of soldiers and for the family that's got this dreadful news today, I'm personally saddened by it and I do want to send the family and friends of this soldier my very, very best wishes at what is obviously a tragic and dreadful time for them.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister how do you think the level of possibilities of success are in Afghanistan now given just with our small effort that we're making along with the Americans. Do we really have a chance of doing what we say our mission is?
PM: Well I certainly believe we are proceeding to acquit our mission, training Afghan National Army members in Afghanistan, which is the mission that we have set for ourselves. As a Government obviously through our Defence Minister John Faulkner and through our Chief of the Defence Force we've always been frank with the Australian people about the difficulty of this task, but we are proceeding through it.
I might turn to the Minister for Defence for some comments on that.
FAULKNER: Thank you very much Prime Minister. I have consistently said that in relation to progress in Afghanistan that we have made steady progress. I obviously have acknowledged that the progress is not as fast as some would like to see but I certainly believe that there has been a change in momentum in Afghanistan.
We are very focussed on our operational objectives: training the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army in Uruzghan Province. We've made clear recently about the latest information that is available in terms of the time we believe it will take to complete our training mission in the province, some two to four years, and indicated that it's likely to see the Australian commitment after that period transition to a support role.
But having said that, ladies and gentlemen, I make the point as I have made on so many occasions, it is a difficult and dangerous mission. The reason we are here in Darwin today to attend the funeral of an Australian soldier, and the news we are speaking about today of the death of another Australian soldier in Afghanistan, I think does indicate to you the risks that are involved in our mission. But let me stress as I've stressed in the past, our troops are extraordinarily well led, our troops are extraordinarily well trained, our troops have the best force protection available to them and of course our tactics, techniques and procedures, our rules of engagement, are such that ensure that our troops are very well protected. But for all that it remains a dangerous and difficult operating environment.
JOURNALIST: Are we seeing more deaths because of the change in momentum?
FAULKNER: I think there's no question that of course we see ourselves now in the fighting season in Afghanistan. It's important to remember, I have indicated just a moment ago, that there have been of course now 17 Australian soldiers who have died in Afghanistan, 143 Australian soldiers have been wounded in Afghanistan.
In 2010 we of course have seen the deaths of six Australian soldiers and 43 of those 143 soldiers have suffered wounds. Don't forget also of course that we had three Australians killed in a helicopter crash and seven Australians wounded in that helicopter crash that occurred not as a result of enemy action. And it's important as we look at the situation that we make frank assessments about that and I've certainly tried to report very frankly to the Australian Parliament and the Australian people about the situation that we face in Afghanistan and the challenges ahead.
JOURNALIST: Can you give your comments in relation to the funeral of Private Scott Palmer today?
FAULKNER: Well these are always very, very difficult occasions for the family and friends of a fallen soldier. I think on an occasion like this the thoughts of the nation are with a devastated and grieving family who've lost a son, and a brother. Devastated friends and of course devastated comrades, regimental comrades particularly, who've provided such fine support for a wonderful family at a very difficult time.
These are always difficult events but my thoughts always go to the people most affected, the families on occasions like this. That's where my thoughts will be today, can I say to you I believe that that's where the thoughts of the nation will be today.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The funeral service will obviously have addresses from family and people who served with Scott Palmer. I will attend the funeral today with the Opposition Leader Tony Abbott. The fact that we are both here and we have both attended the two other funerals for the soldiers that died in the same helicopter incident that the Minister for Defence has described, I think the fact that we are both here says that the nation is paying its respects to these soldiers through the presence of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition.
Having attended two funerals as Prime Minister, and I'm sure this will be true today, what amazes me, impresses me is the grace and bravery of the family and friends in the face of such tragic loss. They are mourning the loss of brave men and the families and friends, obviously devastated, but conducting themselves with a great deal of dignity and bravery themselves in difficult circumstances.
Today we will be with parents who are mourning the loss of their son, with a brother who is mourning the loss of his brother, it's obviously a very, very difficult time and we are there to support but also to show that the nation is thinking about this loss, the nation is grieving this loss, and the nation is sending its respects.
JOURNALIST: Can I just ask one other question sorry, not on the same subject, which is while you're up in northern Australia, will you be, either this evening or tomorrow, taking the opportunity to talk to any other foreign leaders in our region about the possibility of asylum seeker centres?
PM: Look obviously my focus today is on attending the funeral and with this tragic news overnight on this news, so I will be pursing with determination the dialogue with East Timor but that will wait for another day.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned I suppose both of you, about the wider implications of these deaths in terms of public support for the war in Afghanistan?
PM: Well obviously I think for the Australian people this tragic news hits them hard, which is why it is important that we continue to explain to the Australian people why we seek their support for the continuing mission in Afghanistan. This has been a country, a safe haven for terrorists who have reaped violence against Australian citizens occasioning loss of life, that's why we commenced on this mission, and I believe Australians, whilst mourning these losses and are very upset about the news overnight, will understand our continuing determination.
And one of the things I would say about the people who have attended the funerals of the other soldiers, the soldiers that have been lost in the helicopter incident, something that's come through very loud and clear to me is that loss actually increases their determination to get the job done.
Thank you very much.



I thank Annabel Miller for directing our ceremony here today and Marissa Starr for leading us so beautifully in our National Anthem.
And I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of this land, the Wiradjuri people, and thank Gloria Rogers for the Welcome to Country.
Friends, it is a delight to join you today in the beautiful city of Bathurst as we open a new centre to advance our understanding of a truly great Australian leader.
It is a real honour to do so in the company of members of the Chifley family.
There are many people behind the story of this house and I'll share one of them briefly today.
It is almost fifty years since in 1962, a skinny 15 year old kid walked into his first Labor Party meeting bearing a piece of paper with two motions scrawled upon it.
One motion was to create a Labor Party newspaper.
The second motion was to preserve Ben Chifley's house as an historic site.
The 15 year old kid was none other than Bob Carr.
Thankfully Bob's totalitarian tendencies were nipped in the bud and Australia was not endowed with a gumnut version of Pravda.
But the more important of those two motions did come to pass a decade later.
Thanks to the foresight of Bathurst Council, Ben Chifley's house was indeed preserved.
Number 10 Busby Street was opened to the public by Gough Whitlam on March 24, 1973 - and it has become a great gift to our nation.
The Chifley house is a window onto another time - a simpler Australia of modest comfort and sturdy frugality.
The house, too, is a window into the life of its owner, Ben Chifley.
Here we can see Chifley's humility represented in physical form.
There is no excess, no extravagance.
His outlet to the world was a wireless set and a Bakelite phone.
His biggest self-indulgence perhaps a meal of his favourite dish: corned beef and potatoes cooked in their jackets.
It is a place every Australian should visit to learn something of our better selves and the things that make us truly great.
For decades, this adjacent building - Number 12 Busby Street - was home to the Chifleys' neighbours.
You can imagine Lizzie lending her neighbour a cup of sugar to make a sponge cake or chatting over the back fence on washing day.
Now the property has been enlisted to enable Ben's story to be better told for those who make the Bathurst pilgrimage.
As with the original preservation of the Chifley Home, Bathurst Regional Council has taken the lead with this project and I thank them for their efforts.
I know everything to do with the Chifley Home is a labour of love for the council and its staff, and the nation is proud that the property has such careful custodians.
The Australian and NSW Governments have also played their part, with grants of $175,000 and $82,000 respectively, along with $282,000 from Council.
Isn't that the way we want government to work in this nation - all levels banding together for the common good.
I'd like to think that level of cooperation reflects something of the new approach we're trying to bring to the nation's affairs in Canberra.
The truth is that as Australians, we all do better when we work together.
Chifley proved that when he sat down with Bill McKell to plan the Snowy Scheme and the Commonwealth-State housing agreement.
In 2010 the times may be different, the job remains the same:
- to build a nation that is strong, decent and fair, and to so in a manner that is less partisan and more productive.
If anyone needs to rediscover the purpose and dignity of politics as our new parliamentary landscape unfolds, they need only come to this house and reflect.
One thing that almost oozes from its walls is Chifley's simple grandeur and his unwavering belief in our nation, its people and its potential.
For Chifley, those possibilities were endless, and the very same faith inspires me as I begin my own prime ministerial journey.
But there is a sadness to this house as well because Chifley didn't get to enjoy it in retirement.
He died in Canberra, aged 66, his body exhausted from eight years in government, managing with John Curtin the nation's gravest crisis, and putting in place the building blocks of post-war reconstruction that would protect the Australian people from the misery of unemployment and want.
Ben Chifley had the zeal of reform but it was tempered by the pragmatic realism of a man who had known defeat, as Labor's early hopes disintegrated in the misunderstandings and divisions of the 1930s.
With hard work and integrity, Curtin and Chifley rebuilt a new tradition of Labor in government - economically responsible, strongly protective of our national security and social reformist in a way that carried the community along.
In many ways, this is the model of a Labor government that still inspires us today.
And, of course, Chifley achieved it all in a profoundly Australian way.
As the historian Ross McMullin has said:
"there has surely never been a more down-to-earth, unpretentious Australian prime minister than Ben Chifley"
- and you can see that from the remarkable modesty of his own home.
It's just about impossible to imagine a Churchill or a Roosevelt inhabiting a place like this.
And certainly not a Menzies.
Though this place is profoundly ordinary - and perhaps because it is - this is the unique home of a unique national leader.
A life such as that must not be forgotten.
And with the preservation of the house and the addition of this fine new facility, it never will be.
In the name of the Australian people, I dedicate this Education Centre to the memory of Joseph Benedict Chifley, and take great pride in declaring it officially open. 



Mr Speaker, a national government has no more important task than defending the nation, its people and their interests. That is why we take so seriously any decision to go to war. The war in Afghanistan is no different.
Today I will answer five questions Australians are asking about the war:
 * 	why Australia is involved in Afghanistan;
 * 	what the international community is seeking to achieve and how;
 * 	what Australia's contribution is to this international effort - our mission;
 * 	what progress is being made;
 * 	and finally, what the future is of our commitment in Afghanistan.
Of course, while our troops remain in the field, I must be responsible in how much I say, but in answering those questions, I want to be as frank as I can be with the Australian people. I want to paint a very honest picture of the difficulties and challenges facing our mission in Afghanistan.
The new international strategy and the surge in international troops responded to a deteriorating security situation. This means more fighting, more violence, it risks more casualties, there will be many hard days ahead.
Mr Speaker, Australia has two vital national interests in Afghanistan.
One: to make sure that Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for terrorists, a place where attacks on us and our allies begin.
Two: to stand firmly by our Alliance commitment to the United States, formally invoked following the attacks on New York and Washington in 2001.
Last month we marked the ninth anniversary of Al-Qaeda's September 11 attacks. Before September 11 Al-Qaeda had a safe haven in Afghanistan under the Taliban government, a safe haven where they could recruit, indoctrinate, train, plan, finance and conspire to kill.
On September 11, Al-Qaeda murdered more than three thousand people, thousands of Americans - citizens of our ally the United States, people from many other countries.
Ten Australians, ten of our own, never forgotten.
And millions of people were terrified.
So we went to Afghanistan to make sure it would never again be a safe haven for Al-Qaeda. We went with our friends and allies, as part of the international community. We went with the support of the United Nations.
The war has put pressure on Al-Qaeda's core leadership, killed some, captured others, forced many into hiding, forced them all on the defensive.Al-Qaeda has been dealt a severe blow.
But Al-Qaeda remains a resilient and persistent network. Our successes against it in Afghanistan are only part of our effort against terrorism. We are working to counter the rise of affiliated groups in new areas such as Somalia and Yemen, and violent extremism and terrorist groups in Pakistan.
That is why we support efforts in those countries, with those governments, to target terrorist groups there as well.
The terror did not end on September 11. Since 2001, some 100 Australians have been killed in extremists' attacks overseas. Among them:
 * 	88 Australians were killed in the Bali bombing in 2002.
 * 	Four Australians were killed in the second Bali bombing in 2005.
 * 	Our embassy has been bombed in Jakarta.
In each of these cases, the terrorist groups involved had links to Afghanistan.
If the insurgency in Afghanistan were to succeed, if the international community were to withdraw, then Afghanistan could once again become a safe haven for terrorists. Al-Qaeda's ability to recruit, indoctrinate, train, plan, finance and conspire to kill would be far greater than it is today, and the propaganda victory for terrorists worldwide would be enormous.
So the goal of Australia and the international community is clear: to deny terrorist networks a safe haven in Afghanistan.
Mr Speaker, the international community has been in Afghanistan a long time: nine years. The Australian people are entitled to know what we are trying to achieve and when our troops can come home.
Removing the Taliban government in 2001 and pursuing Al-Qaeda in the years since has made a crucial difference in preventing terrorist attacks. From 2001 to mid-2006, US and Coalition forces and Afghan troops fought relatively low levels of insurgent violence.
The international force in Afghanistan was focussed on a stabilisation mission, and there were no Australian units deployed in Afghanistan between December 2002 and September 2005. Through this period, few would now argue, US and international attention turned heavily to Iraq.
Australia's substantial military involvement in Afghanistan resumed when the Special Forces Task Force was redeployed there for twelve months from September 2005 in support of international efforts to target key insurgents.
Violence increased further in mid-2006, particularly in the east and the south. Due to significant intimidation and the absence of effective governance in many rural areas, some Afghans turned to the Taliban at this time.
The mission moved to a counter-insurgency focus.
Australia's contribution increased from October 2008 on as we took a growing role in training and mentoring in the southern Afghanistan province of Uruzgan, however the international counter-insurgency mission was not adequately resourced until 2009.
In December 2009 President Obama announced a revised strategy for Afghanistan and a surge of 30 000 US troops, NATO has contributed more, so has Australia.
I believe we now have the right strategy, an experienced commander in General Petraeus, and the resources needed to deliver the strategy. The overarching goal of the new strategy is to enable transition, that is, to prepare the Government of Afghanistan to take lead responsibility for its own security, but our vital national interests, in preventing Afghanistan being a safe haven for terrorists who attack us and in supporting our ally, do not end with transition.
Our aim is that the new international strategy sees a functioning Afghan state become able to assume responsibility for preventing the country from being a safe haven for terrorists.
Australia's key role in that mission, training and mentoring the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army in Uruzgan, is expected to take 2 to 4 years, and President Karzai has said the Afghan Government expects the transition process to be complete by the end of 2014.
But let me be clear - this refers to the Afghan Government taking lead responsibility for security. The international community will remain engaged in Afghanistan beyond 2014, and Australia will remain engaged.
There will still be a need for Australians in a supporting role. There will still be a role for training and other defence co-operation.
The civilian-led aid and development effort will continue.
And we will continue to promote Afghan-led re-integration of former insurgents who are willing to lay down their arms, turn their backs on terrorism and accept the Afghan constitution.
We expect this support, training and development task to continue in some form through this decade at least.
Our mission in Afghanistan is not nation-building. That is the task of the Afghan Government and people. With international aid and development, we will continue to help were we can, but entrenching a functioning democratic Afghan state could be the work of a generation of Afghan people.
The new international strategy is comprehensive.
It is focussed on:
 * 	Protecting the civilian population - conducting operations together with the Afghan National Security Forces to reduce the capability and will of the insurgency.
 * 	Training, mentoring and equipping the Afghan National Security Forces - to enable them to assume a lead role in providing security.
 * 	And facilitating improvements in governance and socio-economic development - working with the Afghan authorities and the United Nations to strengthen institutions and deliver basic services.	 
The new strategy promotes efforts towards political reconciliation. It also includes a greater focus on partnership with Pakistan to address violent extremism in the border regions that threatens both Pakistan and Afghanistan, and the new international strategy is well resourced.
The international strategy is implemented by a combined civilian and military effort under the International Security Assistance Force.
This involves 47 troop-contributing nations, working alongside a host of international bodies and aid agencies, with and at the invitation of the Afghan Government, and under a United Nations Security Council mandate, a mandate renewed unanimously just this month.
This coalition includes many long-standing friends and allies of Australia, including the United States and New Zealand; the United Kingdom, Canada and France. Singapore and Korea, among other Asian countries, contribute, and several Muslim countries are involved, including Turkey, Jordan and Malaysia.
At the Asia-Europe meeting, I spent some time with Malaysia's Prime Minister Najib, I was particularly struck by what he said was one of Malaysia's most important contributions to Afghanistan: doctors, doctors who are Islamic women. They are able to work with Afghan women as few foreign medical professionals can.
We are part of a truly international effort in Afghanistan.
To ensure the new international strategy can be delivered, last December the United States committed to a military and civilian surge in Afghanistan. The elements of this surge are now reaching full-strength, once fully deployed, this will take Coalition force numbers to roughly 140,000.
US forces on the ground have tripled since early 2009.
The total force now has the resources required to deliver a comprehensive international strategy focussed on counter-insurgency and designed to deliver transition.
Mr Speaker, Australia's involvement makes a real difference in Afghanistan.The Government supports the new international strategy and we have supported the surge. Australia has increased our troop contribution to Afghanistan by around 40 per cent in the past 18 months. We now have around 1,550 military personnel deployed in Afghanistan. Our military force is complemented by around 50 Australian civilians.
Earlier this year we took over leadership of the Provincial Reconstruction Team in Uruzgan to spearhead our civilian efforts, and increased our civilian commitment to Afghanistan by 50 per cent. In fact since 2001 we have committed over $740 million in development assistance to Afghanistan.
The main focus of the Australian effort in Afghanistan is directed towards Uruzgan province, it is a difficult job.
Uruzgan province lies in southern Afghanistan. Around 500 000 people live there - roughly the population of Tasmania, across an area about one third the size of that state.
Nearly three-quarters of the land is dry and mountainous. Most of the people live in a few major valleys alongside the rivers. Subsistence agriculture and poppy farming are the main ways to earn a living, water is a precious and highly contested resource and overall economic prospects are poor. School attendance is low, and illiteracy is high, in fact, the female literacy rate in Uruzgan is less than one per cent. For men it is only ten per cent.
In Uruzgan, Australia's soldiers and civilians are part of Combined Team-Uruzgan. Combined Team-Uruzgan is a new structure that brings the military, policing, political and development elements of our assistance under a single command. The Team is commanded by a senior United States military officer, Colonel Creighton, and the senior civilian official is an Australian diplomat, Mr Bernard Philip. I met them both during my visit. We are lucky to have them.
The Team is built around an Australian-US partnership, with contributions from a number of countries including New Zealand, Singapore and Slovakia. Combined Team-Uruzgan was established following the Dutch drawdown in August.
We appointed our Senior Civilian Representative to lead the Uruzgan Provincial Reconstruction Team and co-ordinate all International Security Assistance Force civilian activities in the province.
The Government has worked closely with the Dutch and US Governments to ensure Australian soldiers and civilians have every support they need through the period of this handover.
I welcome the Dutch Government's decision to extend their attack helicopter support.
This is part of a broader International Security Assistance Force contribution from which Australia and all contributing nations benefit. Australia's contribution of two Chinook helicopters is part of this.
While in Afghanistan and Europe I met with:
 * 	Colonel Creighton, commanding Combined Team-Uruzgan;
 * 	General Petraeus, commanding the International Security Assistance Force;
 * 	NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen;
 * 	And the then caretaker Prime Minister of the Netherlands, Jan Balkenende
In each of these meetings, I emphasized the strength of my view, my Government's view, that continuing this support was necessary.
So I was glad to receive confirmation of the Dutch decision after my return.Our advice is that the planned arrangements for support following the full Dutch drawdown will see equivalent support to Australian forces.
While lighter in absolute numbers, the American support available to our forces is agile and highly effective in pursuing our common mission. In addition, Afghan forces in Uruzgan have increased from around 3 000 to 4 000 in the past eighteen months, meaning total troop numbers are larger now than when Dutch forces were present.
As Prime Minister, I am satisfied that our troops have the right support, and of course, this is a matter we keep under constant review.
In Uruzgan, Australia's substantial military, civilian and development assistance focuses on:
 * 	Training and mentoring the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade to assume responsibility for the province's security.
 * 	Building the capacity of the Afghan National Police to assist with civil policing functions.
 * 	Helping improve the Afghan Government's capacity to deliver core services and generate income-earning opportunities for its people.	 
As well as our efforts supporting transition in Uruzgan, Australia's Special Forces are targeting the insurgent network in and around the province, disrupting insurgent operations and supply routes.
While not part of Combined Team-Uruzgan, the Special Operations Task Group contributes to the province's security.
Our Special Air Service Regiment and our Commando Regiments are the equal of any special forces in the world.
They will make a difference to the outcome of the war.
I know all this is very dangerous work for our soldiers and civilians.
I give you my firm assurance that this government will listen to the professional advice and provide every necessary protection and support for our soldiers and civilians in Afghanistan. Over the past twelve months the Government has announced more than $1.1 billion for additional force protection measures for Australian personnel. This includes upgraded body armour and rocket, artillery and mortar protection.
The continuing and evolving threat posed to our troops by improvised explosive devices has seen us pursuing the right technologies to ensure our troops can detect these devices.
Our troops are protected through hardened vehicles and other protective equipment, and of course we will keep these force protection measures under constant review.
I have spoken to Air Chief Marshal Houston, the Chief of the Defence Force.
I have spoken to Major General Cantwell, our national commander on the ground.
Their advice to the Government is this:
As we stand today, our force structure - the number of troops on the ground and the capabilities they have - is right for our mission in Afghanistan.
As Prime Minister, I want to be very clear; the Government receives the advice on this decision, but we take the responsibility for this decision.
There has also been some debate about the rules of engagement for our soldiers in Afghanistan. Of course I will not comment on the particular case which is subject to current proceedings.
I do however want to respond to some of the public comments on the rules of engagement generally.
Those rules of engagement are properly decided by the Government.
They are consistent with the guidance provided by General Petraeus.
They are consistent with the International Security Assistance Force's rules of engagement.
They are consistent with the international law of armed conflict.
As with troop levels, we take the advice, but we take the responsibility.
As Prime Minister, let me say: I believe the rules of engagement are robust and sufficient for the mission in Uruzgan.
The Australian Defence Force is a professional military force, respected in Australia and around the world. They operate under strict rules of engagement. That is what they do.
Rules of engagement are central to the mission of the ADF. Strict rules of engagement are in the long-term interests of our troops in the field, but more than that: they are the difference between us and our enemy.
As much as anything, what marks us from them is precisely this.
We respect innocent civilian life.
I believe Australians would not have it any other way.
Mr Speaker, the new international strategy is in place.
The elements of the surge to support the strategy are now reaching full-strength. The hard work is underway, we will monitor events closely.
The NATO Lisbon summit in November will assess further progress against the International Security Assistance Force's strategy, mapping out the strategy will be a key focus of the summit.
Afghanistan is a war-ravaged country that faces immense development challenges. While the challenges are huge, I can report tentative signs of progress to date.
The Afghan National Security Forces are being mentored and trained.
The Afghan National Army reached its October 2010 growth objective of 134,000 ahead of schedule, and the Afghan National Police is also ahead of its October 2010 goal of 109,000.
The Afghan National Army is becoming increasingly capable and supporting coalition operations more effectively. Nearly 85% of the Army is now fully partnered with ISAF forces for operations in the field. Afghan forces are now in the lead in Kabul.
The ability of the Afghan government to provide services to its people is being built.
In primary education, enrolments have increased from 1 million in 2001 to approximately 6 million today. Some 2 million of these enrolments are girls. There were none in 2001. Nothing better symbolises the fall of the Taliban than these two million Afghan girls learning to read.
In basic health services, infant mortality decreased by 22 per cent between 2002 and 2008 and immunisation rates for children are now in the 70 to 90 per cent range.
In vital economic infrastructure, almost 10,000 kilometres of road has been rehabilitated and 10 million Afghans now have access to telecommunications, compared to only 20 000 in 2001.
With the increase in troop levels, the fight is being taken to the insurgency.
Insurgents are being challenged in areas, particularly in the south and east of the country, where they previously operated with near-impunity.
Indeed, much of the increase in violence this year is attributable to the fact that there is a larger international and Afghan presence pursuing the insurgency more aggressively.
In Afghan politics, efforts are being made to convince elements amongst the insurgents to put down their arms, to renounce violence and adopt a path back to constructive and purposeful civilian life.
And although we know democracy remains rudimentary and fragile, Afghanistan has a free press and a functioning parliament.
Last month parliamentary elections took place - elections with real and widely publicised problems - but elections did take place.
And the international community is working closely with Pakistan. Stability in Pakistan, and the uprooting of extremist networks that have established themselves in the border regions and terrorise both countries, is essential to stability in Afghanistan.
Mr Speaker, let me turn more specifically to the progress of Australia's mission in Uruzgan.
Our Mentoring Task Force is training the 4th Brigade of the Afghan National Army.
The 4th Brigade, as our commanders on the ground told me during my visit, is proving to be an increasingly professional force, fighting better and becoming more capable at conducting complex operations.
The Brigade's recent efforts in successfully completing a series of resupply missions between Tarin Kot and Kandahar has demonstrated improving capability. Since late last year, they have moved from observing and participating, to planning and leading these activities.
The Brigade also recently provided security for parliamentary elections in the province.
Our civilians are also making a difference in Uruzgan.
Our AFP contingent has trained almost seven hundred Afghan National Police at the police training centre for the province. It has also contributed to the successful targeting of corrupt officials and the tackling of major crimes.We are helping build local services.
In Tarin Kot township, business is flourishing at the local bazaar. There are two bank branches, crime is down, and the town is becoming a genuine provincial trading hub.
I visited our Trade Training School on the Tarin Kot base, which is turning out 60 graduates each quarter in basic trades such as plumbing and carpentry, most of whom then contribute to reconstruction and development in the province.
Our aid to Uruzgan is increasing to $20 million in 2010-11.
Already we have supported 78 school reconstruction projects and the disbursal of over 950 micro-finance loans. We have helped refurbish the Tarin Kot hospital and assisted the rehabilitation and operation of 11 health centres and 165 health posts. We are constructing a new building for the Department of Energy and Water, and building a bridge crossing to connect to the Tarin Kot-Chora Road.
Our civilians are working to build capacity within the provincial administration and support the reach of central government programs into Uruzgan.We are taking the fight to the insurgency.
On the C-130 flight into Afghanistan, a map of Uruzgan spread out on his knees, our national commander Major General John Cantwell briefed me on our work in the field. Valley by valley, we are gradually making a difference to security.
He told me about agriculture-rich Mirabad Valley, a strategically important region with a history of violence in recent years, just to the east of the provincial capital Tarin Kot. Mirabad was dominated by the Taliban for the last seven years. It was a place where the Provincial Government had no influence.
But over the last two years the Afghan security forces, in partnership with Australian, Dutch and now US forces, have methodically expanded their permanent presence into the Valley with the establishment of three Patrol Bases.
Insurgents, clearly threatened by the growing reach of the Afghan National Army, attacked the bases unsuccessfully a number of times during construction. Now the bases, combined with two nearby outposts, will allow the Afghan National Army to better protect Mirabad's communities.
Mirabad is far from a success story yet. Progress in development, education and democracy is yet to begin, but in the specific mission we have given our forces in Uruzgan - to train the Afghan National Army to take the lead in security - we see progress being made.
That is the beginning of transition.
General Cantwell also told me about Gizab. It is an isolated township in the far north of Urzugan Province that had long been a Taliban safe haven, and one which the Taliban used as a base to launch attacks against the Chora district.
Earlier this year, in April, the local community rose in revolt against the Taliban and, with the assistance of Afghan and Australian forces, captured the local Taliban commander and expelled the insurgents.
Gizab now has a local police force and a new district governor, and the provincial government is beginning to make its presence felt. Again, a place where progress is painstaking and incremental, where there will be new setbacks and where consolidation is needed. Again though, a place where the seeds of transition are being sewn.
I have shared some positive stories about the beginnings of transition. There are many stories which are not so positive. We should be very realistic about the situation.
Progress, even in security, is highly variable across the province, any gains come off a very low base, any advances made are fragile.
The challenges that face Uruzgan, and Afghanistan, are immense, but I do believe we should be cautiously encouraged.
Mr Speaker, Australia's national interests in Afghanistan are clear.There must be no safe haven for terrorists. We must stand firmly by our ally, the United States.
There is a new international strategy in place - focussed on counter-insurgency, designed to enable transition. Australia's commitment to Afghanistan is not open-ended.
We, along with the rest of our partners in the International Security Assistance Force, want to bring our people home as soon as possible, and the Afghan people want to stand on their own, but achieving our mission is critical to achieving both these things.
The international community and the Afghan Government are agreed on a clear pathway forward.
The Kabul conference in July welcomed the Afghan Government's determination that the Afghan National Security Forces should lead and conduct military operations in all provinces by the end of 2014.
At the upcoming NATO/ISAF Summit in Lisbon the international community and the Afghan government will assess progress against the international strategy. Mapping out the strategy for transition to Afghan leadership and responsibility will be a key focus of the summit.
Transition will not be a one-size-fits-all approach. It will be conditions-based.
It will happen faster in some places and slower in others. It will be a graduated process, not an event or a date, there is no "transition day". International forces will be thinned out as Afghan forces step up and assume responsibility. In some places the transition process will be subject to setbacks.
We need to be prepared for this.
My firm view is that for transition to occur in an area, the ability of Afghan forces to take the lead in security in that area must be irreversible.
Our Government will state this as a simple fact in discussions before and at Lisbon.
We must not transition out, only to transition back in.
Mr Speaker, Australia will do everything in our power to ensure Afghanistan is never again a safe haven for terrorists.
Australia will stand firm in our commitment to our alliance with the United States, the international community understands this, our friends and allies understand this, our enemies understand this too.
I believe that the new international strategy, backed by the surge in military and civilian forces, is sound: Protecting the Afghan people, training the Afghan security forces, building the Afghan government's capacity.
Working with the international community, Australia is making a real difference in Afghanistan, delivering on the international strategy in Uruzgan province - and supporting transition in the country as a whole.
Australia will not abandon Afghanistan, we must be very realistic about the future.
Transition will take some years, we will be engaged through this decade at least.
Good government in the country may be the work of an Afghan generation.
There will be many hard days ahead, but I am cautiously encouraged by what I have seen.
I believe this debate is an important one for our people and our Parliament.
That is why I announce today that as Prime Minister I will make a statement like this one to the House each year that our Afghanistan involvement continues.
This will be in addition to the Defence Minister's continuing ministerial statements in each session of the parliament.
Mr Speaker, attending funerals for Australian soldiers is the hardest thing I have ever done, and it is nowhere near as hard for me as it is for the families.There is nothing I can say to change their long walk through life without a loved one, a loved one, lost for our sake.
In the ultimate, I can promise only this: we will remember them.
Their names are written on the wall of the War Memorial in Canberra, their names are written in the walls of our hearts.
When I think of these Australians we have lost in Afghanistan, I think of the Australian poet James McAuley's words:
I never shrank with fearBut fought the monsters of the lower worldClearing a little space, and time, and lightFor men to live in peace
I know the professional soldiers of the Australian Defence Force are proud people. They offer their lives for us. They embrace wartime sacrifice as their highest duty. In return, we owe them our wisdom. Our highest duty is to make wise decisions about war.
I look forward to the deliberations of this Parliamentary debate on Afghanistan.
I hope we do our duty as well as they do theirs.


 Canberra 
I'm very pleased to be able to speak at the Australian Industry Group's annual dinner.
As Deputy Prime Minister, as Minister for Education and Minister for Workplace Relations, and as a Labor frontbencher since 2001, I've long had dealings with the Australian Industry Group.
But this is my first opportunity to address you as Prime Minister.
As Prime Minister, I want to share with you not just my Government's economic agenda, but my own economic thinking.
We've got a reform agenda to deliver, and I'll come to that.
But I want to put our reforms in the context of three more specific challenges that government and industry face right now.
The dollar rising. Electricity prices rising. And anti-reform voices rising.
Australia has come out of the downturn as the strongest advanced economy. Now, the Government is working to turn the hard work through the downturn into lasting prosperity.
Our economy is strong overall, but I know that many sectors are finding conditions difficult.
The policy of my Government is to support broad-based growth and a balanced economy for the long term.
Commodity exporters have served our country tremendously well, raising the living standards of every Australian, but an economy that becomes too dependent on any one sector takes too big a risk.
Even while demand for commodities remains strong, we face the risk of a "patchwork economy" - where some sectors thrive while others hang on and hope.
And if demand for commodities moderates over time, then we will only remain strong if we have ensured that our economic growth is broadly based: growth across all sectors - in services, manufacturing and agriculture, not just mining and resources.
I know the strong dollar is making life hard for some.
I know that the upward pressure on our currency makes life harder for manufacturing exporters as well as exporters of services like tourism and education and agriculture exporters too.
Consumers and capital-intensive industries and those who rely on inputs like fuel and transport do benefit from a strong dollar, and have an opportunity to make productive investments.
But that doesn't make life any easier for those who are feeling the pinch.
What we also know is that the root cause of our strong dollar is our strong economy.
Compared to the rest of the world, we have strong growth, employment is expanding, investment flows into Australia are high, and we have record terms of trade. Interest rate differentials are obviously a factor, though in turn they reflect our higher growth.
And given our floating exchange rate, all of that will mean a stronger dollar.I appreciate that no one here is arguing for costly direct interventions in currency markets to drive our dollar down, much less fixing the rate.
That floating dollar is an invaluable pressure valve for our economy. Easing pressures on inflation and wages while we manage a phase of strong growth.The floating dollar is the founding fact of the modern Australian economy.
At the same time as the dollar is so strong, I'm also conscious that electricity prices are rising and that this is also hard for Australian industry.
I think it is important that the origins of these price rises be clearly understood. The current rises are a significant economic fact in themselves but I also think their connection to future policy should be clear as well.
The current price rises in a number of states have been principally caused by a sustained period of under-investment.
Over the past three years residential electricity bills have risen by more than 40 per cent across Australia.
We continue to see electricity prices increase. From July this year the Queensland Competition Authority will allow prices to rise by just over 13 per cent.
In NSW, the Independent Pricing and Regulatory Tribunal has announced price increases of between 7 and 13 per cent from 1 July as well.
In Western Australia the Government has increased prices by 17.5 per cent during 2010.
These increases have been overwhelmingly driven by a lack of investment.
Significant investment is required to replace ageing network infrastructure and deliver energy security.
State and Territory Governments have no longer been able to ignore the need for electricity providers to recoup the costs of these investments through higher prices.
The Premier of Western Australia has effectively apologised for the situation, saying:I regret it, but it's something that simply has to happen.
There is another way to manage these issues.
Living in Victoria at the time, I saw the reforms of the energy sector undertaken by the Kennett Government and continued by the Bracks and Brumby Governments. This provides an example that other states could learn from.
A leading industry commentator - Keith Orchison, previously the CEO of the Energy Supply Association of Australia - put it this way in the Australian newspaper last week:After almost two decades in which Australia has coasted, meeting its power needs with cheap coal and putting off until tomorrow a higher level of augmentation of networks, while state Governments have reaped a handy dividend from the revenue earned by the electricity businesses they own, the reckoning is at hand.
It's not a pretty picture.
We'll all live with the legacy of those decisions. But my commitment is this.I'm not going to allow a repetition of this problem in another 10 years by allowing another sustained period of under-investment now.
That is one reason why I am so determined to deliver a carbon price.
Obviously, the fundamental motivation for our carbon price policy is pollution reduction. If carbon didn't create an externality by warming the planet, we wouldn't be pricing that externality in.
However the industry consequences are then immediate. Delaying a carbon price makes the eventual adjustment shaper and more costly. And the absence of a carbon price is already a problem.
Producers and consumers accept the science of climate change. Because they believe it, they are already responding, and their responses are already changing our energy economics.
Without certainty on a future carbon price, businesses won't invest in long-lived assets, because they won't know what their returns will be or what the environment will be for their competitors.
Investors already face perverse incentives for solutions which are driving them to adopt stopgap solutions rather than long term investment.
This is particularly the case in the electricity generation sector where uncertainty will direct what capacity growth there is towards meeting incremental rises in energy demand, rather than long-term baseload growth.
Where his predecessor is critical of some state governments for lack of investment and policy prudence, the current CEO of the Energy Supply Association of Australia, Brad Page, is imploring policy makers to underwrite investment by injecting a carbon price into the economy.
He has said that without a clear carbon constraint over the next few years, generators will be forced to make stop gap investments in technologies like open-cycle gas turbines to meet immediate increases in demand rather than take long term large scale investment decision. In Brad Page's words:That's not a zero-cost outcome - our lights would stay on but power prices will rise. Delaying a clear carbon constraint is going to cause electricity prices to go up anyway.
Inaction on a carbon price means higher prices.
There are other significant advantages to acting on a carbon price.
Revenue from the carbon price delivers transition support to households and industries. No such revenue is available to assist with the costs of the current price rises around the country - nor for future rises from an on-going investment strike.
That's because carbon pricing is a major structural economic reform.
So unlike the current catch-up round in the states, any price rises which do flow from carbon pricing bring with them the dynamic benefits of reform for the long-term.
Real carbon pricing reform will ensure industry uses energy more productively - increasing outputs compared to emissions.
Decoupling economic growth from growth in emissions is a key micro-reform.
This reform will also help us compete in a carbon-constrained global economy. Energy productivity is an emerging new arena for global competition in production costs and it's one where investment decisions now have an effect for years, for decades, to come.
Like all structural reforms, we need consensus and discipline to deliver good outcomes which are sustained for the long term.
I know the climate change committee and the business and community roundtables are working hard to deliver this consensus.
And the Government is determined to maintain this discipline, by taking the lead in a richer, deeper reform conversation which encourages thinking about the long-term.
Australia did not come out of the downturn as the strongest advanced economy by accident.
Government made good decisions.
And industry did too.
Having experienced acute skills shortages at the height of the last boom, during the downturn you sought to retain rather than shed valuable workers.Labour demand did weaken during 2008-09 - but this was mostly reflected in a decline in average hours worked, with firms seeking to put in place arrangements that avoided redundancies.
I pay tribute to the role that Australian industry has played.
But Government and industry alike had the benefit of 25 years of good decisions behind us.
25 years of hard won economic reforms, most particularly the reforms of Hawke and Keating.
Reforms which mean that our open economy's ability to resist global shocks has become the envy of the world.
Governments don't do economic reform because it feels good.
Reform is not easy - but it works.
When you get economic reform right, you fuel the drivers of sustainable long term economic growth. Reform lifts participation, and greater participation will ease the constraints on growth from the increasing number of Australians who no longer work.
Reform also lifts productivity, and this is the heart of the matter.
Treasury analysis finds that if we can get productivity growth up to what it was in the 1990s - up to where it stood following the Hawke-Keating period - our economy could grow an extra 15 per cent by 2050.
In Government, we must walk the reform road every day.
One or two big ticket reforms is not enough.
Reform is a seamless robe, which cannot be divided to suit sectional interest.
We all share the long-term benefits when we all share the short-term difficulties. No economic or social sector will have only beneficial reforms.
I said recently that minority Government is no excuse to walk away from reform. I mean that.
This country has had a reform agenda for a generation.
There are big differences between the parties and big issues at stake in politics - industrial relations and climate change obvious among them. At our best, though, there has been a historic reform project which spans the political divide.
A shared understanding between Governments of both persuasions and industry that modernising our economy creates opportunities for all Australians.
That shared understanding should ensure that minority Government does not mean an end to reform.
But I believe the reform consensus is now under serious threat.
I never thought in the 21st century I would hear a Shadow Finance Minister debate the need to allow our dollar to float.
I never thought that in the 21st century I would hear a Shadow Treasurer debate the need to allow a competitive market for interest rates.
Equally, I never thought I would hear a NSW Premier deny that a deal is a deal and a signature means you agree.
And I never thought, following a legislated reform direction, I would hear a NSW Opposition Leader threaten a reform of a river that belongs to the nation.
In our country we are hearing rising voices against reform.
Not just in the community as a whole, but in major party politics as well.
And strikingly, in the Parliament, in the once reform-advocating Liberal Party.
If a strain of economic Hansonism takes hold on the conservative side of politics in a Parliament which is so finely balanced, our long-term prosperity is at real risk.
Without the legacy of reform, our economy could never have resisted recession through two decades and three global shocks.
And at this time, with global uncertainty over growth and domestic uncertainty over carbon pricing, the reform consensus is as important as ever before.
Everyone who is committed to economic reform now has a job to do.
Simplistic solutions abound.
The risk of a return to economic populism is real.
The reform conversation needs many voices.
Leaders must lead, and my voice will be loudly heard.
Industry has a stake in the reform project - in opportunity, in prosperity, in growth - so you must have a strong voice in the reform conversation too.
My Government has an ambitious reform agenda: financial consolidation; building capacity on the supply side with tax, superannuation, infrastructure and skills; extending market-based reforms to health and education, carbon and water. We will pursue it with discipline and rigour.
As Prime Minister and Leader of the Labor Party I can guarantee we will not unilaterally withdraw from the post-1983 reform consensus.
Others must speak for themselves.
By nature, I am an optimist.
And by conviction, I am optimistic about our economy's future.
I am also a reformer.
The Labor Government I lead puts reform at the centre of all our economic decisions.
I also believe the way we approach reform will be a case study for the best way to govern.
Methodical.Making steady progress on our plans, day by day, week by week.
Working hard for all Australians, wherever they live.
Modernising.
Preparing Australia for the long-term with modern market-based solutions.
Carefully weighing the hard decisions, at the right time, for the right reasons.
Driven by our values - hard work, a fair go through education, respect.
And always keeping our economy strong.



PM: It's great to be here today with Premier John Brumby, I'm also joined by the Federal Water Minister, Tony Burke, and by the Victorian Water Minister Tim Holding, and we're here today to make an important announcement. We have been working together, and the Federal Government has been driven by a reform program for the Murray-Darling Basin.
You would of heard both me and the Minister for Water Tony Burke, say constantly over the last few weeks that we want to see an outcome for the Murray-Darling Basin that means we have strong communities, we have food production, and we have healthy rivers. That we can win in all of these areas, keeping our communities strong, having food production, and improving our environment.
Today we're announcing an historic partnership which fits in with this reform agenda. It is a win for farmers, and a win for the environment. Today I'm here to announce that the Federal Government will make available $953 million to upgrade old irrigation infrastructure in the Goulburn-Murray area.
Now much of this infrastructure is old, some of it is very old, indeed 80 years old. That means of course that the water seeps, it leaks, it evaporates, and we are not using the water efficiently.
By upgrading the infrastructure we believe we can make available 200 billion litres more water, we can save it from seeping and leaking and evaporating. And the water that is saved will be divided 50 per cent for the benefit of farmers through increased irrigation, 50 per cent for the benefit of the environment with more water able to flow naturally through the river.
This is a great outcome and a product of a strong partnership with the Government of Victoria. So I'll turn now to the Victorian Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Thank you very much Prime Minister and can I just too acknowledge Luke Donnellan today as the Parliamentary Secretary to me and also as the local Member. This is a fantastic announcement today and if I could thank the Prime Minister for this announcement, $953 million.
The timing of this in terms of the impact it'll have in regional areas couldn't be better, this'll mean jobs, confidence, optimism and prosperity for the future, and if you think about this in the context of what is an historically high Australian dollar, for all of our producers, whether they're in the stone fruit business, whether they're in the dairy business, this is a challenging environment with a high Australian dollar, and so what this investment will do is secure the future of irrigated agriculture and horticulture in our food-bowl region.
And I think everybody's aware we've been great supporters of this food-bowl project, it is an idea that came from the region and we talked to leading irrigators, leading horticulturalists in the region, and we worked out with them what's the best way for them to go forward, to secure the future of agriculture, to secure the future of regional Victoria, but also to return water to our environment. And that's what food-bowl project is all about, or Northern Victorian Irrigation Renewal Project as we call it. It's about investing in infrastructure that was built between 50 and 100 years ago, and it's like a lot of things that were built between 50 and 100 years ago, they're not as efficient, it's not as efficient as it could be, and the losses out of this system are huge - up to 800 billion litres a year of water lost, as the Prime Minister has said through evaporation, seepage, leakage, poor metering.
And by investing in the infrastructure, by sealing some of the systems, by taking out some of the old open channels, by improving the way in which we move that water there are immense water savings.
As the Prime Minister has said today this is a win for farmers and a win for the environment, it is. This project will ensure that there's 200 billion litres of water savings - 100 billion litres of water savings for the environment, and 100 billion litres of water savings for farmers - and of course it builds of what we're doing in stage one, so we kicked this off with our billion dollars, work is underway now, there's already 56 billion litres of savings, already those savings are coming through the system in fact at a bit better than we expected. Already they're being returned, already they're making a difference, already they're generating confidence and jobs in the region.
And last winter there was something like 500 people directly employed on projects in relation to this food-bowl stage one. Next winter you'll see even more, the winter after that even more, as the Federal money starts flowing in and this great transformational project, this great partnership between our Government and the Gillard Government kicks into full steam ahead and secures the futures of this region.
We're here today at Montague's, Montague's have got a lot of investments, four generations of families right across the State, some of them in the food-bowl region, but they know the importance of secure irrigated water for the future. In terms of making the big investments, in terms of generating the jobs, and so this is a just a fantastic investment, a fantastic announcement for our State today, and as the Prime Minister said, in the current debate about Murray-Darling I think this is a great signal by the Federal Government about the direction in which they're heading, where you can have a win for farmers, a win for regional Australia, and a win for the environment as well.
More water for the Murray, but more water too for irrigated agriculture, so it's a fantastic announcement Prime Minister, we thank you for that, and I think today is really a great stepping stone to a confident future for our farmers, for our regions and for the Murray river.
PM: Yes can I say thank you to the Montague family too, thank you for the little pictures that the girls did for me, all perfect apart from the Collingwood flag flying out the front, but there we have it, it was a good apple. Have we got any questions?
JOURNALIST: How does this fit in with the Murray-Darling Basin Authority's plan, does this mean that less water will have to be taken off farmers?
PM: Well we are continuing to work through the process for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority, independent authority generating the plan, of course we now have a Parliamentary Committee led by Tony Windsor and Minister Burke is also engaged in direct consultations with communities, but the water that is able to be saved through work like this does count towards the sustainable diversion limits that you've seen in the guide which will lead to the production of the draft plan, which will ultimately, following further consultation, lead to the plan itself.
JOURNALIST: Will you be offering similar support packages for other areas?
PM: We have been big investors in upgrading irrigation infrastructure, we're doing it because it's an efficient way of saving water. When we came to Government obviously we came in a circumstance where the Federal Government had not been involved in purchasing water, so for the first time we've done that, and where the Federal Government did not have a large sustained program of upgrading irrigation, and we've been doing that and today's announcement fits in with our broader program around the country of upgrading irrigation infrastructure. So we're getting the water for productive purposes, rather than seeping or leaking or evaporating; that means for irrigation, and more for the environment itself.
JOURNALIST: So does that mean you'll be able to take less from farmers under the Murray Basin plan, or you just know yet?
PM: Well we've just got to be clear, we're some way away from having the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. We've got a guide, then we'll have a draft plan, and we'll have further consultations for the final plan. The concept throughout though is about sustainable diversion limits, how much water can be taken. The water that is saved through this work can count in that process, so it does make a difference but of course I don't want to pre-empt what the endpoint will be, the limits will be defined in the final plan because we've got some journey to travel yet. And throughout that journey our frame here for decision making is we want to see healthy rivers, we want to see strong communities and we want to see food production. We believe we can get a triple bottom line win: a win for the environment, a win for farmers, a win for communities. We're working on that, and making sure that we've got modern infrastructure for irrigation is part of achieving that triple bottom line win and that's what today's announcement is about.
JOURNALIST: Will we ever get to a point where there are no more open water channels in Australia? Would you like to get to that point?
PM: Well that's obviously a very grand ambition given how much open water channels we've got. The focus for our investment has to be where we can most efficiently make a difference, so the dollars can do the maximum work, which is why this project stands out, the dollars invested here can do a lot of work. Premier Brumby might want to say something.
BRUMBY: I was just going to say there's a lot of channels, I think in this, in food-bowl it's 6,500 kilometres, but of course again in partnership with the Federal Government we've just completed Wimmera Mallee Pipeline, that was something like 19,000 kilometres of open channel, and that's all piped and the beauty of this is that system now is still only on 20 per cent, it still hasn't rained a lot up there, but at just 20 per cent, because the whole system is piped, there is four years of guaranteed water security. That's a system that was losing nine litres out of every ten, you put ten litres in and only one would get through to the farmer, so you can piped these systems, but my own view is it wouldn't be realistic in the next decade or so to imagine sealing every open channel across Victoria and across Australia, but there's no doubt that this works, there's absolutely no doubt that when you upgrade the system, seal some of the pipes, put in the best metering, put in the most sophisticated irrigation equipment, you get huge water savings and we've seen that in Wimmera Mallee, we're seeing it in food-bowl.
JOURNALIST: I'll just ask the Prime Minister, are you under more pressure now to reform gay marriage laws given Mark Arbib's comments in The Australian this morning?
PM: Well Mark Arbib's made statements about his personal views, this is a matter that gets ultimately decided at our national conference as a matter for the whole of the Australian Labor Party, so Mark's expressed his personal views and no doubt he will take them to the next national conference which is the proper place to have this debate.
JOURNALIST: I think he also expressed his view for a conscience vote, if I'm not wrong, do you support that on this issue?
PM: Once again we have currently a Party policy, the Party policy's crystal clear, that marriage is between a man and a woman, that's what the Marriage Act says and that's how it should stay.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) conference next?
PM: Well this is a binding policy of the Labor conference, so the proper process here, if anybody's got a view about changing the policy or indeed how we vote on it, is to take that matter to the Party conference which is some time away.
JOURNALIST: It does seem to be an issue that's gaining a lot of traction and momentum?
PM: I think it's an issue where there's community debate, but also it's an issue where there are divided community views, I've been very clear about my view, I believe the Marriage Act should stay in the form that it is, there will be community debate because there's community debate, inevitably there will be debate in political parties as well, and I think Mark Arbib is signalling that when that debate happens in the proper place in the Labor Party, he'll have something to say during it.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister why has Australia made the new defence arrangements with the United States and reported in The Australian today?
PM: We'll be here in Melbourne tomorrow and Monday, in part I'm here to participate in events associated with the Ministerial Dialogue between the United States and Australia on foreign policy and defence questions. I very much thank the Premier of Victoria for having me and the Defence Minister and the Foreign Minister, and of course Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and also Secretary Gates here in Victoria for these important discussions.
What you've seen in today's newspaper is speculation about what might come out of those talks, in those talks we anticipate discussing America's Force Posture Review in our region, we anticipate that will give rise to a process of discussion about how that Force Posture Review has implications for Australia, it could have implications in further joint exercises, it could have implications in further joint sharing of facilities, but that's to be worked through arising from these talks.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister you did promise Hillary Clinton a good time, how do you plan to have a good time?
PM: Well Melbourne is a very good place to have a good time, so whether it's sauntering on Melbourne's streets, grand boulevards or in our back lanes, whether it's shopping, whether it's talking to our great sporting identities or just enjoying beautiful Victorian weather, there's a lot for Secretary Clinton to do here in Melbourne.
JOURNALIST: And have you been following the State campaign, how do you think the Premier is travelling?
PM: Well you would anticipate I think that as colleagues and friends obviously I'm very admiring of John Brumby's leadership of this State. I believe when you look at what's been achieved here in Victoria under the Brumby Government, that Australia is well positioned coming out of the global financial crisis, we're coming out strong, but Victoria is particularly well positioned because of the policies of the Brumby Government, because of its leadership in innovation, its leadership in issues like the one we're talking about today: food production, its leadership in jobs and job expansion in this State. Victoria I think is coming out particularly strong and with the right management I believe that gives Victoria tremendous opportunities for the future.
JOURNALIST: Did you watch the debate last night?
PM: I didn't have the opportunity to watch the debate last night, I was attending a function. Sorry, I would have liked to but I didn't have the opportunity.
JOURNALIST: And Premier obviously good to have the Prime Minister by your side in the first week?
BRUMBY: Yeah fantastic, yeah, and it's great and I hope I expressed clearly before just how fantastic this announcement is today and we've been working on this for some time, it's something I believe in, something Tim believes in, it's about, in essence, having your cake and eating it too, it's about how you secure agriculture, how you secure regional Victoria, and you secure the environment. And to get this decision from the Prime Minister today it's just fantastic and I'll see a bit more of the Prime Minister over the weekend with a couple of activities as well, and to have her full support, working with us, particularly in relation to investment and jobs and regional development is just a wonderful partnership and I think it'll serve our State well.
JOURNALIST: You've had a bit of time to reflect on the debate, how do you think you went? A lot of the commentators are saying that Ted Ballieu might have come out on top?
BRUMBY: Look I was happy with the debate, I've said that to you last night, and I think debates are a good thing and I thought there was some good questions last night, some tough questions last night, but it was really an opportunity for me I think to make my position known about the importance of jobs, the importance of the economy, keeping the Budget in surplus, continuing to grow our State, and investing in education and health. That's what you'll get from my leadership and our Government, we're very clear about that, you'll get a strong economy, you'll get strong jobs growth, you'll get investment in education, and you'll get investment in health and you'll get us too, tackling the issue of climate change in really serious way.
JOURNALIST: Was Ted Ballieu playing by the rules last night during the debate?
BRUMBY: I'll leave that to the commentators, there'll be a hundred different views about that last night, and I think it's good we've had a lot of our Ministers out and debates as well, we've got the Burvale I think next week, so I'm looking forward to that. So it's a good, it's all part of this.
JOURNALIST: Do you think his interjections were over the top though?
BRUMBY: Well they didn't bother me, I don't know what the viewers thought of them, but they didn't bother me.


Melbourne 
PM: It's great to be here today with Premier John Brumby, I'm also joined by the Federal Water Minister, Tony Burke, and by the Victorian Water Minister Tim Holding, and we're here today to make an important announcement. We have been working together, and the Federal Government has been driven by a reform program for the Murray-Darling Basin.
You would of heard both me and the Minister for Water Tony Burke, say constantly over the last few weeks that we want to see an outcome for the Murray-Darling Basin that means we have strong communities, we have food production, and we have healthy rivers. That we can win in all of these areas, keeping our communities strong, having food production, and improving our environment.
Today we're announcing an historic partnership which fits in with this reform agenda. It is a win for farmers, and a win for the environment. Today I'm here to announce that the Federal Government will make available $953 million to upgrade old irrigation infrastructure in the Goulburn-Murray area.
Now much of this infrastructure is old, some of it is very old, indeed 80 years old. That means of course that the water seeps, it leaks, it evaporates, and we are not using the water efficiently.
By upgrading the infrastructure we believe we can make available 200 billion litres more water, we can save it from seeping and leaking and evaporating. And the water that is saved will be divided 50 per cent for the benefit of farmers through increased irrigation, 50 per cent for the benefit of the environment with more water able to flow naturally through the river.
This is a great outcome and a product of a strong partnership with the Government of Victoria. So I'll turn now to the Victorian Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BRUMBY: Thank you very much Prime Minister and can I just too acknowledge Luke Donnellan today as the Parliamentary Secretary to me and also as the local Member. This is a fantastic announcement today and if I could thank the Prime Minister for this announcement, $953 million.
The timing of this in terms of the impact it'll have in regional areas couldn't be better, this'll mean jobs, confidence, optimism and prosperity for the future, and if you think about this in the context of what is an historically high Australian dollar, for all of our producers, whether they're in the stone fruit business, whether they're in the dairy business, this is a challenging environment with a high Australian dollar, and so what this investment will do is secure the future of irrigated agriculture and horticulture in our food-bowl region.
And I think everybody's aware we've been great supporters of this food-bowl project, it is an idea that came from the region and we talked to leading irrigators, leading horticulturalists in the region, and we worked out with them what's the best way for them to go forward, to secure the future of agriculture, to secure the future of regional Victoria, but also to return water to our environment. And that's what food-bowl project is all about, or Northern Victorian Irrigation Renewal Project as we call it. It's about investing in infrastructure that was built between 50 and 100 years ago, and it's like a lot of things that were built between 50 and 100 years ago, they're not as efficient, it's not as efficient as it could be, and the losses out of this system are huge - up to 800 billion litres a year of water lost, as the Prime Minister has said through evaporation, seepage, leakage, poor metering.
And by investing in the infrastructure, by sealing some of the systems, by taking out some of the old open channels, by improving the way in which we move that water there are immense water savings.
As the Prime Minister has said today this is a win for farmers and a win for the environment, it is. This project will ensure that there's 200 billion litres of water savings - 100 billion litres of water savings for the environment, and 100 billion litres of water savings for farmers - and of course it builds of what we're doing in stage one, so we kicked this off with our billion dollars, work is underway now, there's already 56 billion litres of savings, already those savings are coming through the system in fact at a bit better than we expected. Already they're being returned, already they're making a difference, already they're generating confidence and jobs in the region.
And last winter there was something like 500 people directly employed on projects in relation to this food-bowl stage one. Next winter you'll see even more, the winter after that even more, as the Federal money starts flowing in and this great transformational project, this great partnership between our Government and the Gillard Government kicks into full steam ahead and secures the futures of this region.
We're here today at Montague's, Montague's have got a lot of investments, four generations of families right across the State, some of them in the food-bowl region, but they know the importance of secure irrigated water for the future. In terms of making the big investments, in terms of generating the jobs, and so this is a just a fantastic investment, a fantastic announcement for our State today, and as the Prime Minister said, in the current debate about Murray-Darling I think this is a great signal by the Federal Government about the direction in which they're heading, where you can have a win for farmers, a win for regional Australia, and a win for the environment as well.
More water for the Murray, but more water too for irrigated agriculture, so it's a fantastic announcement Prime Minister, we thank you for that, and I think today is really a great stepping stone to a confident future for our farmers, for our regions and for the Murray river.
PM: Yes can I say thank you to the Montague family too, thank you for the little pictures that the girls did for me, all perfect apart from the Collingwood flag flying out the front, but there we have it, it was a good apple. Have we got any questions?
JOURNALIST: How does this fit in with the Murray-Darling Basin Authority's plan, does this mean that less water will have to be taken off farmers?
PM: Well we are continuing to work through the process for the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. The Murray-Darling Basin Authority, independent authority generating the plan, of course we now have a Parliamentary Committee led by Tony Windsor and Minister Burke is also engaged in direct consultations with communities, but the water that is able to be saved through work like this does count towards the sustainable diversion limits that you've seen in the guide which will lead to the production of the draft plan, which will ultimately, following further consultation, lead to the plan itself.
JOURNALIST: Will you be offering similar support packages for other areas?
PM: We have been big investors in upgrading irrigation infrastructure, we're doing it because it's an efficient way of saving water. When we came to Government obviously we came in a circumstance where the Federal Government had not been involved in purchasing water, so for the first time we've done that, and where the Federal Government did not have a large sustained program of upgrading irrigation, and we've been doing that and today's announcement fits in with our broader program around the country of upgrading irrigation infrastructure. So we're getting the water for productive purposes, rather than seeping or leaking or evaporating; that means for irrigation, and more for the environment itself.
JOURNALIST: So does that mean you'll be able to take less from farmers under the Murray Basin plan, or you just know yet?
PM: Well we've just got to be clear, we're some way away from having the Murray-Darling Basin Authority plan. We've got a guide, then we'll have a draft plan, and we'll have further consultations for the final plan. The concept throughout though is about sustainable diversion limits, how much water can be taken. The water that is saved through this work can count in that process, so it does make a difference but of course I don't want to pre-empt what the endpoint will be, the limits will be defined in the final plan because we've got some journey to travel yet. And throughout that journey our frame here for decision making is we want to see healthy rivers, we want to see strong communities and we want to see food production. We believe we can get a triple bottom line win: a win for the environment, a win for farmers, a win for communities. We're working on that, and making sure that we've got modern infrastructure for irrigation is part of achieving that triple bottom line win and that's what today's announcement is about.
JOURNALIST: Will we ever get to a point where there are no more open water channels in Australia? Would you like to get to that point?
PM: Well that's obviously a very grand ambition given how much open water channels we've got. The focus for our investment has to be where we can most efficiently make a difference, so the dollars can do the maximum work, which is why this project stands out, the dollars invested here can do a lot of work. Premier Brumby might want to say something.
BRUMBY: I was just going to say there's a lot of channels, I think in this, in food-bowl it's 6,500 kilometres, but of course again in partnership with the Federal Government we've just completed Wimmera Mallee Pipeline, that was something like 19,000 kilometres of open channel, and that's all piped and the beauty of this is that system now is still only on 20 per cent, it still hasn't rained a lot up there, but at just 20 per cent, because the whole system is piped, there is four years of guaranteed water security. That's a system that was losing nine litres out of every ten, you put ten litres in and only one would get through to the farmer, so you can piped these systems, but my own view is it wouldn't be realistic in the next decade or so to imagine sealing every open channel across Victoria and across Australia, but there's no doubt that this works, there's absolutely no doubt that when you upgrade the system, seal some of the pipes, put in the best metering, put in the most sophisticated irrigation equipment, you get huge water savings and we've seen that in Wimmera Mallee, we're seeing it in food-bowl.
JOURNALIST: I'll just ask the Prime Minister, are you under more pressure now to reform gay marriage laws given Mark Arbib's comments in The Australian this morning?
PM: Well Mark Arbib's made statements about his personal views, this is a matter that gets ultimately decided at our national conference as a matter for the whole of the Australian Labor Party, so Mark's expressed his personal views and no doubt he will take them to the next national conference which is the proper place to have this debate.
JOURNALIST: I think he also expressed his view for a conscience vote, if I'm not wrong, do you support that on this issue?
PM: Once again we have currently a Party policy, the Party policy's crystal clear, that marriage is between a man and a woman, that's what the Marriage Act says and that's how it should stay.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) conference next?
PM: Well this is a binding policy of the Labor conference, so the proper process here, if anybody's got a view about changing the policy or indeed how we vote on it, is to take that matter to the Party conference which is some time away.
JOURNALIST: It does seem to be an issue that's gaining a lot of traction and momentum?
PM: I think it's an issue where there's community debate, but also it's an issue where there are divided community views, I've been very clear about my view, I believe the Marriage Act should stay in the form that it is, there will be community debate because there's community debate, inevitably there will be debate in political parties as well, and I think Mark Arbib is signalling that when that debate happens in the proper place in the Labor Party, he'll have something to say during it.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister why has Australia made the new defence arrangements with the United States and reported in The Australian today?
PM: We'll be here in Melbourne tomorrow and Monday, in part I'm here to participate in events associated with the Ministerial Dialogue between the United States and Australia on foreign policy and defence questions. I very much thank the Premier of Victoria for having me and the Defence Minister and the Foreign Minister, and of course Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, and also Secretary Gates here in Victoria for these important discussions.
What you've seen in today's newspaper is speculation about what might come out of those talks, in those talks we anticipate discussing America's Force Posture Review in our region, we anticipate that will give rise to a process of discussion about how that Force Posture Review has implications for Australia, it could have implications in further joint exercises, it could have implications in further joint sharing of facilities, but that's to be worked through arising from these talks.
JOURNALIST: And Prime Minister you did promise Hillary Clinton a good time, how do you plan to have a good time?
PM: Well Melbourne is a very good place to have a good time, so whether it's sauntering on Melbourne's streets, grand boulevards or in our back lanes, whether it's shopping, whether it's talking to our great sporting identities or just enjoying beautiful Victorian weather, there's a lot for Secretary Clinton to do here in Melbourne.
JOURNALIST: And have you been following the State campaign, how do you think the Premier is travelling?
PM: Well you would anticipate I think that as colleagues and friends obviously I'm very admiring of John Brumby's leadership of this State. I believe when you look at what's been achieved here in Victoria under the Brumby Government, that Australia is well positioned coming out of the global financial crisis, we're coming out strong, but Victoria is particularly well positioned because of the policies of the Brumby Government, because of its leadership in innovation, its leadership in issues like the one we're talking about today: food production, its leadership in jobs and job expansion in this State. Victoria I think is coming out particularly strong and with the right management I believe that gives Victoria tremendous opportunities for the future.
JOURNALIST: Did you watch the debate last night?
PM: I didn't have the opportunity to watch the debate last night, I was attending a function. Sorry, I would have liked to but I didn't have the opportunity.
JOURNALIST: And Premier obviously good to have the Prime Minister by your side in the first week?
BRUMBY: Yeah fantastic, yeah, and it's great and I hope I expressed clearly before just how fantastic this announcement is today and we've been working on this for some time, it's something I believe in, something Tim believes in, it's about, in essence, having your cake and eating it too, it's about how you secure agriculture, how you secure regional Victoria, and you secure the environment. And to get this decision from the Prime Minister today it's just fantastic and I'll see a bit more of the Prime Minister over the weekend with a couple of activities as well, and to have her full support, working with us, particularly in relation to investment and jobs and regional development is just a wonderful partnership and I think it'll serve our State well.
JOURNALIST: You've had a bit of time to reflect on the debate, how do you think you went? A lot of the commentators are saying that Ted Ballieu might have come out on top?
BRUMBY: Look I was happy with the debate, I've said that to you last night, and I think debates are a good thing and I thought there was some good questions last night, some tough questions last night, but it was really an opportunity for me I think to make my position known about the importance of jobs, the importance of the economy, keeping the Budget in surplus, continuing to grow our State, and investing in education and health. That's what you'll get from my leadership and our Government, we're very clear about that, you'll get a strong economy, you'll get strong jobs growth, you'll get investment in education, and you'll get investment in health and you'll get us too, tackling the issue of climate change in really serious way.
JOURNALIST: Was Ted Ballieu playing by the rules last night during the debate?
BRUMBY: I'll leave that to the commentators, there'll be a hundred different views about that last night, and I think it's good we've had a lot of our Ministers out and debates as well, we've got the Burvale I think next week, so I'm looking forward to that. So it's a good, it's all part of this.
JOURNALIST: Do you think his interjections were over the top though?
BRUMBY: Well they didn't bother me, I don't know what the viewers thought of them, but they didn't bother me.



PM: Can I thank Daniel Grollo for having us here today, and it's obviously a great pleasure for me to be here with Secretary of State Clinton and with our ambassadors, both the US Ambassador to Australia, Ambassador Bleich, and of course our very old friend and our Ambassador to the United States Kim Beazley.
And we are here today to talk about how we jointly are working on and facing up to the challenge of tackling climate change, and as Daniel has explained, there could be no better place to have this discussion than in this remarkable building, where the wind turbines up on the roof that we've just seen were invented here in Victoria, in fact they're from Bendigo. And the living roof features local grass species, and the information technology that runs throughout this building manages all of the systems, the carpet, the photo-voltaic roof arrangement which was manufactured in the United States.
So this building in and of itself is a partnership of Australian products and American products.
Of course as a Government we are strongly committed to investing in renewable energy and that's why we've set the renewable we've set the renewable energy target of 20 per cent by 2020. And the very setting of that target is expected to drive $19 billion in investment, and we've further allocated $5.1 billion to our clean energy initiative to drive further innovation.
We're also committed to deliver to the Australian people a number of new energy initiatives, including implementing standards for new coal fired power stations and extending the energy efficiency opportunities program to electricity generators.
We're going to set mandatory CO2 standards for light vehicles and we're going to implement tax breaks for green buildings. We are of course going to continue to pursue our efforts to put a price on carbon in our economy.
Australian and the United States have a long and productive history of working in partnership in areas that will shape the future including on clean energy. Recently we've enhanced our collaboration in the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, and I want to acknowledge that we announced that new initiative when Ambassador Bleich and I had the opportunity to travel to Gorgon on Barrow Island in the far north west of our country.
We've earmarked a number of Fulbright scholarships for specific research in the field of climate and clean energy research and I'd acknowledge our friends that have joined up from Fulbright today.
And we've created a new joint committee on science and technology to identify new areas for collaborative research on clean energy, energy efficiency and climate research.
Today I'm very pleased, with Secretary of State Clinton, to be able to announce a further step, a major new initiative that builds on these joint efforts between our two nations.
Australia and the United States have agreed a new solar research collaboration initiative. Now I think we all know that solar power has significant potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide the clean energy we need for the future.
One of the greatest barriers to a broader commercial take-up of solar power is its cost, and that is specifically what this joint research initiative will address. The price of solar technology has come down in recent years but we need to accelerate that trend. The joint project, with the United States, is part of an aggressive effort to bring the sales price of solar technology down by two to four times, down to the point where the price of electricity from solar is comparable to electricity generated from conventional sources.
Now this is an ambitious goal, but anyone who has stood under the Australian sun, even here in Melbourne where sometimes we see and sometimes we don't, knows how much we stand to gain in we can do this.
So the Australian Government will commit new funding of up to $50 million for this initiative to be managed by the Australian Solar Institute. This builds on the work of the Australian Solar Institute which is already driving collaboration, focussed research and development that will have a major impact on the efficiency and cost effectiveness of solar technologies.
That will support research and development collaboration with the United States, including through a number of foundation projects. We will be concentrating on solar power technologies, the research is expected to look at advanced solar technologies, such as dual-junction photo-voltaic devices, hot-carrier solar cells and high-temperature receivers, all likely to be part of our future.
The United States also has a very strong solar energy research program and this new initiative will build on existing expertise from both of our countries. These joint efforts will ensure that we lead the way in development and supply of the most competitive solar technologies at the most reasonable price.
In conclusion can I take this opportunity to thank the US Government and Secretary Clinton for their continued commitment to investment in technology that is essential to a clean energy future.
Thank you very much.
SECRETARY OF STATE CLINTON: Well good afternoon. We just had a wonderful lunch and I think speaking for myself I'm still back relishing the break in the schedule and having fun in Melbourne.
Let me start by thanking the Prime Minister for her leadership on this really important issue, it's obviously important for Australia but it's important as a global commitment and we look forward to working with her on this and so many other matters.
Daniel Grollo thank you for having us at this amazing example of what can be done when contractors, developers, construction companies, owners, get together and decide to make the investments that will pay off in clean energy, in this case, zero carbon buildings.
I also want to acknowledge Lyndell Wilson, the acting Executive Director of the Australian Fulbright Commission, Nick Otter the CEO of Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and Wayne Kemp, district General Manager of Honeywell.
I've had an extraordinary trip through Asia over the last two weeks, I don't think there is a more important event that I've participated in than this one. To speak about our efforts on climate change and clean technology at a building that represents the future. This building, thanks to Grocon's commitment, brought together your country's most creative minds to create a building with ingenious energy saving features. It puts energy back into the power grid from its wind turbines and its solar panels, it has a living roof that we just saw, that cuts cooling costs. It uses mainly rainwater and filters its own waste water through beds of reeds to reduce the run-off it sends into the sewers.
Now I am sure that many Australians and frankly Americans and others will be studying the Pixel building example. Certainly the State Department will want to send our experts to delve into greater specificity with you because we are committed to building environmentally sustainable embassies all over the world. So this sets an example, unfortunately it's unique and in the world we are trying to create we want it to be typical, standard, routine, that buildings do what this one does in terms of efficiency.
We really have very little time to make our buildings, which are massive users of inefficient greenhouse gas produced energy, more in line of what we are seeking. We need innovations like the ones we see here to generate renewable energy and manufacture goods without polluting our air and water, and these tools need to be affordable and available in every country.
So we need to start a global clean tech industry and that will help our economies grow by creating tens of thousands of new jobs and give us viable alternatives to fossil fuels and reduce our dependence of foreign sources of energy. I think that the United States and Australia working together can be pioneers of this movement and I'm excited that we are joining forces, taking our sophisticated research and energy abilities and putting them together for this purpose. We each have brilliant scientists working on problems like capturing carbon, increasing food production, developing more efficient technologies and I think both the people of Australia and America don't want to see more bickering about what should be done to reduce carbon emissions, they want to see action and the Prime Minister and I are here today to say we are committed to action.
I know that the Cancun conference is coming up soon to build on what happened at Copenhagen. I am one who believed strongly that we accomplished less than what we should have at Copenhagen but we did come out with an agreement and we're committed to working with our partners around the world, particularly the Government of Australia, to ensure that we make progress again at Cancun.
And so rather than just waiting for global agreements, we have decided between our two Governments to take steps on our own.
First we are launching, as the Prime Minister said, a new solar energy research collaboration. We have a common goal of making solar energy competitive with conventional sources by the middle of this decade, 2015. The good news is that the price of photo-voltaic modules has dropped about 50 per cent in the past three years, but to meet our goal we have to drive the price down even more.
I can remember when the first cell-phones came out, you know they weighed as much as a brick, they were very expensive and look at now where we have advanced to because we made it a goal that the result would be cell-phone technology available universally and we now have 4.6 billion cell-phones in the world. Well under this initiative our two Governments will share both the cost and the benefits of research and development, which will speed up innovation.
Second we are stepping up our joint efforts to make it commercially viable to capture and store greenhouse gasses. I'm pleased to announce that the State Department will provide a new $500,000 grant to the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute which is co-funded by the Australian Government.
This new funding will help promote carbon capture and storage in developing countries, it will pay for a global survey to identify the most promising technologies for reusing carbon dioxide. For instance by turning it into materials that can be used for roads or buildings, or into liquid fuel that can power cars or generate electricity, and our support for this Institute demonstrates we want to make sure that the best ideas get the funding they deserve.
Third we're expanding one of the world's best educational programs, the Fulbright Scholarships. We're creating a special focus on climate change. Over the next three years Australia and the United States will fund up to 15 additional scholars to work specifically on climate change and clean energy. We hope these clean tech Fulbright Scholars will do some of the work that advances our understanding of climate change and leads to new commercially viable solutions.
Fourth we are expanding our collaborations on science and technology across all the difference agencies of our Government, to make sure that our efforts dovetail together we will convene a science and technology joint commission meeting in Washington in February. We want to make sure that in both the United States and Australia, we're getting the best return on taxpayer's investments in these new technologies.
Now I think what you're seeing here this afternoon is a recognition by both of our Governments and the people of our two countries that in the 21st century no single country will be able to address these environmental challenges on its own. We need partnerships now more than ever, we need all the talent and the capital we can muster and I cannot imagine a better partner than Australia in building the kind of green clean and prosperous future that we want and deserve.
So Prime Minister thank you for leading this effort here in Australia and for all that you are doing. We look forward to working with you.
Now I think we're going to answer a couple of questions?
PM: We are going to answer a couple of questions.
JOURNALIST: Madame Secretary I have a question for you, it's Sabra Lane from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. President Obama's comments abandoning the emissions trading scheme, have been seized on by the Opposition here, they say that the Prime Minister should follow that lead and abandon it here. I'm interested to hear your thoughts on that. Many commentators believe that that decision will now have an impact right around the world, with other countries deciding to ditch emissions trading scheme as a means of bringing down carbon emissions. Is that your view and if so, is it government regulation or a carbon tax that will be the best way of reducing emissions?
CLINTON: First let me start by saying that I think what President Obama said the other day was a statement of the reality that we face politically in the United States Congress. As you may know the President was successful in passing a cap and trade system through the United States House of Representatives, we were not successful in getting that considered by the Senate.
Given the changes of the mid-term election and the fact that in our system if you don't have action on pending legislation by the end of the Congress with ends this coming January, then you have to start over, and so the President is still very committed to the United States addressing climate change, making investments in clean energy and we will be looking at a range of options to take, including as you point out the regulatory route, which we've already been doing in concert with the legislative route.
I don't think that President Obama's statement is meant to describe anything other than what is happening inside the United States. Obviously decisions in Australia are up to the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, but what we are absolutely clear eyed about is our commitment to addressing climate change and its affects. So we're going to keep moving forward, and we're going to come up with approaches that we think will work, some of them regulatory, some of them supporting the kind of clean building initiative that we see here, some of them through legislation.
PM: I think we are taking a question from our American friends, yes?
JOURNALIST: Hi, this is a question for both of you. I know that trade is on the agenda and you've been talking about it. I want to ask about that in light of the recent terror scare prompted by the packages that were mailed from Yemen. Do you think there should be tighter restrictions on international shipping by air or by sea, and if so how do you manage that and not put a crimp on economic growth?
PM: Well I'm happy to answer that for Australia's behalf. What we would say is that we are very committed to free trade, we have an open trading economy, we're very committed to seeing the world continue to make progress on trade liberalisation and at the forthcoming G20 the future and level of ambition of the Doha round will obviously be under discussion.
With the scare from Yemen, I believe the solution is not in turning our backs on trade, we've got to have free and open trade, we also need to have the adequate screening and security that makes sure that that trade is safe. For Australia we immediately moved to a new screening regime, we don't have direct carbon shipments from Yemen, so we were screening 100 per cent of cargo coming through ports like Dubai for the immediate days that follow. We have now instituted the kind of protocols that are being followed around the world for screening arrangements.
So yes it has changed levels of security, but that's the appropriate response. Turning our back on free trade is not the appropriate response.
CLINTON: I agree completely. 


Melbourne 
PM: Can I thank Daniel Grollo for having us here today, and it's obviously a great pleasure for me to be here with Secretary of State Clinton and with our ambassadors, both the US Ambassador to Australia, Ambassador Bleich, and of course our very old friend and our Ambassador to the United States Kim Beazley.
And we are here today to talk about how we jointly are working on and facing up to the challenge of tackling climate change, and as Daniel has explained, there could be no better place to have this discussion than in this remarkable building, where the wind turbines up on the roof that we've just seen were invented here in Victoria, in fact they're from Bendigo. And the living roof features local grass species, and the information technology that runs throughout this building manages all of the systems, the carpet, the photo-voltaic roof arrangement which was manufactured in the United States.
So this building in and of itself is a partnership of Australian products and American products.
Of course as a Government we are strongly committed to investing in renewable energy and that's why we've set the renewable we've set the renewable energy target of 20 per cent by 2020. And the very setting of that target is expected to drive $19 billion in investment, and we've further allocated $5.1 billion to our clean energy initiative to drive further innovation.
We're also committed to deliver to the Australian people a number of new energy initiatives, including implementing standards for new coal fired power stations and extending the energy efficiency opportunities program to electricity generators.
We're going to set mandatory CO2 standards for light vehicles and we're going to implement tax breaks for green buildings. We are of course going to continue to pursue our efforts to put a price on carbon in our economy.
Australian and the United States have a long and productive history of working in partnership in areas that will shape the future including on clean energy. Recently we've enhanced our collaboration in the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, and I want to acknowledge that we announced that new initiative when Ambassador Bleich and I had the opportunity to travel to Gorgon on Barrow Island in the far north west of our country.
We've earmarked a number of Fulbright scholarships for specific research in the field of climate and clean energy research and I'd acknowledge our friends that have joined up from Fulbright today.
And we've created a new joint committee on science and technology to identify new areas for collaborative research on clean energy, energy efficiency and climate research.
Today I'm very pleased, with Secretary of State Clinton, to be able to announce a further step, a major new initiative that builds on these joint efforts between our two nations.
Australia and the United States have agreed a new solar research collaboration initiative. Now I think we all know that solar power has significant potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and provide the clean energy we need for the future.
One of the greatest barriers to a broader commercial take-up of solar power is its cost, and that is specifically what this joint research initiative will address. The price of solar technology has come down in recent years but we need to accelerate that trend. The joint project, with the United States, is part of an aggressive effort to bring the sales price of solar technology down by two to four times, down to the point where the price of electricity from solar is comparable to electricity generated from conventional sources.
Now this is an ambitious goal, but anyone who has stood under the Australian sun, even here in Melbourne where sometimes we see and sometimes we don't, knows how much we stand to gain in we can do this.
So the Australian Government will commit new funding of up to $50 million for this initiative to be managed by the Australian Solar Institute. This builds on the work of the Australian Solar Institute which is already driving collaboration, focussed research and development that will have a major impact on the efficiency and cost effectiveness of solar technologies.
That will support research and development collaboration with the United States, including through a number of foundation projects. We will be concentrating on solar power technologies, the research is expected to look at advanced solar technologies, such as dual-junction photo-voltaic devices, hot-carrier solar cells and high-temperature receivers, all likely to be part of our future.
The United States also has a very strong solar energy research program and this new initiative will build on existing expertise from both of our countries. These joint efforts will ensure that we lead the way in development and supply of the most competitive solar technologies at the most reasonable price.
In conclusion can I take this opportunity to thank the US Government and Secretary Clinton for their continued commitment to investment in technology that is essential to a clean energy future.
Thank you very much.
SECRETARY OF STATE CLINTON: Well good afternoon. We just had a wonderful lunch and I think speaking for myself I'm still back relishing the break in the schedule and having fun in Melbourne.
Let me start by thanking the Prime Minister for her leadership on this really important issue, it's obviously important for Australia but it's important as a global commitment and we look forward to working with her on this and so many other matters.
Daniel Grollo thank you for having us at this amazing example of what can be done when contractors, developers, construction companies, owners, get together and decide to make the investments that will pay off in clean energy, in this case, zero carbon buildings.
I also want to acknowledge Lyndell Wilson, the acting Executive Director of the Australian Fulbright Commission, Nick Otter the CEO of Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and Wayne Kemp, district General Manager of Honeywell.
I've had an extraordinary trip through Asia over the last two weeks, I don't think there is a more important event that I've participated in than this one. To speak about our efforts on climate change and clean technology at a building that represents the future. This building, thanks to Grocon's commitment, brought together your country's most creative minds to create a building with ingenious energy saving features. It puts energy back into the power grid from its wind turbines and its solar panels, it has a living roof that we just saw, that cuts cooling costs. It uses mainly rainwater and filters its own waste water through beds of reeds to reduce the run-off it sends into the sewers.
Now I am sure that many Australians and frankly Americans and others will be studying the Pixel building example. Certainly the State Department will want to send our experts to delve into greater specificity with you because we are committed to building environmentally sustainable embassies all over the world. So this sets an example, unfortunately it's unique and in the world we are trying to create we want it to be typical, standard, routine, that buildings do what this one does in terms of efficiency.
We really have very little time to make our buildings, which are massive users of inefficient greenhouse gas produced energy, more in line of what we are seeking. We need innovations like the ones we see here to generate renewable energy and manufacture goods without polluting our air and water, and these tools need to be affordable and available in every country.
So we need to start a global clean tech industry and that will help our economies grow by creating tens of thousands of new jobs and give us viable alternatives to fossil fuels and reduce our dependence of foreign sources of energy. I think that the United States and Australia working together can be pioneers of this movement and I'm excited that we are joining forces, taking our sophisticated research and energy abilities and putting them together for this purpose. We each have brilliant scientists working on problems like capturing carbon, increasing food production, developing more efficient technologies and I think both the people of Australia and America don't want to see more bickering about what should be done to reduce carbon emissions, they want to see action and the Prime Minister and I are here today to say we are committed to action.
I know that the Cancun conference is coming up soon to build on what happened at Copenhagen. I am one who believed strongly that we accomplished less than what we should have at Copenhagen but we did come out with an agreement and we're committed to working with our partners around the world, particularly the Government of Australia, to ensure that we make progress again at Cancun.
And so rather than just waiting for global agreements, we have decided between our two Governments to take steps on our own.
First we are launching, as the Prime Minister said, a new solar energy research collaboration. We have a common goal of making solar energy competitive with conventional sources by the middle of this decade, 2015. The good news is that the price of photo-voltaic modules has dropped about 50 per cent in the past three years, but to meet our goal we have to drive the price down even more.
I can remember when the first cell-phones came out, you know they weighed as much as a brick, they were very expensive and look at now where we have advanced to because we made it a goal that the result would be cell-phone technology available universally and we now have 4.6 billion cell-phones in the world. Well under this initiative our two Governments will share both the cost and the benefits of research and development, which will speed up innovation.
Second we are stepping up our joint efforts to make it commercially viable to capture and store greenhouse gasses. I'm pleased to announce that the State Department will provide a new $500,000 grant to the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute which is co-funded by the Australian Government.
This new funding will help promote carbon capture and storage in developing countries, it will pay for a global survey to identify the most promising technologies for reusing carbon dioxide. For instance by turning it into materials that can be used for roads or buildings, or into liquid fuel that can power cars or generate electricity, and our support for this Institute demonstrates we want to make sure that the best ideas get the funding they deserve.
Third we're expanding one of the world's best educational programs, the Fulbright Scholarships. We're creating a special focus on climate change. Over the next three years Australia and the United States will fund up to 15 additional scholars to work specifically on climate change and clean energy. We hope these clean tech Fulbright Scholars will do some of the work that advances our understanding of climate change and leads to new commercially viable solutions.
Fourth we are expanding our collaborations on science and technology across all the difference agencies of our Government, to make sure that our efforts dovetail together we will convene a science and technology joint commission meeting in Washington in February. We want to make sure that in both the United States and Australia, we're getting the best return on taxpayer's investments in these new technologies.
Now I think what you're seeing here this afternoon is a recognition by both of our Governments and the people of our two countries that in the 21st century no single country will be able to address these environmental challenges on its own. We need partnerships now more than ever, we need all the talent and the capital we can muster and I cannot imagine a better partner than Australia in building the kind of green clean and prosperous future that we want and deserve.
So Prime Minister thank you for leading this effort here in Australia and for all that you are doing. We look forward to working with you.
Now I think we're going to answer a couple of questions?
PM: We are going to answer a couple of questions.
JOURNALIST: Madame Secretary I have a question for you, it's Sabra Lane from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. President Obama's comments abandoning the emissions trading scheme, have been seized on by the Opposition here, they say that the Prime Minister should follow that lead and abandon it here. I'm interested to hear your thoughts on that. Many commentators believe that that decision will now have an impact right around the world, with other countries deciding to ditch emissions trading scheme as a means of bringing down carbon emissions. Is that your view and if so, is it government regulation or a carbon tax that will be the best way of reducing emissions?
CLINTON: First let me start by saying that I think what President Obama said the other day was a statement of the reality that we face politically in the United States Congress. As you may know the President was successful in passing a cap and trade system through the United States House of Representatives, we were not successful in getting that considered by the Senate.
Given the changes of the mid-term election and the fact that in our system if you don't have action on pending legislation by the end of the Congress with ends this coming January, then you have to start over, and so the President is still very committed to the United States addressing climate change, making investments in clean energy and we will be looking at a range of options to take, including as you point out the regulatory route, which we've already been doing in concert with the legislative route.
I don't think that President Obama's statement is meant to describe anything other than what is happening inside the United States. Obviously decisions in Australia are up to the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, but what we are absolutely clear eyed about is our commitment to addressing climate change and its affects. So we're going to keep moving forward, and we're going to come up with approaches that we think will work, some of them regulatory, some of them supporting the kind of clean building initiative that we see here, some of them through legislation.
PM: I think we are taking a question from our American friends, yes?
JOURNALIST: Hi, this is a question for both of you. I know that trade is on the agenda and you've been talking about it. I want to ask about that in light of the recent terror scare prompted by the packages that were mailed from Yemen. Do you think there should be tighter restrictions on international shipping by air or by sea, and if so how do you manage that and not put a crimp on economic growth?
PM: Well I'm happy to answer that for Australia's behalf. What we would say is that we are very committed to free trade, we have an open trading economy, we're very committed to seeing the world continue to make progress on trade liberalisation and at the forthcoming G20 the future and level of ambition of the Doha round will obviously be under discussion.
With the scare from Yemen, I believe the solution is not in turning our backs on trade, we've got to have free and open trade, we also need to have the adequate screening and security that makes sure that that trade is safe. For Australia we immediately moved to a new screening regime, we don't have direct carbon shipments from Yemen, so we were screening 100 per cent of cargo coming through ports like Dubai for the immediate days that follow. We have now instituted the kind of protocols that are being followed around the world for screening arrangements.
So yes it has changed levels of security, but that's the appropriate response. Turning our back on free trade is not the appropriate response.
CLINTON: I agree completely. 



PM: I'm joined here today by Jenny Macklin in her capacity as Minister for Indigenous Affairs, and by my colleague Robert McClelland the Attorney General, and we're here today to make an announcement related to the commitment of the Government to acknowledge the special place of our first peoples in the Australian constitution.
Can I start today by saying now is the right time to take the next step and to recognise in the Australian constitution the first peoples of our nation; now's the right time to take that next step to build trust and respect, and we certainly believe that constitutional recognition is an important step to building trust and respect, it's an important step to building and acknowledging that the first peoples of our nation have a unique and special place in our nation.
As we all know the Australian constitution is the foundation document of our system of government, but currently it fails to recognise Indigenous Australians. The national apology to Indigenous Australians, in particular the stolen generations, helped build respect between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians. It helped generate the trust we need for closing the gap. When driving a national effort to close the gap in life expectancy and life opportunities between Indigenous and non indigenous Australians, a great deal of work is happening in early education, health, jobs, remote housing and services, governance and infrastructure, but more dollars are not enough. We came to office determined to reform the way dollars are used and determined to leverage them for long-term outcomes, ways that transform individual lives, family lives and the lives of communities, by rebuilding the positive social and economic norms that underpin daily life.
We came to government also knowing that change was needed on an emotional level, as well as a practical level. The recognition of Indigenous Australians, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, in the Australian constitution is another step, the next step in that journey. But of course, without the support of the majority of Australians in the majority of States, constitutional recognition cannot succeed. I'm pleased that we are starting the active work on this process of constitutional recognition with bipartisan and wide-spread support in the Australian Parliament. Of course, Prime Minister John Howard made a landmark address about this very matter to the Sydney Institute in 2007. Tony Abbott, the Opposition Leader, supports constitutional recognition, as John Howard did in 2007. The Australian Greens have expressed their support for such a referendum, as have the Independents in the House of Representatives, Rob Oakshott, Tony Windsor and Andrew Wilkie.
Now this broad-based support in the Australian Parliament gives us a rare opportunity in the live of our nation. Referendums are rarely carried and those that face Parliamentary opposition have far less of a chance. Support this widespread across the Parliament means we have a once in a fifty year opportunity for our country.
I'm certain that if this referendum is not successful there will not be another like it. So, to build the support necessary the Government will move to establish an expert panel by the end of the year, to progress the recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in the constitution. This expert panel will include Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians, it will include community leaders, constitutional experts and Members of Parliament. It will lead a national discussion and broad consultation in 2011 to build consensus about the recognition of Indigenous peoples in the constitution. This expert body will work closely with organisations with expertise and history of engagement on this issue, and that includes the Australian Human Rights Commission, the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples and Reconciliation Australia.
The panel will be asked to consider how best to progress constitutional recognition of Indigenous peoples and provide the best possible option on the nature of the amendment which could be put to the Australian people at a referendum.
Now, I'm certain the work of this body will give the referendum every chance of success. We will ask the expert panel to work throughout 2011 and to report to the Government by the end of 2011, but I do want to stress today the conversation that this expert panel leads is a conversation that needs to involve all Australians and we will be looking forward to their input. I'll turn now to Jenny Macklin for some comments.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much Prime Minister. This is a very significant day, particularly for our Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. For some time, Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples have been calling for the recognition that they deserve in our Constitution. Today, we see that going that step further.
Our Government recognises that we need mutual respect if we're to close the gap, and the Government's taken a number of steps to build that mutual respect. Of course, the National Apology was a very, very significant part of that journey. We also indicated our support for the United Nations' Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. We've moved to support the establishment of the National Congress of Australia's first peoples, and we've also supported, financially, the establishment of the Healing Foundation to make sure that we can financially support different projects around Australia to help Indigenous Australians heal. These measures are very significant, individually and together.
The next step on this journey is to see the recognition of our first peoples in the Constitution. As we indicated in the election campaign, we are about to establish an expert panel to facilitate the discussion that needs to take place with the Australian people about the nature of this constitutional change. We're releasing today the draft terms of reference for that expert panel and we're calling on Australians to come forward with their suggestions as to who might usefully contribute to this expert panel.
As the Prime Minister has indicated, the work of the expert panel will be very important in building a consensus for change to our Constitution. It is the case that Constitutional change is difficult, but we are very optimistic that this change can be brought about through good will, and that's the job of the expert panel - to build that consensus, to build the agreement across the political spectrum and across this very big country of ours. So this is a very significant day, a very significant step forward in that journey that we began with the apology.
MINISTER MCCLELLAND: Thank you. yes, as the Prime Minister said, the Constitution is our foundational document so therefore any amendments, obviously, are not taken lightly.
The expert panel, however, will enable the opportunity to obtain advice, not only advice and also consultation with the community, the Indigenous community and from the broader community, but as the Prime Minister indicted, advice from experts, including obviously, constitutional lawyers.
In this way the community can be assured that that foundational document, our constitution, that also contains the various checks and balances and safeguards, will be, that any amendments will be consistent, entirely consistent and appropriate given our constitutional framework, that will be an important thing.
As the Prime Minster indicated, and Jenny Macklin indicated, referendums aren't easy. There have been forty-four in Australia - only eight have been successful. But one of those which was successful was the 1967 referendum to recognise Indigenous Australians, that had some ninety per cent of Australians supporting it. So with the historic opportunity, with bipartisan support, with goodwill, with consultation and appropriate advice, we are confident that this presents an historic opportunity for Australians. Thank you.
PM: Right, we're happy to take questions. Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, obviously the work of the body will be consultative work. There will be costs associated with the referendum, that's right. The Government is also committed to a referendum on the recognition of local government, so we will, as part of this process, also be working- well, not this process, this process will be dealing with the referendum about recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait islander peoples in our constitution.
During the first six months of next year we'll also be working through the process about the local government referendum, and questions of cost can be dealt with at that point.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you anticipate holding the referendum at the next federal election in 2013 because of the consultative process, or is it still possible that it could happen in 2012?
PM: We are expressly leaving options open as to whether it is held with or before the next election.
JOURNALIST: What sort of options, I mean, what sort of changes to the constitution? I mean, it says in the release that we've got here that there are various ways it could be altered. What are some of the things that you're looking at?
PM: I think it's really important that we don't pre-judge this process. That's the very reason for having it, and the very reason for having it and bringing together this group in the form that we've specified - representatives of the parliament, representatives of Indigenous Australians, and experts - is to maximise understanding, agreement and consequently prospects of success for the referendum proposition, so I don't think it would be wise for us to be engaged in, you know, shooting the breeze about what this referendum proposition may contain. It needs this process to maximise the prospect of success, and it should be a conversation that all Australians involve themselves in, but we fundamentally believe and gave this commitment at the last election to have this process of change, that now's the right time in Australia's history to take this next step forward, this next step to build trust and respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Yes? That's alright, you're allowed to, you know.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) do you therefore envisage a, something like the human rights consultation that Frank Brennan led with town hall meetings, these sorts of things? Will it go to that level? How much do you anticipate that would cost (inaudible)
PM: Look, to a great extent how this body will work will in fact be in its own hands, so that it can define processes which best engage the Australian community and best build constituencies of support for the referendum, but I'll also turn to Jenny Macklin for some details on the working of the body.
MINISTER MACKLIN: Thanks very much, Prime Minister. I think that question is very important because if this question is to succeed we do need wide ranging support. We know it will be important for the expert panel to get out and discuss the issues with people right across Australia, but we also know that there are other groups who have experience on this question, like Reconciliation Australia, the Australian Human Rights Commission, the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples, they themselves are also wanting to participate in this discussion and I'm sure there will be many others, so we want to encourage that debate and discussion in as many different forums as possible.
JOURNALIST: How many people do you think will be on the panel?
MINISTER MACKLIN: That too is something that we want to discuss over the next few weeks with all the interested parties, so the Prime Minister is today writing to the leaders, to the Leader of the Opposition and the leader of the Greens, and the Independent Members of Parliament, inviting them to participate. We're also going to discuss the membership with the main Indigenous organisations that I've just mentioned. We'll also discuss it with other community leaders over the next few weeks. We hope to have the panel established by the end of this calendar year.
JOURNALIST: If this is passed, what sort of impact will this have on the lives of Indigenous Australians, like you mentioned six or seven (inaudible) - what would happen with this one?
MINISTER MACKLIN: Well I think that's why both the Prime Minister and the Attorney and I are all emphasising the critical role of respect, if we're to close the gap. We understand how critical it is if we're to close the gap, that we put the investment in that's needed, into health and education, supporting people to get a job, having a decent home to live in. But we also know how critical it is that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are respected, that they respect themselves, that their place in Australia is written into our Constitution, and understood to be that special place that I think so many of us understand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say that, what would you say to those that look at this as a token gesture?
PM: We are progressing two agendas here, and as Jenny Macklin has just said, they need to be done together. I think, frankly, in the Australian debate for too long there's been some sense that there's a false divide between working practically and working to generate trust. I think these two things go together, and what the apology to the stolen generation certainly reinforced in me, and I believe it reinforced in the life of our nation, is that by taking a step to put out an arm of friendship and treat people with respect builds trust so that the very practical things you then want to do - about getting a job, having a home, appropriate health services, kids in school - can work better because there is that sense of trust and respect.
I think we all know in our own lives that to make a life, of course, you have to have physical things around you and services that you can rely on, but to make a life you too have to feel that you are somehow recognised and respected. That's inherit in how we understand our own way of being. I think it's inherit in how we've got to move with Indigenous Australia so we make a real difference in the lives of Indigenous Australians and do the things we want to, like close the gap on life expectancy.
JOURNALIST: PM, just on another matter, your meeting with Hillary Clinton. How did that go? Could you characterise that for us, and also looking forward to your trip overseas?
PM: With Hillary Clinton, I did have a good day in Melbourne yesterday, and I think Melbourne was showing a very good face to the world. I had the opportunity to spend some social time with Hillary, having lunch together, and very much enjoyed that.
Of course, the formal talks are proceeding today, involving our Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence, and both Secretary of State Clinton and Secretary of Defence Gates, so those formal talks are in train, but I did have the opportunity for a wide-ranging conversation with Hillary when we had the opportunity to walk through Melbourne and have lunch afterwards, and then of course I hosted the dinner at Government House last night.
The essence of the security dialogue that will be happening today - Afghanistan a big part of it, our role and our security dialogue about our region of the world, the Asia-Pacific, and the fact that the US is increasingly engaged in the Asia-Pacific. There is dialogue on some of the new challenges we face in this age - space junk, cyber security threats and the like.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) US and Australia have different positions on dealing with Fiji. Is that something that's going to be discussed? Is that a problem?
PM: When it comes to Fiji, we obviously support pressure being maintained so that there are democratic elections in Fiji. The Australian Government is very sceptical that the elections which are supposed to be held in 2014 will actually occur. It's important to us, to the US, to the world generally, that we keep working together to maximise pressure on Fiji to give the Fijian people the appropriate opportunity to go out, exercise a vote and pick their government.
So, we'll be collaborating and discussing these questions with the US and more generally. Fiji continues to be a major issue of concern for me, for the Government, in our region, and we want to work with others to keep pressure on so elections do happen for the people of Fiji.
JOURNALIST: Would you consider adopting a more US approach so you have a direct (inaudible)
PM: I think the best thing is for us to be discussing how we can best work together so that we maximise the pressure on Fiji.
OK, thank you.



PM: Well, I am glad to be here in Seoul, too, to have joined you all today, but most particularly, of course, I have had the opportunity to meet the President of Korea. We have discussed the strong friendship between our two countries. We have discussed our mutual desire to rapidly conclude the Free Trade Agreement which has been negotiated between Korea and Australia.
Trade means jobs. The Free Trade Agreement will be good for Australia. It will be good for Korea and we have discussed this afternoon working to bring that Free Trade Agreement to conclusion.
I also congratulated the President of Korea on his leadership in hosting this meeting of the G20. The meeting which will be conducted over the next two days, I believe, is shaping up to be very successful event. Of course, Australia and particularly Kevin Rudd worked hard to ensure that the G20 was created to guide the worlds' response to the global financial crisis and to become a standing part of the way that the world does business and the G20 has already some significant achievements.
When the G20 met as the global financial crisis unfolded, in Washington there was agreement about financial sector reform - so important as the global financial crisis was engulfing the world. In London there was agreement to coordinated stimulate fiscal stimulus: US$5 trillion to support economic activity and to support jobs around the world as the world confronted the global financial crisis. And in Pittsburg the G20 worked to get a response to drive the global recovery.
Here in Seoul we will be building on this earlier work and taking it forward. I am very pleased that here in Seoul we will finalise the reforms to the International Monetary Fund. Australia has worked hard on these reforms. We co-chaired the working group with South Africa and in my discussions with the President of Korea, just a little bit earlier today, he did thank Australia for the work that we have done on IMF reform.
We will also see the delivery of the G20 framework for driving global growth as the global economy recovers. There is a recognition that the global economy is still fragile. As the economists would say, the risks are on the down side, so we need to keep working together to keep driving the global economy, to keep lifting growth and lifting jobs as a result.
Thirdly, this meeting will deliver the Basel III financial stability rules, and once again Australia has worked hard on these rules and making the case about what is different in Australia. Of course, we have a strong banking sector and we have been keen as discussions have unfolded to have the world understand that given the different circumstances in our economy, different circumstances of our banking sector, that Australia did need some special consideration as these rules were being put together.
Because we have worked hard to secure that special consideration, I can confidently say that there is nothing that will happen at the G20 or as a result of these financial rules that justifies an Australian bank putting up interest rates above and beyond movements by the Reserve Bank. There is nothing stemming from the G20 that justifies that.
Can I just say that I look forward to the meetings over the next two days. I did also want to highlight the fact that the leadership of the President of Korea development matters will also be discussed at this G20. I believe that that is significant. The global financial crisis has literally thrown tens of millions of people into poverty. I believe it is appropriate that at this G20, in a country that is so successful in making the journey from being a developing country to a developed country, that we have the matter of development on the agenda and I welcome the fact that the President of Korea has so squarely put it there.
I'm very happy take questions.
Yes, Bonge?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you believe, in light of the ANZ following the bad example of the Commonwealth that you should continue to argue strongly for Australian banks to receive favourable treatment from the Basel framework?
PM: I think we've got to be very clear here about what we're arguing for. In these Basel III rules and this framework there are suggestions about the amount of government bonds and government debt that banks should hold.
Australia is in a different position to other countries around the world. By comparison with other countries we have low debt, so these rules don't work for us. We've made that case, and we've made that case because we don't want Australian banks to have any excuse from these new financial rules to excuse their arrogant conduct in putting up interest rates above and beyond Reserve Bank movements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the ANZ scrapped its exit fees, though, so no credit there?
PM: I think, looking at the moves of the ANZ today, the Australian people will be angry. I think the ANZ Bank will experience the same degree of anger that the Commonwealth Bank did as a result of its conduct on Melbourne Cup Day.
The Government has already acted to deliver proposals that will increase competition in our banking sector. We already acted to deliver a crack-down on unfair mortgage exit fees. We've already acted to support second-tier lenders through our Residential Mortgage Backed Securities.
As is very publically known, the Government is working on a further package of reforms and no-one should doubt our resolve to deliver those reforms, and deliver increased competition in the banking sector.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you think that further package, though, will prevent the sort of action we've from the ANZ today and the Commonwealth before, or will the Government still be relatively powerless when it comes to the crunch?
PM: The purpose of competition reforms is to empower consumers to walk away from their bank and go and get a better deal.
Mark?
JOURNALIST: Isn't the problem, Ms Gillard, though, exemplified by the ANZ today, that now you have two of the big four essentially acting in the same way, so that if you move from one bank, you go to another, it does the same thing? How are you as Prime Minister and how is the Government going to encourage people to use the other players in the market, the smaller players, and to assure them that they're as safe as the big four?
PM: Bit of history, and a bit of the future - the history, obviously, is we moved when the global financial crisis threatened to guarantee bank deposits. We did that in the interests of Australians. It was them that we were concerned about. We also have supported second-tier lenders with our Residential Mortgage Backed Securities arrangements, but you are right - the impact of the global financial crisis has been that there has tended to be a move from second-tier lenders to the big four. We want, as the global economy recovers, and certainly as our economy recovers, to foster increased competition in the mortgage market.
Now, before the global financial crisis we were seeing more competition in the mortgage market. There were lenders, for example, like Wizard, that were out there pushing hard in the mortgage market. We want to see increased competition. Therefore, reforms that enable increased competition - good for consumers - enable them to shop around.
Yep, Phil?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard, do you consider ANZ's action of raising the rates by 39 basis points then abolishing their exit fees, do you consider it a sign they're not scared to see customers walking away?
PM: I believe Australians are angry. I believe that Australians are angry enough that they will be looking again at the conduct of their own bank and judging what they should do next based on that conduct.
Mal Farr?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just to Devil's advocate a bit, how can you turn up at a conference which is going to deal with extraordinary economic features and yet say that the banks are not justified in taking extraordinary steps themselves?
PM: Once again, bit of history, bit of the future - we need to remember that when the global financial crisis swept the world, of course there was a contagion running through global markets that we feared the impact on Australia, but we also came to that global financial crisis with good regulation and with the big four banks in a strong position. Out of the world's top 100 banks, our four banks are in the top 10.
In those circumstances, even as the global financial crisis has unfolded and thanks in part to the decisive action taken by the Australian Government to keep our economy going, the banks have emerged from this difficult period still profitable, still strong, so in those circumstances I am entirely justified to say to the banks that there is no excuse for the sorts of interest rates movements we've now seen from the Commonwealth Bank and the ANZ Bank.
The solution is to keep fostering competition. We have already acted and we will continue to act and no-one should doubt our resolve to act.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, does your anger and thirst for competition extend to looking at the four pillars?
PM: The issue here is where do consumers go? People with mortgages, how do they get a loan? On what terms and conditions do they get a loan? How do they end up locked in to that loan? That's what the exit fees debate is about, locking you in so you can't go and shop around.
We want to foster competition. Fostering competition gives people choice of lenders, so I don't really think the dialogue or terminology of the four pillars helps this debate. We are talking about people having choice. When there are active second-tier lenders, people have choice.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on G20, the comments this week of the German Finance Minister attacking the Fed and their movements on quantitative easing, China, Brazil, Russia - what do you believe? Do you agree with what the Fed has done? Is that part of deliberately devaluing their currency, and how will that play into what you've got ahead over the next two days?
PM: I think there will be a great deal of discussion about currency questions. There will be a great deal of discussion about competitive currency devaluations as a new form of protectionism. I believe that that will be something that's very much on the agenda at this G20.
What we need to emerge with is an agreement that helps balance global growth. We are all aware of current imbalances. We have nations that need to save more and nations that need to spend more, and in order, in part, to support that balancing, we need to move over time to market-based mechanisms for currency fluctuations. That's the Australian position. It's the position we took at the G20 Finance Ministers meeting. It's the position we will take at this G20 meeting.
Clearly, questions of currency devaluation and quantitative easing will be on the agenda at this G20 meeting.
Yes, Mark?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you're here, essentially one of the things you're doing is arguing to help the Australian banks in terms of the Basel III, yet the banks, of course, aren't exactly doing you any favours. Will you in all future circumstances put the interests of the Australian banks at the front of the queue in meetings like this, or would you ever have cause to reconsider?
PM: There's only one thing at the front of the queue and that's the interest of the Australian people. It's in the interests of the Australian people to not have rules that don't suit our economy imposed on our economy. That's why we're having the argument - national interest, interest of the Australian people.
Because we will succeed in that argument, there is no reason stemming from the G20 or its financial rules that would help a bank in Australia justify an interest rate movement above and beyond movements by the Reserve Bank, so we've got to be very clear here - actions are in the interests of the Australian people. Guaranteeing deposits in the teeth of the global financial crisis was about Australians and their savings and the things that they rely on to go about their ordinary lives. We did that in the interests of Australians.
Our banks went into the global financial crisis strong, and they've come out strong, and what that means is that there is not a justification for moving interest rates above and beyond Reserve Bank interest rate movements and there's certainly no excuse arising from the G20.
Mark?
JOURNALIST: Is it time to hauls these bankers in for a meeting with you and the Treasurer and to remind them of what you see as their social responsibilities and their responsibilities to ordinary Australians, mortgage holders?
PM: I think the best thing to do is to determine and deliver the package that we are working on. The Treasurer has been working for a number of months to add to the earlier measures we have already delivered to increase completion.
So, we have already acted to increase competition. We will act again. I am very clearly saying no-one should doubt our resolve on the question.
Sorry, Kieran? We don't want to discriminate against Kieran.
JOURNALIST: Are you expecting a negative reaction from the United States after you rejected Tim Geithner's call for indicative guidelines on surpluses to correct the global trade imbalance?
PM: No. Once again, Australia is in a different position. With our current account deficit, obviously it is explained by us being a resource economy enjoying very large capital inflows. We are therefore in a different position from other nations whose current account deficits would be explained by excess consumption and too little savings, so we were right to make that case and we'll continue to make it.
I'm not expecting any reaction to that other than understanding. It's quite a simple proposition.
Dennis?
JOURNALIST: Just on the Korean free trade, would you be encouraged if the US and Korea finally settled their first agreement, and would that give you encouragement for an Australian FTA with Korea?
PM: As I understand it, President Obama is very enthusiastic to conclude the US-Korea free trade agreement. That's good for the US.
We want an agreement that's good for Australia. My mission here and my mission as I travel overseas generally is to say that free trade is good for trading economies like our own. We're competitive, we're a trading economy. Free trade is good for us, it's good for jobs. That's why I'll put the case.
Apart from the Korea-Australia free trade agreement that I do want to see come to conclusion, we should anticipate here at the G20, of course, that there will be broader discussions about trade and particularly putting urgency and ambition into the Doha round.
JOURNALIST: Did you talk about any timing for the Korea-Australia FTA in the talks with the President today?
PM: We talked about our shared desire to bring this to conclusion expeditiously.
JOURNALIST: What are your plans for Remembrance Day tomorrow?
PM: The program will be given to you, but tomorrow I will be laying a wreath in remembrance of fallen soldiers. I will have the opportunity to meet some Australian veterans who are here in Korean who served in Korea, so I'm very much looking forward not only to having the opportunity to lay the wreath as we mark remembrance day, but to also meet those individual Australians and to hear their life stories, which I'm sure are going to be quite remarkable ones.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Today is Remembrance Day, it's the day when we remember and honour Australian war dead, Australians who served in so many conflicts and lost their lives. Today I've had the opportunity to lay a wreath here in Korea, accompanied by a Korean war veteran, Jack. We've had an opportunity to mark Remembrance Day and particularly to honour the service of the more than 17,000 Australians who fought for democracy here in Korea. We lost 340. 281 of our Korean war dead are buried in Korea.
It's been a very special way of marking Remembrance Day and to each of the veterans who has made the journey and joined us today, I say a big thank you for sharing your morning tea with me, for sharing an insight into their lives and an insight into their war stories.
From marking Remembrance Day I will now move to two bilateral discussions, I will be meeting with the Prime Minister of Canada, I will be meeting with the President of Russia and I will also be addressing the G20 Business Summit. And of course I want to take this opportunity as I move to those bilateral discussions and discussions with members of the business community to remind why the G20 is important and why we are here.
It's about strengthening global growth, it's about lifting the number of jobs, it's about making sure our financial institutions and financial markets are strong and open and can meet the test. That is what is under discussion here at the G20. We know that the consequences of high rates of unemployment, weak global growth, risks in financial markets end up hurting people around the world. It tells in joblessness, which ultimately tells in the loss of homes, in often the loss of families, because of family break ups. It tells as people are thrown into poverty around the world. That is what we are here working through at the G20.
In the course of those discussions we will be talking about currency questions and Australia believes that currency should be market based, that is our position, that is what our economy has and it has served our economy well. So the agenda will include discussion on currency questions, but it is broader than that, currency is one part of a broader agenda about how we ensure that we move beyond today's stage for the global economy to a stage of greater growth, more jobs, healthier financial markets around the world. I'll turn now to the Treasurer for some comments and we'll take questions.
TREASURER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. It was also a privilege to meet with our veterans today on Remembrance Day, to be with them and to share with them their memories about this country, and to talk with them about why they fought.
It's also an important day when we're looking at the G20 agenda. There's two years of pretty solid work which is coming to fruition in this meeting over the next 24 - 36 hours. There's fundamental reform as the Prime Minister said, of the global economy. We need structural reforms to lift growth, not to shift growth - fundamental reform of the International Monetary Fund. And also fundamental reform of the international financial system to prevent financial crises in the future, which have caused so much damage and such high unemployment, particularly in developed economies around the world.
Today we've had the unemployment figures out at home. There have been 375,000 jobs created in Australia in the last year and over 600,000 jobs created since the Government was first elected. That is a remarkable performance for a developed economy, given that we've just been through a global financial crisis and a global recession.
What that reminds us of as we go through discussions in the next 24 hours, 36 hours, is the importance of continuing to grow the economy because if we can keep people in work everybody benefits, and that's why it's important we put in place the sort of reforms that have been talked about at the G20.
I'd also like to say in terms of the reform of the financial system, that there will be absolutely no fig leaf or no excuse for any domestic bank to blame any interest-rate rises on the decisions that are taken here. The decisions that are taken here will be decision which will safeguard customers, which will safeguard deposits, which will make sure our banking system is in good nick both globally and domestically. Because what we learnt in the global financial crisis is that no country is immune when we have a global financial crisis and a global recession.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister if I could ask you a question. Is the asylum seeker decision by the High Court a victory for human rights in Australia?
PM: I have been advised of the decision of the High Court today, I haven't had the opportunity to study it in detail. The Minister for Immigration has of course responded to this in Australia and indicated that the government will take legal advice on the implications of the decision and respond in due course. We process asylum seeker claims in order to do the right thing, to ascertain who is a refugee to whom we have an obligation under the Refugee Convention and as a matter of opening our hearts to people in real need and who does not have a valid claim and should be returned to their own country. But we'll study the decision, get appropriate legal advice, the Minister for Immigration has indicated that in his press conference in Australia today, he's meeting with the Solicitor-General this afternoon and will be able to make a full statement.
JOURNALIST: So is it advice to get around the decision?
PM: When you get a High Court decision you would anticipate the government would meet with its legal advisers to fully understand all of its implications. Absolutely standard, due process and we'll do it.
JOURNALIST: Would you legislate if necessary to preserve the status quo?
PM: Well, let's not get ahead of ourselves, we've got a High Court decision, the government will take legal advice on it, the Minister will meet with the Solicitor-General and when we understand all of its implications we'll respond in full.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask about banks Ms Gillard.
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: It's not a a little bit ironic that you're here with Mr Swan arguing the case for our banks to not be included in Basel III measures, whilst they're at home sticking you in the back with interest rates?
PM: I answered this question yesterday and I'll turn to Wayne for a comment as well. I answered this question yesterday and let me say again, we need to be very clear about what we are doing here at the G20, we're talking about a framework to lift global growth, that's good for Australia, it's good for working Australians, it's good for their families.
We're talking about a framework here that through lifting global growth, continues to create jobs around the world. We are seeing strong employment growth at home, but there are many millions of people around the world desperate for work who do not have it now, with all the potential long term social consequences that that spells out. We're here making sure that there is a strength in our financial system which means we do not see a global financial crisis occur again.
That's good for Australians, good for their jobs, good for our economy because our economy was not immune when the world went through a global financial crisis. That's what we're doing here, good for Australians, good for the global economy, good for trade, good for jobs. I'll turn to Wayne for a direct comment as well.
TREASURER: Yes, the Basel III arrangements aren't just about banks. They're about securing future prosperity. They're about a sound financial system. They are about making sure we have a flow of credit in our economy. So it's not about the banks.
These arrangements are put in place to secure the safety and the security of our national and international financial system and, of course the banks are not being exempted. But what we have secured is a recognition that there are differences in the Australian banking system and one size doesn't always fit all. So there will be some differences in the application of those rules in Australia which recognise unique features of the Australian system.
So they're not being exempted, but also it is very clear that these new rules will work for people because they all work to protect the security of the financial system, because when it was threatened, the flow of credit to Australia two years ago was in doubt. That's why the Government moved to put in place the bank guarantees, not for the banks, for the Australian people. And because we did that we've had the economic growth that you've seen in Australia, which is unique in the developed world. We wouldn't be talking about 375,000 jobs in Australia in the past year if we hadn't made those moves to secure our financial system.
PM: We'll take two at the front then we'll have to go, going to be quick.
JOURNALIST: Mr Swan, in the Wall Street Journal you had an article with Timothy Geithner and Tharman Shanmugaratnam, and you said that the cost of borrowing for banks will be higher for a time. Aren't you agreeing with what the banks have argued about their own circumstances?
TREASURER: No I'm not. The fact is this; our banks are achieving record profitability. It is true that in some sections of their business they are facing increased costs, but their attempt to put up rates over and above the cash rate is not justified because their net interest margins are back to what they were pre-crisis.
Yes, there will be swings and roundabouts in funding costs, but the fact is the Reserve Bank data is in, it rejects completely the claim by the banks that their funding costs should be passed through in addition to Reserve Bank rises because their net interest margins are back to pre-crisis levels. Within that, of course there will be changes in the cost of funding, but overall their net interest margins are back to pre-crisis levels, thereby rejecting the central premise of the claim that they have made.
PM: Ok, last question quickly, I don't want to keep the Canadian Prime Minister waiting.
JOURNALIST: What does Australia see as the markers of success from this G20 meeting? What decisions have to be made to ensure this meeting is a success and on currency particularly?
PM: Well, I'll answer that and then turn to Wayne as well. First and foremost we want to see the endorsement of the new global framework to drive growth, not just the endorsement of the words, but the determination to deliver the framework to drive growth. Growth equals jobs, it's good for Australia, it's good for the world.
Second, we want to see the absolute delivery of the IMF reforms, which we have worked on so long and so hard co-chairing the working group with South Africa, these are very important changes to rebalance voting shares in the IMF between the developed and developing world.
Third, we want to see the adoption of the new financial rules that Wayne has just been talking about, they are important for global financial stability, so we do not find ourselves in the future back in a global financial crisis. Yes, in the course if that we've got to make a case for some things that are different about the Australian economy and we will do so.
Finally, can I say I think it's important that at this G20 we've got development on the agenda, that's been put there by the President of Korea and as I said yesterday I believe that that is important for the G20 agenda and for G20 work going forward. So, when you work through the list, we've all got a shared interest in global growth, in jobs, in financial stability.
I think it's important that development has come on the agenda and finally we do want to see new impetus for the urgency and level of ambition in the Doha round. Trade is good for jobs, trade is good for Australia and that's what we're here doing at the G20. I'll turn to Wayne for a comment.
TREASURER: Well, just in addition to that, reducing global financial imbalances is very important to the framework for strong balanced and sustained growth and therefore, I think, a re-affirming if you like of the commitment that was made at the Finance Ministers' Meetings that countries not engage in competitive devaluations, for countries to work on structural reform including currency reform. The overall commitment to market-based exchange rate regimes. That's important, and I think that's what the Finance Ministers have put forward for the Leaders to consider this weekend. 



PM: The G20 Summit has obviously come to an end and I am very pleased by the outcomes of the Summit. I was pleased to be here representing Australia, and I'm very pleased at what has been achieved. The G20 was the forum that made leaders work together so that the world didn't tip from a global recession into a global depression.
What has been achieved here at Seoul is building on what been achieved at earlier G20 meetings.
At the Washington Summit, there was the comprehensive plan for financial sector reform to stabilize the financial system following the global financial crisis.
In London, there was the agreement for coordinated fiscal stimulus to inject growth into the global economy and to support jobs. Then, of course, there was also the agreement to inject $1.1 trillion into the IMF to restore credit flows.
In Pittsburgh, the dialogue of the G20 moved to global recovery. Now, this coordinated action before Seoul, in stopping a great depression, has saved 21 million jobs around the world. That's the estimate of the International Labour Organisation. That means the number of jobs that have been saved around the world is almost equal to the total population of Australia.
We came here to Seoul to build on those foundations, and particularly focus on global growth and jobs for the future and that is what has been done at this Summit.
When I came here, I came with three specific objectives. First, to deliver Basel III, the new financial stability rules, and that has been achieved. This is good for consumers, to make sure that the financial system is stable. It's a prudent measure to prevent in the future the kind of financial crisis we saw in the past with the Global Financial Crisis. I came here to ensure that these rules were delivered in a way which did not justifyAustralian banks talking about this Summit, and increasing interest rates as a result of it, and that has been achieved. What has happened here in Seoul does not justify interest rate movements by Australian banks, above and beyond the Reserve Bank increases.
Second, I came here to ensure that the reform of the International Monetary Fund that Australia had worked on so hard was delivered. We had co-chaired a Working Group with South Africa. This matter had been in deadlock and now it is resolved. This means that the resources of the IMF are increased to enable it to go about its work and the voting shares between developed and developing countries have been allocated more fairly. This resolves any questions of legitimacy about the structures of the IMF and now our attention can turn to the IMF going about its work and, particularly, going about its work so it acts early, before countries fall into crisis, not afterwards.
Third, I came here to support the global framework which is about global growth and about jobs. It is about undertaking hard reform to economies, including our own. It is about moving towards more market-based exchange rates. And we have outlined here in Seoul a clear path, in 2011, to addressing global imbalances. That won't happen overnight, but the reform work is underway.
In addition to these three direct measures from the Seoul Summit, I came here to advocate for increased trade. Trade is good for Australia, it's good for jobs and I am very pleased that the Summit communiqu makes it clear that Leaders here are committed to bringing the Doha Trade Round to the end-game in 2011; to getting the job done with a level of ambition.
I am also very pleased that here in Seoul we have reaffirmed our commitment to not go down the path of protectionist measures. As I've indicated in my earlier statements at this Summit, I think that that will be hard. I think that there will be protectionist sentiment abroad in many nations. I am very pleased that global leaders here in Seoul have re-confirmed their commitment not to succumb to protectionism that would hurt the world, hurt global growth and hurt Australia. We are a trading nation, and trade means jobs.
I am also very pleased, that here in Korea, under the leadership of President Lee, the G20 had a good discussion about development. There's no better place to do it than here in Korea, which is such a shining example of what development can bring to a nation, and the prosperity of its people.
All in all, here in Seoul what we have worked on is ensuring we've got a stronger global economy. We've got stable financial markets. We've got a commitment to sustained growth. We've got a commitment to increased trade. All of these things are good for Australians. Global growth is about Australian jobs. Financial stability, it's about security for the future. Increased trade, that's about Australian jobs. And correcting the imbalances in the global economy is about sustaining growth over time. Good for the world, good for Australia.
So I'm very pleased with the outcomes here, and I'm very pleased to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how have you saved the banks from facing higher costs, and justification for raising rates, and what do you think of the past two rises by last two big banks
PM: To take your second question, first, I would say to the two banks that have moved their interest rates today that there is absolutely no justification for doing do. Australians will judge them very harshly for it. I believe people who bank with those banks will judge them very harshly for it. We are determined to increase competition in the banking sector. We've already made some moves to increase competition and we will make more. And the message to banking customers is, I can understand that you're not happy with the conduct of the banks, and we will be facilitating your ability to go out and get a better deal. So, very very critical of today's move by the two banks on interest rates.
Here in Seoul, in terms of the Basel III rules, there were obviously some questions about how these rules would be implemented for economies like our own, where we have low government debt, and consequently the rules about holding debt and holding bonds were not going to work well in Australia. And through implementation processes, we will be able to deal with that matter, so there isn't an impact of these rules on our banks in the same way that there will be an impact in other economies where there is more government debt.
JOURNALIST: On the review of countries' current accounts. The timetable has been rather stretched out compared to the earlier focus, is that right?
PM: The timetable is that the matter will be discussed in the first half of 2011, and that the first assessment will be done during the period in which France is chairing the G20, that is, in the next twelve months. This has been a step forward. This has obviously been a difficult issue in the lead up to the Summit and at the Summit itself. It's to seek better balance between those countries that consume and spend too much and those countries that save too much. Adjustment isn't easy, but we are committed here, through this communiqu, to an assessment process of current account deficits and surpluses and that assessment will happen in the next twelve months.
JOURNALIST: Given the rhetoric that is coming from the government in the last couple of weeks, do you feel, from the government's perspective, insulted by what (inaudible) that they continue to ignore you?
PM: At the end of the day, it's about making sure that the people who matter most to banks - their customers - have the most ability to make a choice and put pressure on. That's what we're determined to deliver and do.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how confident are you that this new commitment on Doha is going to be anything more than just another commitment to join the list of failed efforts.
PM: I can understand that scepticism, and you're right, there have been references in earlier G20 communiqus to injecting life into the Doha Round. But I would specifically point you to the fact that this commitment from Leaders talks about the end-game in 2011. Now, those words are deliberate and they are important. It is inevitable in negotiations that people keep a bit back, a bit in their pocket, until they think the deal is imminent. And then they get the last chip out of their pocket and put it on the table. By using the terminology "end-game", leaders are saying to their respective negotiators: 'Don't keep holding back, get it done now. Don't keep an offer that you were going to make in reserve. Put it on the table, get it done.'
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how do you assess the outcome on the so-called 'currency wars', and what's your assessment about the dynamics between the United States and China, on that issue, and more generally in the Summit.
PM: The US and China came into this Summit with different views about the best way through in the Summit; those view have been obviously worked through over the last day-and-a-half, and we have reached what I think is a good step forward. It does mean that there will be an assessment process of imbalances, and that assessment process will happen in the next twelve months. So, this has been a sensitive question, no doubt about it, and a way has been found through.
JOURNALIST: Is the language strong enough for your liking?
PM: Look, a way has been found through. My language has been about clear pathways and timelines, I didn't want to leave this Summit with 'diplomat-ese' - with greatest respect to those who assist us with writing the communiqus. I didn't want to leave this Summit with 'diplomat-ese' that had no sense of time in it. I used, when I spoke in the meeting itself, the language of clear pathways and timelines. There's a clear pathway, and there's a timeline; I'm satisfied with that.
JOURNALIST: What do you think about Doug Cameron's (inaudible)
PM: Well, Doug's just not right on that matter.
JOURNALIST: Can you tell us what you discussed with President Obama in your own meeting today?
PM: I've had the opportunity to have a couple of discussions with President Obama during the course of the Summit, here. I should say, I've also had the opportunity for a meeting with Prime Minister Cameron, I had the opportunity for a brief conversation with President Hu.
As you would be aware, the Summit is constructed so Leaders spend some time by themselves, and that has enabled me to meet a number of people that I hadn't had the opportunity to meet before, including President Obama. I anticipate when I meet President Obama tomorrow, we will be talking about the outcomes of this Seoul Summit. We will be talking about America's engagement in our region, following our very successful AUSMIN talks in Melbourne just last weekend. And we will be talking about the future strategy in Afghanistan, particularly given that the NATO Summit is in Lisbon next weekend.
Thank you.  


PM: I've just fresh from the family photo, so we've done that bit of the G20. The G20 meeting is still in progress, what happens here matters for Australian families. Big topics on the agenda of this G20 to which we will agree during the course of the meeting do matter for Australian families. Australian families need to know that the world's financial system is stable. When the global financial crisis hit and the world's financial system was not stable, that did have an impact on Australian families. So the financial stability reforms that will be agreed at this G20 meeting matter to Australians and their daily lives.
Second, what happens here matters for Australian families because global economic growth matters for Australian families; whether growth is balanced and can be sustained in the long-term. A growing global economy is good for the Australian economy, a growing global economy means Australian jobs and Australian prosperity.
And thirdly, what happens here matters for Australian families because we are a great trading nation. So what happens to free up trade, to increase trade, matters for Australian families because for Australian families, put very simply, trade equals jobs.
Each of these issues is under discussion at the G20 and it appears that agreement on these substantial areas of work will be reached.
Financial stability through new rules including the Basel III rules and reforms to the IMF, increased global growth through agreement to a new global framework to work on lifting growth and addressing imbalances between those countries that currently spend too much and those countries that currently save too much. Balanced global growth is in the interests of the world and in the interests of Australians because it means global growth can be higher and sustained.
And it appears the G20 will also agree to the conclusion of the Doha round to the end-game, this is a major set of trade negotiations that the world has been working on for a long period of time, now we are determined to move to the end-game, that's good for Australia, we're a trading nation and it's good for Australian jobs.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, yesterday it appeared that your written text in the speech you gave to the business summit was tougher and stronger (inaudible) than the speech you actually gave. Why did you soften your sentiments?
PM: Can I say what a load of nonsense. I had a written text, I went to the business summit, the format was a round table, so rather than read my way through many pages of a speech, I drew off it and extemporised as I went. I did that for all of the speech. I made sure that when I gave that speech, which effectively became an off the cuff speech drawing off the written speech, that I was very clear that the conduct of Australian banks in putting up interest rates above and beyond the Reserve Bank movement is unacceptable, it is of concern to the Australian community, and the Government is responding with competition measures. I made that very clear.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister 24 hours after the High Court's decision on asylum seekers, are we any closer to knowing whether there (inaudible) changes?
PM: I will work through that with the Minister for Immigration when I return to Australia.
JOURNALIST: He seems to be given an indication that they might be though, and courting the possibility of having to change the laws (inaudible)
PM: The Minister for Immigration's directly dealing with this matter back in Australia. He'll work through and make some recommendations about need for legislative change. I would just make this point - we are of course talking about Howard Government legislation. We now have the High Court decision and we need to assess its ramifications. It appears to me that in some of the media today there's a suggestion that somehow this High Court decision affects my plans for a regional protection framework and regional processing centre, it does not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister -
PM: Michelle and then I'll come to Malcolm.
JOURNALIST: You have spoken strongly about the danger of increasing protectionism, do you think that this is a serious imminent threat to the international economy?
PM: I think it's a medium term threat to the international economy, by that I think the measure is in years not months. I think it's a medium term threat, because there are many nations around the world that are struggling with high levels on unemployment. Fortunately in Australia, because of the special circumstances of our economy, because of the quick and decisive action of the government with the provision of economic stimulus, we are seeing unemployment rates that by world standards are not as high as other countries are dealing with. So our most recent unemployment rate 5.4 per cent, whereas for example the Americans are dealing with an unemployment rates of more than 9 per cent, so the medium term threat here is governments go through fiscal consolidation, which in the language of ordinary families in many parts of the world will mean cut backs to government services that they rely on. In those nations at the same time there will be persistently high unemployment levels and sluggish growth, I think in those circumstances in many countries around the world that will give rise to domestic calls for protectionism. Australia is in a different position, our economy is in a different position, but if a tide of protectionism broke out around the world that would ultimately be bad for us, we are a trading nation. Malcolm?
JOURNALIST: Are you saying there are no manifestations of re-emerging protectionism within Australian politics, I'm not talking about government, but (inaudible)
PM: I think that there is a debate in the Australian community about free trade, about whether it's good for us, I think we've had that debate, and will continue to have it, but I don't think that debate had sharply increased in tempo in Australia. My warning here at the G20, in terms of challenges that face G20 leaders in the medium term is that not in Australia, given our economic circumstances, but in other countries, sluggish growth, high unemployment, dramatic budget cut backs, that that in those countries is a recipe for rising protectionist sentiment and we can't afford to have it break out around the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister -
PM: Yes.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned that DFAT (inaudible) Congolese mining in Australia is based on a French investigation claims that he was (inaudible) with only 350 people in 1999.
PM: Look, I can't help you with that, I'll have a look at it and we'll get back to you with a comment.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, in your written speech yesterday you suggested that the (inaudible) banking could damage the wider Australian economy. Do you believe that there is a risk of economic problems arising from the bank's actions?
PM: What I said yesterday at the business summit was that domestically in Australia the economic debate is about banking and about the mortgage rate increases, about how Australian families rightly feel ripped off about that and about the need for increased competition building on the government's earlier competition reforms. I believe all of that is true. I believe the focus in Australia on banking means, of course, there is less debate about other things that are happening in the economy, where we are with unemployment, which once again if you compare with the US or the UK or so many countries around the world, we are in a different and better position and in other economic debates we are obviously having - a patchwork economy, different, growing different speeds of growth in different parts of the nation, so that was the force of my comment. The Government is obviously working on a further package of competition reforms, which I'll announce with the Treasurer next month.
JOURNALIST: But on Mark's question, do you believe that the actions of the banks are threatening Australia's good economic (inaudible)
PM: I think the actions of the banks are impacting on Australians and they rightly feel ripped off. I am not putting the case and I did not yesterday put the case that the actions of the banks in this case threaten, for example the unemployment rate. I'm not putting that case, but Australian working people, rightly feel ripped off by these interest rate increases, they're the wrong thing to do, the Government knows they're the wrong thing to do, we've already introduced competition reforms and we will go further. Kieran?
JOURNALIST: China has agreed to a form of words taking its currency to a more market basis to avoid a form of protectionism (inaudible).
PM: There is still some work happening on that question. I believe an agreement will be reached. We should just not what this process is about, it's called a mutual assessment process and it's about having a way of assessing imbalances in the global economy between countries. We want to emerge from this G20 meeting with the process agreed to and with a timeline agreed to, there is still work and discussion underway about the timeline. Thank you 


Yokohama, Japan 
PRESIDENT OBAMA: The United States does not have a closer or better ally than Australia. We are grateful for all the work that we do together. I expressed my personal thanks to the people of Australia through the Prime Minister for the enormous sacrifices that are being made in Afghanistan by Australian troops.
We, I think, are going to be discussing these issues further when we see each other at the Lisbon Summit, but obviously all of us here have an interest in bringing about a good outcome in that region that ensures our safety and security over the long term.
On the economic front, I have reiterated to the Prime Minister how important the Asia Pacific region is to our economy and to world economic growth. Australia is a central player in that economy, so we are going to continue to explore ways that we can work together to expand trade, expand investment, ensure that everybody is playing by the rules of the road in the region and co-operating effectively. The Trans-Pacific Partnership is a good example of the kind of collaboration between our two countries and I think we can expand opportunities for all people.
So I am just grateful to have this opportunity to speak with the Prime Minister, I have extended an invitation to her to visits the United States sometime early next year and we'll find a date and hopefully we can build on some of the discussions we've already had to further enhance our bilateral co-operation.
So Prime Minister, thank you and to your entire delegation for the good work that you've done and I look forward to seeing you in Washington.
PM: Thank you. If I could say to President Obama, we've had the opportunity to be at the G20 over the last few days and had the opportunity to have a few brief discussions there and we will see each other in Lisbon next weekend.
Our two countries are great mates, to use our terminology and as great mates we are continuing to work together in our region and beyond. We have had the opportunity to talk about Afghanistan and I do take this opportunity to pass on the condolences of the Australian people for the losses that you have suffered there. But we are working together there and will have time next weekend at Lisbon to talk about the transition strategy.
We have also had the opportunity to reflect on the discussions we had at AUSMIN about the American force posture review and the work that we are doing on new challenges like cyber security. And we've had the opportunity to talk about our engagement in the region there, the US engagement is strengthening through forums like the East Asia Summit and we are on the same page on trade, so we very much look forward to the discussions of the Trans-Pacific Partnership during the course of the APEC meetings.
So a very good opportunity to have a good discussion about the areas where our two countries are collaborating now and will in the future. Thank you.



PM: Today, obviously, has been the start of the APEC meeting. I'm very glad to be here at this important meeting of economies in our region. And APEC has, for two decades, been driving regional openness and prosperity. It's the kind of work that the G20 is now doing globally. The historical focus of APEC has been about promoting trade and investment in our region, and APEC has enjoyed some success. But there is still more to do to engage in economic liberalisation in our region. More to do on the trade front and more to do behind borders so that countries work on those regulatory questions that can end up making it difficult for businesses to invest and trade with each others' country. Now this is important for Australia because APEC economies account for two-thirds of Australia's two-way trade in goods. And one in five Australian jobs relates to trade. So that means if we can improve doing business with our region, if we can improve trade with our region, then we of course improve the prospects for Australian jobs.
APEC is now, following its trade successes, going to continue to be delivering to its goals on trade but it's also broadening its focus to these behind-the-border issues that can prevent business and investment. And this is really a question of very practical things. To give you some example, under the umbrella of APEC, Australia is leading better heavy vehicle safety standards. And Lindsay Fox, our own Lindsay Fox, is playing a role in this with a dream that you could drive one of the heavy vehicles that Lindsay Fox owns so many of, and go through the region and have the same safety standards - that is, not at every time when you are trying to engage in transport and logistics, hitting a different safety or regulatory regime.
There's the cooperation that's led to the lowering of mobile phone roaming costs. I think everyone can understand just as a matter of practicality, if we are going to facilitate trade and investment in the region, being able to move around the region, use your mobile phone, use it at reasonable costs, is very important. And there's the work that we're doing to enable Australian professionals, people like accountants, to go and work in other parts of the region, take their Australian qualifications and be recognised for their skills and ability and be able to start practice. So as this meeting works through, we will be talking about trade, we will be talking about these behind-the-border issues, we will of course be talking about what happened at the G20 and the implications for the economic liberalisation work in our region and the economic collaboration in our region.
In addition, today, I've had the opportunity to meet with President Obama for a formal bilateral discussion. At the G20 I had the opportunity to have a few casual discussions, non-formal discussions, with President Obama but today we met for a formal bilateral meeting. In that meeting I reaffirmed Australia's long-term friendship with America. We are good mates and we will continue to be good mates. And what that means is that we've got an agenda of work that the two countries will participate in. Some of that agenda of work was talked about at the recent AUSMIN talks in Melbourne when Secretary of State Clinton and Secretary of Defence Gates came to Australia for the formal AUSMIN talks. We talked then about greater collaboration on defence work. We talked about the implications of the US Force Posture Review for work in our region and implications for joint collaboration and work with the Australian Defence Force.
We too of course have had the opportunity with President Obama today, and more broadly with Secretary of State Clinton particularly, to talk about the diplomatic developments in our region, the geopolitical challenges and America's new engagement in the region by becoming a formal member of the East Asia Summit and I was able to discuss that matter with President Obama today.
We also briefly touched upon the question of climate change, what is happening in each of our countries. We talked substantially about Afghanistan as we move towards the Lisbon summit next weekend which both President Obama and I will be attending. This is obviously a meeting of NATO countries. Australia will be there, not because we're a NATO country, but because we are a major contributor in Afghanistan and we'll be there to participate in the discussions about the strategy in Afghanistan. And to be very clear about that strategy, it is the one that I talked about in my parliamentary contribution. We are talking about the conditions that would enable transition of security leadership to move from the forces who are there, including Australian forces, to Afghan-led security by the Afghan National Army and Afghan police. But we will have an enduring commitment to Afghanistan in the sense of supporting the people of Afghanistan. When I spoke in the parliament I made the nature of that commitment clear. We are engaged there now fighting the insurgency, training the Afghan National Army, facilitating the transition to Afghan-led security. But I was very clear with the Australian people that we would be engaged there to the end of the decade at least, and we would have a continuing involvement in the provision of aid and the development of governance in Afghanistan. So I had the opportunity to talk to President Obama about those matters today. Now as the lights come on and off I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what do you see as the three key markers of success of APEC coming out of tomorrow? What do you want to see out of the meeting?
PM: What I'd like to see out of the meeting is that APEC at a regional level backs the work that's been done at the G20, particularly the work on the Global Framework, the Framework for balanced growth, so that would be number one.
Number two that we commit to stay the course on trade liberalisation and reaffirm our commitment to not succumb to protectionism, even in a period where for some countries in the region this will be difficult as they have persistent unemployment rates and engage in fiscal consolidation which will put some pressure on government delivery of services.
And number three, that we also have the commitment to keep driving the collaboration that is making the difference to the behind the border issues. APEC is at this meeting considering a growth strategy, it's been the subject of discussion amongst leaders today and it goes towards these sorts of questions.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the G20 has overshadowed APEC? Do we need APEC? Is it a costly add-on these days?
PM: We need APEC. We need APEC to keep driving the collaborative work which is necessary in our region. Trade liberation, the regulatory matters that I've talked about as behind the border matters. This is a level of in detailed work that APEC really has a reputation for. For driving the sort of partnership in the region that allows this in detailed but meaningful work to occur. So the examples I've gone to: global roaming, heavy vehicle standards, these things make a practical difference to the ability of the countries in our region to do business with each other.
JOURNALIST: With the American president going to the East Asia Summit next year, do you think that he will be willing to keep up these multiple groups, attend these multiple groups?
PM: Well the president will be hosting APEC next year so he will have to get to Honolulu which presumably he'll look forward to. Look I believe there is a role for APEC on these matters that involve our region. I mean we're building on a lot of work here over a long period of time, 1989 to now. There's been a consistent work program, therefore it is a deep collaboration between countries and consequently I think it continues to play a valuable role.
JOURNALIST: Do you think we have too many of these summits now? By next weekend you will have been to four in the last six weeks or so. Leaders seem to be flat out just going to summits all the time. Is it a sign that nothing gets down unless the leaders do get together or are we wasting our time at these summits? It's good to have a new prime minister meet people but what is the value of these personal contact summits?
PM: You wouldn't want to extrapolate from this time period into saying that the intensity of summits is like that all year long, clearly it is not. We've been in a time period where yes they've been a number of summits clustered. In part that's done for the practicalities that once people have come to Korea for G20 its obviously easy, or easier for them to continue to Japan than it would be to go back home and at another time travel again. So yes there have been a clustering of summits in this period but they've each had an important role.
Now in terms of my choice of travel; we pressed to be a member of the Asia-Europe Meeting. It's a leaders' level meeting and having pressed to be involved in it then we did need to be represented at leaders' level. The G20 has been absolutely pivotal to holding the world back from depression. We press very strenuously for the G20 to be the guiding body for the economic work that we need to do globally, so clearly leaders' level meeting and that's appropriate. APEC was uplifted by Paul Keating to being a leaders' level meeting. Yes there are meetings at ministerial level as well but it plays a very useful role. The decision to travel to the NATO summit was a discretionary one. Australia did not need to be represented at leader level but I determined that at what I believe is a pivotal point in the strategy for Afghanistan given the importance of this in terms of our military commitment that it was appropriate for me to attend this NATO summit.
JOURNALIST: What was the nature of your discussion with President Obama on China today? Was there mutual concern in any areas or was it just general?
PM: We talked about the geopolitics of our region particularly in the context of the East Asia Summit which the US has determined to join. We very much pressed for there to be a part of the regional architecture that brought the US and China amongst others around the table to have a dialogue across the full range of areas, economic, defence, strategic questions, geopolitical questions that has been achieved with the joining of the US to the East Asia Summit. So we talked about our region in that context. We are obviously on the same page in the sense that the Australian attitude and the American attitude is to have a positive and constructive engagement with China. Everybody is talking about China's rise and that's understandable and as China rises and obviously we want to see China be a force for good in the world and be a participant in the global and regional discussions, and be a participant in the rules based system. And so Australia and the US have the same strategic objectives here.
JOURNALIST: You've been invited to go and see Barack Obama in the US next, did he make any indication about whether he's coming to Australia finally?
PM: We would like to see President Obama in Australia, but he issued the invitation for me to visit him next year and we'll look for an opportunity to do that in the first quarter or so of the year depending on other commitments .President Obama knows that he is welcome in Australia whenever he can make the trip.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Japanese Prime Minister made some very strong remarks today about the need to open up the economy. He acknowledged that Japan is losing ground because of the rise of China and other nation in Asia. That's a very positive sign for trade relations between Australia and Japan. Have you had any talks with the Japanese about trade yet? Do you take any comfort from the kind of signals that the Japanese Prime Minister is sending?
PM: The Trade Minister has just been here and you're right, this is a very positive signal. It's a positive signal that appears to be in the context of the Trans Pacific Partnership and the fact that that partnership is under discussion and coming together and obviously Australia is a participant in it. The prospect of that partnership causing Japan to think again about its trade position and to suggest a more open approach. This is very good news: for a long, long period of time Australia has pressed for freer access on agriculture to Japan. We've been endeavouring to negotiate a Free Trade Agreement between our two countries for some period of time, but obviously pivotal to our interests is agricultural access. So we very much welcome this change of view by the Prime Minister here and we'll keep exploring exactly what it means in a practical sense through our own free trade discussions. And we will come to understand more clearly what Japan means through discussions about the Trans Pacific Partnership.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, it does seem that there's a tradition that seems to have gone by the board. We understand you've been fitted up for something - we don't know - a kimono, a shirt, or something - but it seems that the APEC funny shirts have been buried here at Yokohama?
PM: The only person who could give you an answer about that is our host, the Prime Minister here, so you'd need to direct your question to him.
QUESTION: You don't regret the passing of this tradition?
PM: I seriously can't help you on what's happened to the APEC shirts. I did wear the East Asia Summit dress which, the one supplied to me was a cream jacket, and it didn't meet with grand appreciation by the photographers, as I recall it they were hoping for something more flamboyant.
QUESTION: Prime Minister could I get your personal view on two matters that are linked to the current debate on gay marriage and the debate on this that's going on within your party.
PM: And you've come all the way to Japan to ask that question? Or you've found it on the APEC agenda?
JOURNALIST: It's the only reason. It might be.
PM: I think there are some foreign affairs officials who are indicating some grand scepticism about that proposition.
JOURNALIST: What is your view on marriage and secondly what is your view on gay couples raising children?
PM: My view on these questions is on the record in Australia. So I would refer you to my statements in Australia rather than deal with these issues whilst I'm here in Japan.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on China, was the issue of their rare earths policy brought up in today's meeting?
PM: No, the question of the rare earths policy hasn't been raised in the forum. It may be during the course of tomorrow, but it wasn't raised in today's discussions.
JOURNALIST: Did you raise it with President Obama?
PM: No, I did not.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Treasury Department in its incoming government briefs, raised a lot of doubt about bilateral Free Trade Agreements, it said the whole game should be multilateral or absolute regional. The longstanding effort of the business sector in APEC has been to get a Asia Pacific-wide Free Trade Agreement. What is your view on it? Is it do-able? Are resources being directed away from the multilateral talks to deal with all these bilateral talks that Australia is involved in?
PM: We are free trade exponents, and our preference would be for a global multilateral round, ie, to have Doha come to a conclusion with a level of ambition. Our preference is to work as broadly as possible. But in circumstances where it has been very, very difficult to make progress with Doha, we have pressed to keep forward momentum for bilateral discussions as well. So yes, we're working on the Doha Round globally, we're working regionally, and APEC has been important to that trade liberalisation work. In circumstances though, where the global round has taken so long, we have also been pressing on bilateral Free Trade Agreements.
JOURNALIST: Like an Asia Pacific FTA, a free trade region?
PM: Well APEC's obviously worked on liberalisation and been effective; we now have these discussions on the Trans Pacific Partnership. We believe those discussions are important. I think you and I are probably on the same page about the ambition here, which is to have the broadest possible round, but in terms of playing out negotiations effectively, given we are a participant in the negotiations but clearly everybody else's view can effect timing and content and ambition, there are occasions where we think that it's in our interests to move as well as participating in those talks for bilateral arrangements.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given you've been seeing the leaders up close, you've had informal meetings with some and formal meetings with others. On the question of China, do you sense that the chill between the US and China is kind of easing through these summits? Is there hope that there'll be better relations there, particularly regarding the region?
PM: I think difficulties are always improved by having an opportunity to sit and talk them through. That doesn't mean that the talking is easy, but I ask you to think about what the alternative is - to have these tensions, and no moment where the principal players come together to talk them through. It is better to have structures that bring people together and enable that dialogue.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you have had a series of intense summits and meetings with world leaders for the first time as Prime Minister. How do you feel fitting into the foreign policy area now? Are you developing a passion for foreign affairs and trade?
PM: Dennis, I like dealing with people and whether you're dealing with leaders of the G20, whether you're dealing with leaders here at APEC, whether you're at home talking to Australians about what's on their mind, people are people and if you can get them talking and work issues through you can normally find a good place, a good path, so I'm someone who likes to have a discussion, I like meeting people, and I've had the opportunity to do that here.
I also want, as Prime Minister, to always be a feisty advocate of our national interest and to do that you need to be at the tables where that national interest is effected, that's what I've been doing over the last few days. There couldn't be a more important place to talk about our economy and the prosperity of Australian families than at the G20, there couldn't be a more important Labor legacy to build on than APEC, and to talk about liberalisation in our region, and that matters for Australian families too.
JOURNALIST: Are you finding some passion for it?
PM: You don't want to over-extrapolate earlier comments, the way that sometimes your friends from the media are wont to do. 



PM: The APEC Summit has drawn to an end and I wanted to take this opportunity to summarise what has been achieved. Australia was proudly a founding member of APEC, because we saw the economic advantages of greater trade and economic engagement in our region.
Here we are 21 years later and having APEC has made a difference. To just give you one statistic which tells the story, in the period from 1994 to 2009 trade within the APEC region tripled. Now what that means is more trade, more economic opportunities and more jobs for Australians.
At this APEC Summit we have built on APEC's earlier successes. We have done a stock take against the Bogor Goals and worked out how much progress has been made and reflected on what more we need to do. And a great deal of progress has been made in reducing tariffs and barriers on trade between APEC nations and economies.
Now we need to keep building on that work. We have noted that against the Bogor Goals there is still work to do, particularly to liberalise sensitive sectors like agriculture. And building beyond those goals, we want to now move from talking solely about tariff protection and free trade to an even greater focus on the behind the border barriers. The behind the border barriers of different regulatory regimes, different ways of working that can prevent trade investment and the creation of jobs.
The communiqu, the leaders declaration from APEC deals with all these matters. In addition it reflects the communiqu of the G20. APEC has also committed itself to engaging in a framework for growth, making sure we life growth, in what is still a difficult time in the global and regional economy. Making sure that that growth is balanced and we address some of the issues that give rise to imbalances between nations including imbalances on the current account. And APEC had said that it too wants to show leadership on the hard grind of structural reforms that economies need to do as the world economy turns to growth. This has been a successful meeting and the leaders declaration is now available for all to see.
In addition today I attended a meeting convened by President Obama to bring together the nations that are joining the Trans Pacific Partnership discussion. We are holding true to a vision of free trade and economic integration across our region. The Trans Pacific Partnership is another stepping stone to get there to greater economic liberalisation and integration.
The original four countries in the Trans Pacific Partnership were present at the meeting convened by President Obama and those nations are Brunei, Chile, New Zealand and Singapore. Now we, Peru, the United States and Malaysia have already indicated we want to be involved in the Trans Pacific Partnership and today Vietnam announced formally that it also wanted to be involved in the Trans Pacific Partnership.
Significantly Prime Minister Kan of Japan joined the discussions in a status of consultation, but the fact that Prime Minister Kan was there in the room for the Trans Pacific Partnership discussion, I believe is a good sign, building on the earlier good signs of his statement about taking a more liberalised approach to trade and particularly dealing with the sensitive subject of agriculture.
The nations in the room talked about their ambition for this agreement. President Obama indicated that he did want to see a good degree of progress by the Honolulu meeting of APEC next year and so nations in the room are aiming to progress this agreement as quickly as possible, with a view to showing that work is achieving by the APEC meeting of next year.
Finally today, I did have the opportunity to engage in two bilateral meetings. One was with the Prime Minister of Thailand, Prime Minister Abhisit. One was with the President of Mexico, Mexican President Calderon. I spoke to the Mexican President particularly about outlooks for Cancun; he is as President of Mexico the host of that important discussion on climate change. I had the opportunity to talk to the Prime Minister of Thailand across our full range of engagement, we are obviously engaged with Thailand in our region on economic matters, we have a strong partnership with them in a number of multilateral forums.
He raised with me the question of people movement in the region and the stress that does put on Thailand. We briefly discussed my proposals for a regional protection framework and regional processing centre and agreed that talking about those proposals should be the subject of further bilateral dialogue and dialogue in the Bali Process.
So all in all, in conclusion as the APEC summit comes to a close, I believe that both the G20 and APEC have done good work, good work to coordinate what is happening in our economies, while the world economy is still in a fragile and difficult stage.
Yes, the world economy has moved to recovery, but the recovery is fragile and it needs to be nurtured and harnessed, it needs to be built upon through freer trade, economic liberalisation and the hard work of structural reforms including addressing imbalances in economies, that's what the discussion over the two summits has been about.
For people in their homes in Australia, that quickly becomes a proposition about our nation's prosperity, about their jobs and their prosperity into the future. I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I just clarify on Vietnam, did they become one, in addition to the four that signed up, or just involved in talks?
PM: So, yes, it's the original four, plus the four that had already indicated they wanted to formally join in the talks. So you've got the agreement for the four and there are discussions about broadening that agreement to others. We had already indicated that we wanted to be in those discussions about broadening and today Vietnam also indicated it wanted to be in those discussions about broadening. So it's not, it's not signing on to the agreement in its current form, it's a dialogue about broadening the agreement with more partners in it.
JOURNALIST: After your meeting with President Calderon are you any more optimistic that something real can be achieved at Cancun to combat climate change?
PM: Having talked to President Calderon, his discussions with me are built on earlier streams of advice to me, including through Minister Combet. The focus in Cancun will very likely be on fast track financing, that is getting assistance to developing countries, to deal with climate change matters and focus will very much be on forests, on the loss of forests and the impact that that has on the climate, on carbon generally. So they are likely to be the things were we will see developments in Cancun.
JOURNALIST: So no talk of targets or anything like that?
PM: President Calderon is very clear about where he wants to take this discussion, he believes that important measures and progress were achieved at Copenhangen, but he does understand that expectations have been built very high and whilst the Copenhagen accord was a good step forward, because expectations were so high, many were disappointed by progress, he understands that. However he believes the important purpose of Cancun is to build on that earlier progress and he wants to particularly build on it in fast track financing and in the forest measures.
JOURNALIST: Given the modest goals that seem to be taken forward to that summit and what's happened in the United States are you confident that you can retain the momentum for implementing a carbon price in Australia?
PM: I will be, as Prime Minister, doing everything I can to generate community and Parliamentary consensus for change in our economy. We need it and we need to remind ourselves that around the world as these international talks continue to happen, around the world economies are changing to deal with climate change and deal with a different future when it comes to using carbon.
We cannot risk being left behind as economies adapt and become low pollution economies. My argument about working out a way through the question of pricing carbon is: it's good for us to be dealing with the adaptation our economy needs for the future. It's in our national interest to build the low pollution economy we will need in the future and let's just be very clear about President Obama's position here, President Obama is responding to the domestic political circumstances he faces, he sponsored a cap and trade scheme, he didn't get through the Senate, it wasn't going to get through the Senate. We know a bit about what it can be like to face hostile Senates, we've got that in common and following the mid-term elections, now the prospects for any such agreement are, for any such legislation going through both the House and the Senate is nil and President Obama has responded to that.
JOURNALIST: On Thailand, is the President of Thailand aware of your regional processing centre and did he give any indication of what he thought of the idea?
PM: He raised with me the issue of people movement and some of the pressures that that puts on Thailand. I, you know, well they do have Burmese refugees in particular in large numbers pressing on their borders and into Thailand and they've experienced those flows for quite a long period of time and this morning we were talking about circumstances in Burma, so I'm sure you can image what occasions those flows of people into Thailand.
So he raised the issue of people movement with me, I'm not a mind reader, but I anticipate he would have done that against a background of knowing that Australia had the propels and discussions in train about a regional protection framework and a regional processing centre.
Our officials have been consulting extensively across the region and so the discussion proceeded on the basis that we were both acknowledging that there was a real issue here, it's an issue that affects both of our nations, we're looking for solutions. Australia has put forward this proposal and he wants to keep discussing it bilaterally and we have the Bali Process for that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just back on climate change, the APEC declaration today doesn't touch on pricing carbon, it does talk about a lot of practical measures and you seem to be suggesting that the President of Mexico is also talking about practical measures in Cancun. Do you feel that he's still committed to reintroducing an ETS, or a price on carbon given the deadline of the 23rd?
PM: Well, first and foremost let's not create a straw man here, there was never any suggestion that this declaration was going to deal with a price on carbon, you know we're here for APEC, which is predominantly, overwhelmingly focussed, as the name would imply, on the economic agenda and in dealing with the economic agenda then it does bring you into a discussion of climate change, but that's not what this meeting is about.
Second, we should remind ourselves that around the world, nations are taking measures to deal with climate change. Many important places in the world price carbon, to give just one example California. If California were a country it would have a seat at the G20 table, it has an emissions trading scheme, it prices carbon. And it's just one example and when we look around the world, through measures that are being taken, shadow prices are being put on carbon, carbon is effectively getting a pricing in some economies.
So against this movement around the world, against the preference of consumers, increasingly being more sharply expressed, that they want live in a greener way and want to make their own contribution to cutting emissions, we can't just sit still and pretend that our economy can deal with what is going to be the way the world economy focuses in the future and consumer preference focuses in the future.
We need to work our way through the adaptations our economy needs to be a lower pollution economy, it's why the government is talking through the multiparty Climate Change Committee and directly with business and stakeholders about pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I saw you having a fairly animated chat with Barack Obama before the leaders declaration, I was wondering what you were talking about?
PM: We were having an animated chat about our political systems and differences in them, for example how we have question time and the fact that I am flying through the night to return to one.
JOURNALIST: Next week the Greens, or in the next fortnight the Greens will put forward legislation to see the banks hold their interest rates, or follow the RBA's lead for the next two years, is this something that the government will support?
PM: The Government will have its own package of measures to deal with competition in the banking sector. Wayne Swan has been working on them, as has been publicly known since October, when it comes to dealing with something as important as the banking sector you want to get it right, Wayne Swan is working to get it right, we will bring forward and support our own package.
JOURNALIST: Is that still in December, Ms Gillard?
PM: Wayne Swan has been very clear it would be next month.
JOURNALIST: The OECD's analysis of the Australian economy today was released and it is very critical in terms of the changes that were made to the RSBT and saying that the MRRT should be broadened, the rate increased, and (inaudible) the negotiated agreement that you came to, what do you say to the OECD's findings about the MRRT?
PM: I entered an agreement with Australia's biggest miners about the way in which this tax would be constructed, we've got the policy transition group working on the detail. I'm certainly intending to hold to the agreement that I made, we have obviously worked through to get a consensus in difficult circumstances and I will hold to that consensus.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, part of that Greens package on bank reform is the removal of the $2 transaction fee on ATMs, I understand that you're not going to support the Green's legislation and you have your own package, but would you support that?
PM: The Government will bring forward its own package of measures on banking as heralded by the Treasurer Wayne Swan and building on our earlier competition reform.
Am I discriminating against you Malcolm, so badly, you've just given up?
JOURNALIST: All my questions have been asked.
PM: Oh, ok. If you don't go there early then - I was actually talking to the Canadian Prime Minister who has introduced a list system in his press conferences.
JOURNALIST: He doesn't like journalists.
PM: I'm picking up tips as I travel.
JOURNALIST: The journalists in Canada went on strike.
PM: We'll they'd better be back working now.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on the TPP talks, can you give us a sense of the friction, and those APEC members in the approach of ASEAN, those three (inaudible) TPP was the much friction on those talks yesterday?
PM: No, no, there's not friction. There is an understanding that there's a number of things that are happening and an understanding that we need to share information, so people can understand as these various potential agreements develop that something isn't happening in one area which isn't complementary with another area.
So there's an information sharing tasks that needs to go on, but not any friction expressed because of the different forms of agreement that are being pursued and my view, clearly, is we need to have the global round come to conclusion, the Doha Round, and that was expressed very clearly at the G20.
We need to pursue further trade liberalisation in our region, both on the question of tariffs but also these behind the border measures that we've discussed and given how difficult this is we won't have all our eggs in one basket, we will take opportunities to press forward on free trade and economic liberalisation in a number of areas.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, on the TPP, can you talk more about what the goal is over the next year? You said that there was a goal to reach by Honolulu one year from now, does that mean signing up to a more firmly, does that mean getting (inaudible)
PM: I think the goal here is to see an agreement that is comprehensive, that is it's not just dealing with goods, but also dealing with services, that has a level of ambition in it.
This has been referred to as a next generation free trade agreement and I believe that terminology is referring to the comprehensiveness of the measures that parties are looking to in the agreement. We will do everything we can as a country to push these talks along and clearly President Obama has expressed a level of ambition, both in terms of what's in the agreement, but also progress by the time he hosts the G20 in the US.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given Prime Minister Kan's comments and his attendance at the meeting today, how realistic are the prospects of a bilateral free trade deal now, are you heartened, encouraged, and what were your thoughts on kabuki theatre?
PM: I'm heartened, heartened by what had happened in the last few days here in Japan. I was heartened by the Prime Minister's statements on his government's approach to free trade. I was heartened by the fact he came to sit in the meeting about the Trans Pacific Partnership.
So they are good signs, but I'm not underestimating the journey from here, free trade, questions of agriculture have been very politically sensitive in Japan and difficult. I think Prime Minister Kan has taken some courageous steps but there is a lot more to do. On kabuki, I hadn't seen any before, so I've learned something.
JOURNALIST: I know we're overseas, but I just wanted to get what your priorities will be for the final sitting weeks of the year?
PM: You will no doubt hear about those long and loud in question time tomorrow, so I will see you back in Canberra for that. Thank you. 



PM: I'm joined today by the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith. We're here in Lisbon for what will be an important round of talks about the future strategy in Afghanistan.
Tomorrow, 48 nations will meet for discussions about the strategy in Afghanistan. These are the nations within NATO and beyond that are contributing to the efforts there.
The meeting will, of course, talk about the strategy for transition. When I spoke to the Australian parliament at the opening of our parliamentary debate on Afghanistan, I spoke about the strategy for transition. President Karzai has indicated that it is his goal that local Afghan forces take the security lead in Afghanistan by the end of 2014. In the parliament, I spoke about how transition would happen place by place and be conditions based, and we will be having that discussion at the talks tomorrow.
We will also be discussing the enduring commitment that nations must have to Afghanistan. When I spoke in the Australian parliament I said that beyond transition we would remain engaged with Afghanistan to the end of this decade at least, with that engagement taking the form of training and support, and of course civilian aid works, so that enduring commitment to Afghanistan will also be the subject of discussion at this meeting tomorrow.
This is an important meeting at an important moment to ensure that the nations engaged in Afghanistan and Afghanistan itself have an agreed strategy forward in Afghanistan as we move to transition and beyond.
Since arriving here in Lisbon with Minister Smith, I've had the opportunity to meet with General Petraeus. I've had the opportunity to meet with Mark Sedwill, the lead civilian representative in Afghanistan. I've also met with President Karzai. In separate bilateral discussions I've met with the President of Poland, the President of turkey, and the Foreign Minister of the UAE.
I'm looking forward to these discussions tomorrow. Our commitment in Afghanistan is an important one for the Australian people. It's important so that we deny terrorists a safe haven in Afghanistan. It's important to our alliance with the United States, and of course it's important because we have troops fighting there and we have lost Australian lives, so we wanted Australia's voice to be heard at this table as the future strategy for Afghanistan is shaped.
I'm very happy to take any questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, there's a report out today from 29 aid agencies, led by Oxfam, that are working in Afghanistan, saying they fear that NATO's assessment of the situation there is overly optimistic and urging the NATO and non-NATO countries here not to look for quick fixes to get out of Afghanistan.
How do you respond to that report?
PM: General Petraeus will give a report to the meeting tomorrow and I had the opportunity to get a preliminary assessment from him in my meeting with him today. I also had the opportunity to meet with General Petraeus when I was in Afghanistan myself.
I believe General Petraeus is providing good advice on the situation in Afghanistan. Much of it accords with the advice that we receive from our very own Defence Force, and they are telling us that progress is being made in establishing security, but there is more to be done. There is more to be done in establishing security; more to be done in establishing governance; and, obviously, more to be done in civil aid and re-construction.
So, as I said to the Australian parliament, this is a process. It will take effort. It will take time. Transition does need to be place by place and conditions based. Our estimates are 2-4 years, and President Karzai has outline his goal of by the end of 2014, so I want to be very frank with people - progress is being made, but for security to transition will take some time yet.
JOURNALIST: There's a report in the Sydney Morning Herald today suggesting that you're closing - I think it's six - intelligence posts around the world. How does that fit with the strategy on Afghanistan? Are you re-focussing on the region, or are you undermining Australia's security strategy?
PM: We have contributed a great deal of resourcing to Afghanistan, to our efforts there, and we will continue to do so. Assessments are made from time to time about where efforts are best placed, so you do, in terms of our global effort, see individual positions move from post to post, but in Afghanistan we have increased our troop commitment by 40 per cent. That was increased last April, so we are dedicating resources to our work in Uruzgan province and we'll continue to do so.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you express to President Karzai any concern about continuing levels of corruption within his Government?
PM: I certainly expressed to President Karzai that Australia wants to see continuing work on the question of fighting corruption in Afghanistan. He indicated to me that efforts are being made within Afghanistan to deal with corruption questions.
Of course, we want to continue to assist and as governance capacity is built in Afghanistan we want that governance capacity to be corruption-free, so, yes, the issue was raised by me in our meeting.
JOURNALIST: How do you assess when or how well Afghan troops will be ready to take over the task of controlling security of the country?
PM: Well, the assessment is going to be made or needs to be made from the ground up, from people who are in a position like our own Defence Force is in Uruzgan, people who are working alongside the Afghan National Army, people who are engaged in the training, people who are therefore involved very closely as the Afghan National Army goes about its work and are in a position to assess its capabilities to provide security.
That security assessment needs, too, to take into account what is happening with governance. Governance matters to the maintenance of security, so all of these factors need to be assessed and the reason we talk about transition happening place by place, that there's no single transition day but rather it's a process, place by place, is that stabilisation and security are happening at different rates in different places.
JOURNALIST: President Karzai has had some fairly tough things to say in a London Financial Times interview today about America in particular and operations. Was any of that re-discussed? Did he repeat those concerns?
PM: The discussion I had with President Karzai was focussed on the meeting tomorrow and the strategy that will be discussed tomorrow and the need for unity around that strategy. President Karzai and ISAF, Australia - we are on the same page, wanting to see Afghan leadership of security. President Karzai has expressed his goal of 2014 and of course we have accepted that expression of his goal, as have all of the other ISAF partners, including the Americans, so we are working on the same agenda about enabling Afghan security leadership in Afghanistan.
I understand why President Karzai puts forward the sovereignty of his country, and the end of this is for Afghanistan to be functioning as a sovereign nation with the ability to take security lead and to engage in strategic denial of Afghanistan from terrorists who would seek to use it as a safe haven and training area.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I ask you about another matter? There's been a mine collapse in New Zealand and 27 miners are missing. I'm wondering what your response is to that and whether Australia can offer any assistance?
PM: I have certainly heard of this and our hearts do go out to the New Zealanders who would now be waiting very, very anxiously for news of their loved ones and friends. If there's any assistance that we can offer, then certainly we will offer it and we'll stay in touch with our New Zealand counterparts about it.
The world has witnessed a mine disaster already this year, and a miracle when people came out alive, and so our very best wishes go to the New Zealanders as they deal with this situation.
Thank you very much. 



The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr Key has just confirmed that there is now no hope that the 29 miners trapped underground at Pike River will be brought out alive.
This is tragic news, 29 families have been hoping, praying, waiting to hear good news and now they've heard the most terrible news.
Our hearts go out to them and on behalf of the Australian people I give the condolences of this nation.
Of course two of these families are Australia, the family of William Joynson and Joshua Ufer.
To those families we especially say we want you to have our condolences, we want you to understand that the nation is grieving with you at this dreadful and difficult time.
This is obviously a community in New Zealand that will now grieve bearing this dreadful loss, we send our best wishes and our best wishes, sympathy and support go to the two Australian families now living with this dreadful and tragic news.


Canberra 
Thank you very much and can I acknowledge the Leader of the Opposition, Tony Abbott; can I acknowledge so many Parliamentary colleagues and friends who are with us; can I acknowledge some background noise; and can I also acknowledge Andrew O'Keefe and his colleagues in the White Ribbon Foundation.
Now, I trust that I don't offend anybody when I say I would prefer if we weren't here today; if there was no need for us to come together and to wear white ribbons; there was no need for us to talk about violence against women and girls because our society no longer had this violence against women and girls.
And there's something deeply confronting about the fact that we can stand on this beautiful day, this picture-perfect day in this remarkable building in a country led by a female leader, and be here to talk about violence against women and girls and yet we do have to come together and talk about violence against women and girls because too many women and too many girls continue to feel that violence.
As a Government, as a Parliament, I believe we are united in our efforts to make a difference to the appalling statistics of violence that our nation still sees, and I could talk about the economic costs, I could talk about all of the statistics, about what this costs us as a nation, but really the most important thing is the emotional cost - what it does to the individuals who end up bearing the brunt of that violence in their daily lives.
We, as a Government, have taken steps to address violence against women and girls. We've announced a $42 million commitment in 2009 to fund initiatives such as the respectful relationships project and the 1-800 counselling service. There's a 12-year national plan that's backed by a further $44.5 million in funding, and that's about improving services for domestic violence victims, telephone support, for frontline workers, a new national centre of excellence for research and a grants program to help local communities themselves reduce violence against women and girls.
These efforts by the Government, which have been led by my colleagues Tanya Plibersek and now by Kate Ellis, are important efforts, but in many ways the most important efforts are those that are taken by individuals who come together to convey a message about how unacceptable this conduct is and how deeply we want to see change, which is why the White Ribbon movement is so important; such an important way of bringing people together; such an important way of involving men, to have them say that they believe this is wrong and that they want to say to men across the country this is wrong.
So, I welcome very much this work of the White Ribbon Foundation, the fact that we are here wearing these ribbons today, but that it is part on an ongoing challenge. I also welcome the fact that it's the subject of deep bipartisanship across this Parliament, so whilst in this Parliament we argue about so much, there is no doubt that every parliamentarian stands united in supporting this cause and united in having their voice heard against violence against women and girls.
Thank you very much. 


Canberra
PM: Accompanied by the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the House and Minister for Infrastructure, Anthony Albanese, and by the Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy, Stephen Conroy.
Today in the Parliament the Government has delivered an historic win for Australian families and businesses, laying the way open for our further delivery of the National Broadband Network and achieving an historic microeconomic reform in this country through the structural separation of Telstra, however before going into that I do want to turn to the Leader of the House to have him explain today's Parliamentary proceedings.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Thanks, Prime Minister. Today we saw the Parliament resumed in the House of Representatives, quite simply at great cost to the taxpayer so that Tony Abbott could rant and rave.
It is extraordinary that there was no vote on the Bill as has been amended by the Senate last Friday. So what we saw was days of delay, prevarication, opposition and blocking in both Houses of Parliament, and when it came to the crunch, the Opposition didn't even vote against it.
The Opposition had three amendments today before the House, two of which were ruled out of order by the Speaker. So after having days to get their act together on this vital piece of legislation, three amendments, one lost on the floor of the Parliament, one ruled out of order because it simply wasn't in accordance with Standing Orders, and one they didn't proceed with.
The only explanation for their behaviour over recent days is that they wanted to go through Tony Abbott's suspension motion, of which he knew, because of the number of pairs that had been granted, there was no possibility of it being carried by the House, which is what Mr Oakeshott's comments on the floor of the Parliament went to.
This is an Opposition that throughout the year, through their own behaviour of wrecking on the floor of the Parliament, has alienated themselves from the very people who just months ago they said they wanted to join with them in forming Government. It's not surprising that we leave this Parliament after the last five weeks' sittings, with the Independents alienated from the Opposition due to their own destructive behaviour.
PM: Thank you. So today once again we've seen Mr Abbott play the role of wrecker - negative, bitter, and his side of politics in an absolute shambles unable to deliver even the most simple mechanisms in the Parliament to pursue their own agenda.
Against that relentless negativity, the Government today has delivered a win for Australian families and Australian businesses. The legislation that has finally been passed today is there for the National Broadband Network, part of preparing for the National Broadband Network, and new superfast broadband will transform the way we deliver health services. Will transform the way we deliver education services, and will transform productivity in our economy.
And of course this legislation also delivered a microeconomic reform of great merit in its own right. For almost 30 years now this nation has tried to reform Telstra, to end up with a structural separation so that the wholesale business and the retail business were not fused together, creating an anti-competitive monopoly. Today we have achieved that structural separation. Once again, this is a win for families and a win for Australian businesses, it's a win for the economy, it's a win for those who believe that competition delivers better prices, better services and more innovation, and that's exactly what we have achieved through this legislation.
Now this is a big win, but the Government will not be resting on our laurels having delivered this win for Australian families and Australian businesses. As we move from 2010 to 2011, I want to make it clear that 2011 will be a year of delivery, it will be a year where Australian families can increasingly see the services they rely on like health changed because the Government is delivering health reform. Where they will increasingly be able to see, in their nation and in their own communities, the power of highspeed broadband, where they will increasingly be able to see the benefits of the Government's work to keep our economy strong and keep the number of jobs growing.
2011 will also be a year of decision. It will be the year the nation needs to make a decision on pricing carbon. It will be a year in which the Government will make decisions on increasing participation in our workforce. We've talked about our ageing society, we've talked about the demands of the resources sector for new workers and new skills, in 2011 we will move from the discussion to the decisions, new solutions, new skills, new opportunities for Australians as we lift workforce participation.
I'll now turn to the relevant Minister for comments on the National Broadband Network and then we'll take questions.
MINISTER CONROY: Well thank you, as some of you were here on Friday, some of this may be a little bit repetitive but what was the most, the most disappoint part about the performance again today, was that in the past when Labor Governments had a historic mircoeconomic reform in the Hawke and Keating period, the Opposition could always proudly say 'well we stood up and were counted, we voted for microeconomic reforms.' But that mantle is now passed, this is an opposition that is interested in nothing more than opposition and wrecking. When it came to a choice between supporting significant, what is often described as the holy grail of microeconomic reform in the telecommunications sector, the Opposition went missing. So it is with some disappointment that I saw one final chance they had to actually get on board and they decided to go down the wrecking and opposing path.
But the National Broadband Network, obviously now has an enormous task to do, it has an enormous task to begin the rollout around Australia at its peak, as many of you have heard me say, there'll be 31 different build spots around Australia. There will be an enormous engineering task, but this isn't Government that's just resting on its laurels, this is a Government, and for those of you who've seen my new title, you've probably not noticed it yet, the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister on Digital Productivity, I know you're all going 'what the hell was that?' but that is about making sure that this Government takes advantage of all the applications, the e-health applications, the e-education applications, the aged care applications, the veterans' care, sustainable energy policy like smart grids that are being rolled out in Newcastle, all of these areas of Government and more that I haven't mentioned, that is the task of this Government now is to move on and start making sure that those applications are being rolled out along with the National Broadband Network so the true benefits of the revolution that we are beginning to unleash here and able to be enjoyed by all Australians.
PM: Happy to take questions, Phil?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister were you surprised at the election result in Victoria and what message is there in that for you?
PM: Clearly the Victorian election result is still working its way through, I know that we are probably anticipating today seeing Premier Brumby and Opposition Leader Ted Ballieu deal with this in press conferences, so I don't want to substitute myself into statements that should be made by those two leaders, but what I would essentially say about the Victorian election is it was an election fought by a capable Premier - John Brumby I believe is a very capable man and he has led Victoria very ably - but an election being fought by a Labor Government that had served the Victorian people for 11 years and was asking of course for a further four years in office to take it to 15 years.
You don't need to be too much of a student of political history to know that it is very difficult for long term governments to present and have their mandate renewed and I think that's what we've seen happen in Victoria.
Michelle?
JOURNALIST: Ms Gillard one of the reforms that you mentioned in your speech this morning, again now, is health reform, hospital reform. With a change of Government in Victoria, what do you anticipate that will do to your capacity to deliver that, do you think the Victorians will renege, and will you be seeking early discussions on this issue?
PM: Whoever emerges as the Premier of Victoria, I will say to them what I'd say to every other Premier and Chief minister - our health reforms are about more doctors, more nurses, more hospital beds, more responsive emergency departments.
Now, Premiers, I believe, and Chief Ministers, want to see their communities enjoy more doctors, more nurses, have access to more hospital beds, elective surgery done more quickly and more responsive emergency departments, and I said this morning, and I'm happy to say again, for any Premier there is a simple mathematical equation here. We know that if states continue to carry the burden of predominantly paying for hospital costs, that if you fast-forward the clock that will take more than they earn in revenue. Simple maths - not sustainable, requires reform, and we are standing ready to deliver those reforms, including stepping up to 60 per cent of the hospital costs, which now press on state governments. So, I'll be making that case very clearly to Premiers and Chief Ministers around the country.
Latika?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, if I can ask you two questions, please, following on from this morning's speech, when do you think you will legislate for a carbon price, not just have made a decision regarding one?
And on a separate matter, does Australia have anything to fear from the next round of Wikileaks? Do we have anything to fear from cables from Australia being published?
PM: Well, on Wikileaks, I'm not going to comment on cables and intelligence matters, but obviously the Government is keeping the matter under close appraisal and the Attorney-General has been making some statements about our mechanisms for doing that today.
On the first, carbon pricing, I've said today that 2011 needs to be the year the nation decides - that we decide on how we will price carbon with sufficient consensus that it can be legislated.
Now, this parliament is the master of its own destiny, but for the Government we will drive the agenda so that in 2011 it can be transparent for Australians and for parliamentarians what the Government believes needs to happen in order to price carbon. We want to do that working through the multi-party climate change committee. We want to do that working with community members and with our two roundtables - the business roundtable and the roundtable involving unions, community groups and environmental groups - but we need to force this matter through in 2011, that is, through to decision, a decision on how we're going to price carbon that is capable of getting support in this parliament and enjoys support in the community.
Paul Bongiorno?
JOURNALIST: In 2010, Labor's been unable to win enough confidence of the voters to form government in its own right. It's been a very bad year. Is the Labor brand toxic?
PM: I understand that the Leader of the Opposition has been out making those statements today. You'd expect Tony Abbott to be out playing politics on a day in which the Government goes to parliament and, despite his negativity, despite his wrecking, delibvers a major reform, and what I can say to you and say to the Australian people is today I've been focussed, the Government's been focussed, on delivering a win for Australian families, Australian businesses, and the Australian economy. Tony Abbott's been focussed on hurling political insults.
Matthew?
JOURNALIST: There is a debate within the Labor Party at the moment, partly, I think, pushed on by the Victorian election result, about whether the future of electoral recovery for your Federal Government at the next election lies in moving your policies to the left, towards where the Green sit on issues like same-sex marriage and border protection, or going to the more traditional bread and butter, economy, services argument. On which of those two arguments do you fit, or do you believe that it's possible to deliver both?
PM: The future for this Government in terms of community support lies in governing and governing well. That's exactly what I will deliver - good government.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) that shows that most Queenslanders are yet to be convinced that the minority government is working, and 52 per cent think we should go to a new election to give one side out of the two a majority. How are you going to convince those people that your Government is working and that this can last three years?
PM: By governing and governing well, as we have been during this parliamentary period - securing important reforms through the parliament. We're talking about one such very important reform today, reforming our telecommunications industry for the future, but of course other important reforms have gone through this parliament - sustainability of the PBS, for example, has been an important measure dealt with in this parliamentary session, and we've got more than 15 bills that have passed this parliament.
So, the best way of demonstrating to the Australian people that we are governing well is by doing it, and we are.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Nick Xenophon said today that he can't support the NBN access arrangements bill as it stands, as it was introduced to parliament last week, because it could lead to preferential pricing for Telstra. Do you share his concerns, and are you willing to go through this kind of parliamentary saga every time an NBN-related piece of legislation moves through both houses?
PM: Well, I'll get the Minister to comment on the detail of the legislation, but want I can say about this parliament is whether we're talking about NBN or whether we are talking about other matters, we need to work through the parliament the Australian people voted for. That does require discussion, respectful conversations.
I think announcing the finalisation of the piece of legislation that we are here talking about today, we are showing what you can achieve with those respectful conversations.
MINISTER CONROY: The Senate has always been a challenge for a ruling Labor Government, so we're sort of used to it, negotiating our way through the Senate. It's nothing unusual. It's different, obviously, with the Reps, but the Senate has always been a chamber where we've negotiated until we've either won or lost a bill.
On the specific issue that Senator Xenophon is raising, what is set out in that bill is that if the NBN want to give, say, a volume discount, it has to go and get approval from the ACCC, so it doesn't say the NBN can just go off and give a volume discount to anybody or make any pricing arrangements.
Now, Mr Quigley has consistently said the policy of the company is not to give volume discounts, so there is Mr Quigley on the record, and I said, if you actually read the relevant legislation it's very specific - it can only be done if the ACCC gives it the tick.
JOURNALIST: Is that, since Mr Quigley has said that, why is there any room within the legislation for volume discounts to be allowed? Why not simply state in the legislation that there will be no volume discounts?
MINISTER CONROY: Well, we've put in a mechanism that the ACCC could tick them off or it could reject them if they were sought, so we're just allowing a degree of flexibility in the legislation, but let's be clear - it has to be done with the ACCC's approval, but the bill's been out as a draft for some time and this is a bill which will now work its way through all the committee stage. We'll listen to the committee. We'll listen to the other members of parliament, and we'll consider that sometime in the first half of next year, but I would imagine this is at least a six-month process that we'll be going through.
JOURNALIST: Do you think the NBN bills will be, when do you think they'll be voted upon in the Senate?
MINISTER CONROY: Oh, it's not for me to say. It's taken 12 months to get this one up, longer than 12 months to get this one to completion, so I'd be a bad judge of when we'd actually get a chance to vote on it.
It'll be debated, I'm sure. As I said, there'll be a lengthy committee process. There'll be lots of discussion on it, but as for when the chamber- I would hope that it could be done before the first half, but the Senate's program is in the hands of the Senate.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Turnbull
says that they support the structural separation-
MINISTER CONROY: -Well, he said that, but he had a chance to vote for it today. He had a chance to vote for it today, and he didn't.
JOURNALIST: In the Senate, people like Nick Minchin gave absolutely savage attacks on the proposal. What do you make of the Senate actually speaking differently to what their supposed policy is?
MINISTER CONROY: Look, there's clearly been a divide within the Liberal Party over this. If you go and took a poll - you know, you sometimes do - not for attributing, the majority of Liberal members that I have spoken to support structural separation. They recognise the mistake the Howard Government made, and they in private have been very supportive, but there've been those that have been campaigning hard, like Senator Minchin, to protect his legacy, which is the privatisation of Telstra, and the world has now moved on and today's vote moves the world on in a quantum leap, and so while I've congratulated Malcolm a number of times on saying that he supported structural separation, he had the chance to put his mouth where his money was, and that was a fail - an absolute fail.
PM: OK, can I suggest, Latika, the easiest answers to your question are timing for the next bill, try and find out how long Mr Abbott is going to mire himself in wrecking and negativity. That's an important piece of information, and yes, you're right, the Liberal Party is divided on Tony Abbott's wrecking tactics.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: But Labor (inaudible) in Victoria and it also looks like losing New South Wales next year, it's just in four months. How much help will you be giving Kristina Keneally over Christmas and the summer break to help her stem the tide, stem the damage which is likely to be inflicted in March?
PM: Well, I'm intending, let me tell you, to take a little bit of a holiday over Christmas. Yes, there are state elections to come. We've just had one in Victoria. I will be associating myself with state campaigns in the way you would expect a federal leader to do.
Ultimately, state campaigns turn on state issues, and Premier Keneally will be out there arguing for the further support of New South Wales voters.
Now, I understand that following the Victorian election there will be any amount of political commentary about what all of this means. I'll leave that to the paid political commentators. That's not my job, but I will just briefly remind on this - of course, we saw John Howard successfuly govern and be re-elected in circumstances where people were marching to ballot boxes in state elections voting for Labor governments. Australians separate these two questions in their minds. That was clearly on display during the period of the Howard Government.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Ms Keneally's call for Mr Riordan to resign?
PM: Look, these are matters for the New South Wales branch.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: You mentioned health, but changes of state government, state government level, what affect would that have on the overall COAG agenda of your Government?
PM: Well, I will be working with, obviously, currently, if you look across the stats and territories we've got Premier Barnett in Western Australia. My job as Prime Minister is to work with the Premiers and Chief Ministers that their states and territories elect to get a job done for Australian families and for the future of the nation. That will be my mission and that's what I'll be going about doing.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) which is a lot more (inaudible) first five weeks of parliament. Shouldn't voters expect their elected members to turn up for work, rather than playing hooky on the last day, especially given that people like Tanya Plibersek had trouble getting a pair when she was pregnant?
PM: Well, I'll go to the Leader of the House, but can I just say this in response to your question: Today's sitting need not have occurred. It only occurred because of Mr Abbott's negativity, and Mr Abbott only came today to hurl insults.
Now, I think taxpayers will take a pretty dim view of that - you're right - but the person who needs to explain the parliament being brought together at this expense is Mr Abbott. The only reason he was here today was to hurl insults, not to do anything in the interests of Australian families.
I'll turn to the Leader of the House on the pairs question.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Can I just add that Tony Abbott also wasn't there for the actual end of the debate on structural separation. He came, gave abuse and ranted and raved and then left the chamber, and he only returned when divisions were held.
Pairs occur and are negotiated between the Chief Government Whip and the Chief Opposition Whip. I'm not aware of all the circumstances for each individual.
I know, for example, that a couple of the pairs were because of a meeting of the committee that's dealing with the inquiry into Wild Rivers. It's appropriate, given that meetings would have scheduled and transport arrangements, etcetera, in Far North Queensland, that that occurred.
I think, over the year, we have seen the Opposition , as part of their blocking and negativity, some of their responses in terms of pairing arrangements have been, I think, completely indefensible - the fact that there had to be a little mini campaign to ensure there was a pair granted to Tanya Plibersek is perhaps the best example of that, but what I would hope occur is with a bit of maturity from the Opposition is that over the long break that actually recognise that this parliament, the 43rd Parliament, has been elected for three years. It's pretty obvious it's going to serve for three years, and that they should therefore act in a much more mature way when it comes to the functioning of the parliament, because I think that's what Australians expect.
PM: OK, we'll take the last two questions, and then we'll go. Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) cost, in ballpark figures today? Was it close to a million dollars?
MINISTER ALBANESE: That would be a matter for the Finance Minister. What I do know is that given that the Opposition failed to even call a division on the matter, the primary matter, that was before the House today, this could have been dealt with last Thursday, frankly, had the Senate not had a considerable debate - they actually had a long debate last Thursday about how long the debate would go for. They then had a dinner break. They then went home early. The fact is that this could have been dealt with.
It was clear from last Wednesday that there was majority support for this vital legislation in the Senate and the House of Representatives. Tony Abbott chose to play his negative game before the House of Reps today.
PM: Alright, Phil Coorey - last question.
JOURNALIST: A philosophical one.
MINISTER ALBANESE: Here we go!
JOURNALIST: This time last year, the Libs were two days away from knocking off their leader, Turnbull. They were in the pits. You guys were riding high. What's your takeout from the last 12 months? Is it the delivery of the speech you gave this morning? Is that the lesson you've learnt from the last year in the Labor movement, or is there more than that that you take out of what's happened in the last 12 months?
PM: I believe what we're elected to do is we're elected to, we go to the election saying to Australians we've got a vision of the future. We're elected to then methodically deliver that vision. Often, that's not easy. That's not easy, particularly in a parliament like this, with the negativity of the Opposition. That's not easy, but you've got to go about it with determination, methodically.
That's what we've been doing in this parliamentary session, and as I've said, 2011, I believe, is the year where Australians will be saying to us, and I am determined to this, Australians will be saying to us 'we want you to govern.' It's what I intend to do - not play politics: govern, govern for the future of all Australians; for their opportunities for the future; for ensuring that we have a strong economy and that we tackle the challenges of the future, including, of course, sustainability and climate change.
So, I ask to be judged by our actions and what we deliver for Australian families.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you just said that you're not elected to play politics, but you've been standing here for 15-20 minutes smashing the heck out of your opponent because he didn't agree with your broadband policy. Isn't that inconsistent?
PM: Parliament is a place of debate, not a place of relentless negativity and wrecking. Tony Abbott's whole world view coming into this parliament was 'don't worry about broadband and reform for Australian families. Demolish NBN, demolish the Government', and when it was clear last Wednesday that he was not going to succeed in demolishing the NBN, he has forced, for the playing of politics, parliament to keep sitting, including today.
Now, I am going to give frank assessments of how the Opposition is behaving in this parliament. That is making clear to Australians, for example, what we're doing in parliament today.
It is impossible to explain why the parliament is sitting today without going to Tony Abbott's negativity and wrecking strategy. I've got to come here and tell people the truth. That is the truth.
Thank you.



PM: It's great to be here in Queensland in the federal electorate of Petrie. I'm joined from federal politics by the Minister for Health, Nicola Roxon, and our fantastic local member Yvette D'Ath, and it's also a great pleasure here in Queensland, to be joined by the Treasurer of Queensland Andrew Fraser, and by our local state representative for the seat of Redcliffe, Lillian van Litsenburg.
We're here to announce some very good news for Queensland and for Queenslanders that rely on their health system. And the good news flows from the historic partnership between the Federal Government and the Queensland Government for health reform. We signed a health reform agreement because we wanted to work together to improve services for people here in Queensland.
And so today it's a great pleasure to be able to announce an allocation of $95 million to make a difference to healthcare here in Queensland. First it's going to make a difference for patients needing elective surgery, it's going to fund 8000 extra operations, and by funding those 8000 extra operations, we're building on what has already been achieved through our elective surgery blitz.
And then as part of this funding, we will also be allocating new money for paediatric care and I'm standing here in Redcliffe Hospital because it will specifically benefit from this new money for paediatric care.
Firstly here at Redcliffe we will refurbish the paediatric ward to provide a six bed short stay unit for that ward, some very excited staff at the back, we will refurbish the community health building to provide four additional paediatric outpatient clinics and we will renovate the emergency department waiting area to improve it as an area for children and their families.
And investments will also be made at Caboolture Hospital, which will benefit from five paediatric same day beds and doubling the paediatric consultation rooms from four to eight. So a special focus on the care of children as well as a focus on elective surgery for people here in Queensland.
I'm very pleased that before we came to the hospital we were able to tour the Superclinic that is taking shape, able to offer multidisciplinary care to people here locally, one of the Superclinics that we are investing in around the country, making a difference to people who need care in our community and need to see more than one health professional and excitingly this Superclinic development also has a training capacity so we will be training health professionals here in Redcliffe with them looking to have a future in healthcare in this area.
Whilst I was at the Superclinic I did have the opportunity to meet a young apprentice there, I said I'd assist him with his work, I'm not sure, despite our best efforts, that the Minister for Health and I were of much assistance to him but I was very pleased to meet him and I'm also very pleased to announce that today we have seen national figures released which say we are at an historic time for the number of students, the number of apprentices. That is Australia is training more apprentices than we ever had before, there's very good news in Queensland, with growth rates of more than 12 per cent, and I think we all know that if a young person can get a start as an apprentice then it puts them on a great pathway for the rest of their lives.
So I'm very pleased to be able to see those good figures and that good news.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Health for some comments.
MINISTER ROXON: Thank you very much. I'll just add briefly to the comments that the Prime Minister has already made.
Of course inspecting the work that's underway at the Super Clinic has been fantastic.
Yvette as the local member has campaigned incredibly hard to get those investments and worked with the foundation that had a vision as far back as 2005, that the community wanted this sort of investment. They raised money, I think more than $1 million themselves.
So for the commonwealth to be able to commit $5 million and an additional $5 million, so there's a total investment now of $10 million there, I think is a significant, really significant compliment to the community for the work that was done to get that idea ready for us to be able to fund.
The Prime Minister has also mentioned the $95 million that is being invested today. This is part of the money that was agreed through our COAG negotiations with the Queensland Government.
We're very proud to see that, that is now turning into specific investments in communities. Like here in Redcliffe, like in Caboolture and of course, just over $60 million which is going to be invested in Surgery Connect which has been a very successful program here in Queensland to make sure that, particularly those patients that are waiting longer than recommended, can get some urgent attention.
So we are delighted to be in partnership with the Queensland Government to deliver extra services whether it's investing in capital like we are here at Redcliffe, whether it's investing in more procedures being undertaken like you see through Surgery Connect.
We believe that by working together we can provide better services for the Queensland community and that's why we're so committed to our health reform agenda and to continue to implement it as we're doing here in Queensland.
MINISTER FRASER: Thanks. This is a good day for someone who is the Treasurer and the Acting Health Minister, what you see here is health reform in action. Put the politics aside and what you get here are better health outcomes for Queenslanders. Health reform delivering more money for hospitals here in Queensland and more surgery. Our Surgery Connect program we funded with a $90 million commitment in our last election, and a $60 million has been allocated out of the (inaudible) and focus on hospitals and health is going to deliver another 8000 episodes of surgery.
We already have the lowest elective surgery waiting time in Australia and we're determined to keep it there, and we're going to keep there because we want to work with the Federal Government to deliver on health and hospitals reform, that's precisely what this funding commitment today does.
It's also important for booming suburbs around Redcliffe and Caboolture have increases to paediatric care. I've already met a young man on the way into the hospital today that was taking home child number four, we know that there's a baby boom here and that paediatric services are absolutely vital for the nappy valley suburbs around these parts of the world.
What we see here is the sort of commitment and the sort of results you get when you put the politics to one side and focus on delivering better healthcare. That's what we are determined to do with the Federal Government.
PM: Very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister given the split in your climate change committee would you accept any compromise (inaudible)
PM: We've decided to have the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee work through the issue of carbon pricing, it's going to keep working. It's no surprise at all that people would bring different views to that table, we understood that when we created the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee, and it will work through the question of pricing carbon. As Prime Minister I'm saying very clearly to the nation we have to get this done, we need to come together as a nation in 2011 and make a decision about how to price carbon so that we can set get this job done. That will be better for us because it will enable to develop the low pollution economy we need for the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well Multi Party Climate Change Committee is discussing how to price carbon, that's what we always it will do and it's doing that job.
JOURNALIST: How soon is the Government going to release plans to improve competition in the banking sector?
PM: Well Wayne Swan, the Treasurer and of course a great Queenslander, has been working on the package and he has said he will release it in December so the Treasurer is on course to do that.
We have worked through this package carefully, Wayne first indicated publically that he was working to build on our earlier competition reforms in October this year. When you are dealing with something as important as banking, you've got to get it right. The Treasurer will announce the further package in December.
But I would remind people that we've already moved to increase competition in the banking sector, already moved by supporting second tier lenders during the global financial crisis, already moved by cracking down on unfair exit fees that keep people tied into a mortgage they no longer want and they want to be able to go and get a more competitive product, we've already moved on questions like ATM transaction fees.
So there's been work to bring more competition to our banking sector, the Treasurer will build on that with a package of measures this month.
JOURNALIST: The My Schools website (inaudible)
PM: The time is being taken that's needed to check this data, we want the My School website to be right, this is a new era of transparency. When we first launched the My School website, Australians had more information than they had ever had before about schools around the country. Indeed, Ministers for Education had more information that they had ever had before about the performances of schools.
Now we're adding to that information, some extra processes are being built in to double check that information so that when the site is launched next year, people will know that they information has been through a very rigorous process.
JOURNALIST: Is it embarrassing though given that last month you said it was ready to go?
PM: The advice from our experts at the Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority is that they want to take some time to check the information again, they've actually engaged some external assistance to go through that checking process. I want to get it right, I want this information to be out there, it's going to be hugely powerful when people see it. For the first time ever having the information on the resources available to schools, how much the Federal Government puts in, how much State Governments put in, and how much is raised from parents. This is information no one in this country's ever had before. I don't have it, Premiers don't have it, no one's ever seen it before and everybody's going to be able to see it through My School.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) slump in retail sales?
PM: I know that the retail figures have been released today and they are consistent with what we would have expected having seen the national accounts this week. Our economy has come through the global financial crisis strong, and it is growing strongly. Consumers are showing a bit of caution and are saving some more money, but when we look overall at our economy, and particularly when we compare it to circumstances around the world, our economy is growing strongly, we have a huge pipeline of investment, a huge pipeline of investment including particularly here in Queensland.
So we have a resources boom mark II for the nation, our job as Prime Minister and also here in Queensland with the Queensland Government is to make sure we balance that growth, that we are cutting company tax to help balance that growth, we're investing in national savings through superannuation and we're investing in the infrastructure a growth economy needs including the National Broadband Network.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned attacks on your staff (inaudible)
PM: Am I concerned about what sorry?
JOURNALIST: Attacks on your personal staff and are you happy (inaudible)
PM: I'm not aware of any significance and obviously my staff do a great job.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I talk to my very capable Ministers about portfolio allocations and Chris Bowen's a great person for that very difficult portfolio of immigration and he's doing a fantastic job.
JOURNALIST: Any regrets about not going to Zurich for the World Cup bid?
PM: I've been to Zurich to support the World Cup bid, when it comes to things like this big decision for the World Cup, I think it pays to get in before the rush, I did get in before the rush by firstly hosting the bid inspection team at Kirribilli when they were out in Australia looking at our fantastic facilities for putting on sport. I went to Zurich to meet with the President of FIFA to explain to him just what a great bid Australia's got. Like many Australians I'm going to be sitting on the edge of my seat tonight in my pyjamas watching the coverage come through very, very late at night. I'm very excited to see the result and what we can say as a nation is Australia put on the best Olympics ever, we can put on the best World Cup ever.
JOURNALIST: The Premier Anna Bligh says that she's had a bloody awful year, how would you describe how the State Government's doing?
PM: Well I'll be catching up with Premier Bligh tomorrow and be very pleased to see her. Premier Bligh and I are working on the big challenges for this nation, making sure we've got a strong economy, making sure that in this period of economic growth we are investing in what we need for long term prosperity, that we're tackling the challenges of the future like climate change, and that of course we are making sure we've got a fair society that gives everybody a chance at opportunity. There's nothing more important to that than the quality of local healthcare services. People can't participate in our society and take advantage of all of its opportunities if they can't get something like healthcare when they need it. That's why I'm so excited by today's announcement.
JOURNALIST: Just back to the World Cup video (inaudible) for its jingoistic imagery, do you think that runs counter to the modern image of Australia (inaudible)
PM: I'm proud of that Aussie imagery, I think when people overseas think of Australia they do think of kangaroos and so to weave a kangaroo comedy script around the World Cup showing some of the great iconic places in Australia I think was a good idea. It's meant to be there as a promotion of Australia, it's meant to be there with a bit of fun attached and I think that does summarise what people could expect coming to Australia for the World Cup, that they'd be in a country with world class facilities but in a country that will welcome people from right around the world for the World Cup, that's why the theme is 'Come, Play', this is a great place to do it.
Thank you very much.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) Cabinet meeting tomorrow here?
PM: We've got a Community Cabinet this evening.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Yep.
JOURNALIST: Is there a full Cabinet meeting on tomorrow or is that it?
PM: We'll have the Community Cabinet so Ministers are available in the local community, obviously we're taking the opportunity to have some internal discussions and meetings, but we'll be on display at Clontarf Beach State High School just a few hours from now.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No I'll be here in Queensland and I'll get to watch the World Cup result here in Queensland overnight.
Thank you for your interest in my program, thank you.



PM: It's a great pleasure to be here today. I'm joined by the Premier of Queensland, Anna Bligh, and joined by the Mayor of the Moreton Bay Council, Alan Sutherland, and we are here to sign this document. Our signatures have been put on the page, a very important document, saying there for all the world, in gold letters, that this is the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Moreton Bay Rail Link. This is a fantastic partnership between the Federal Government, State Government, and local Council to bring a desperately needed rail line to a community that has campaigned for it for more than 100 years.
During the election campaign, with the Premier and with the Mayor, I announced that the Gillard Government, if elected, would contribute more than $700 million to this project. I'm pleased today to come here and honour my word, to honour my word by signing this agreement and with the signing of this agreement it is absolutely all systems go to build the Moreton Bay Rail Link.
It's going to make a great difference for people in this local community. Less travel time simply means more time at home with family and friends, and people desperately want to spend more time at home and less time in transit to work.
It's a greener way of people moving from this peninsula to where they need to go for work. Each full train is the equivalent of taking 600 cars off the road, and of course there are thousands of jobs created through this project - thousands of jobs in direct construction and then the jobs which will flow from people being able to move more easily through the new rail line.
I'd like to say to this community, particularly standing here with the Premier and with the local mayor, congratulations on all of the campaigning work you've done to bring this project to this stage I know it's been long fought for. And I'd like to specifically acknowledge our local member Yvette D'Ath, the Member for Petrie, who has been a strong and continuing advocate for this project.
And I'd also like to acknowledge the work of our Minister, Minister Anthony Albanese, who as our Minister for Transport and Infrastructure has been pivotal to the Federal Government making this commitment.
I'll turn now to the Premier for some comments.
PREMIER BLIGH: Thank you Prime Minister and welcome to Queensland, welcome particularly with such good news.
The Moreton Bay Rail Link has been a long time coming. I think it has been promised by almost every Premier of Queensland. I was determined that I would not promise this rail link unless I could deliver it. I am absolutely delighted today to be standing here with the Prime Minister of Australia and the Mayor of the Moreton Bay region to deliver to the people of this part of Brisbane a rail link that will transform their community.
The Moreton Bay Rail Link today becomes signed and sealed. The challenge now is to deliver it. Over the next 12 months we'll have our final geotechnical work undertaken, public consultation on the preferred alignment and construction is set to start in 2012.
This project is now full steam ahead. We've got the finances settled and we're on track to have this start construction in 2012. This rail link will make a huge difference to the congestion on our roads in the northern part of Brisbane and I'm absolutely delighted that we're making it happen.
Prime Minister you came here and made a promise. Today you're keeping that promise. We thank you. To the Council, I know that finding these sorts of funds is not easy at the local level of government. Between the three of us we can make this happen. If it'd been left to one level of government, it would have been a very tough call, but when we all put our shoulders to the wheel we can make something very important happen.
So thank you, thank you to my state Members who between them have always been champions for this project.
As I said it's been a long time coming. No-one can accuse anybody of rushing it, but it's now a reality and it's something that we will now get on and deliver.
I'll invite the Mayor.
MAYOR SUTHERLAND: Well, as I said before, I'd like to thank both the Prime Minister and the Premier. This is indeed an historic occasion for the area and I am absolutely delighted that this is a great example of what happens when people cooperate and work together.
The benefit is going to be for the members of this community, for every man, woman and child that using a car, a clean, greener way to get to work, to get to school, to get to university and that's what it's all about. It's about lifestyle.
This is a very fast growing area in Australia, one of the fastest growing areas in Australia, and unless we work together cooperatively, we won't have these great outcomes and I couldn't be more happy with the outcome here today. After over 100 years of promises, we are finally delivering the Moreton Bay Rail Link.
PM: Thank you very much. We're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well, you'll be able to have a look at the agreement but we have worked long and hard to get the costings right on this. As the Premier has said, and as our local Mayor has indicated, we haven't rushed into this, we've got the details right and the details are in the agreement that we've signed. The funding is being made available, the finances are right and work will be underway in 2012.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that residents will still be sceptical until they see some actual work started, though?
PM: Well, I can understand that people like to see earthworks and things actually happening, but it is locked in. It's absolutely locked in.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
SUTHERLAND: Well, I think one of the reasons for the scepticism, as I can remember at least six or eight occasions where it's been promised from all tiers of government and so many elections. In fact, I can remember going back to the '70s when I was aware of it actually being promised politically, and the rail line, the corridor had been bought many, many years ago. 90 per cent of the corridor had been obtained in the '70s, but still no rail, and you can actually see the rail line from the air. The corridor's been available for many, many years. So when people Moreton Bay Rail Link and the rail to Redcliffe and the names it's been called over the years they go 'oh yeah', but this time it's a reality. That's the difference.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: What this says about the project is that when all three levels of government work together you can actually accelerate something and I think that's a great outcome. One of the reasons why this project can now become a reality is that unlike 30 years ago we now have a much bigger population in the region that will sustain public transport. So, I agree with the Mayor - you can actually Google the rail corridor. It's been here for 30 years, but having that corridor means that now that we've got the funding and the population to sustain it, what can get on a move very quickly. We don't have to go through a long and expensive acquisition process.
So what the Commonwealth and Council funding means is that we can bring forward this project and to bring forward an accelerate projects can often transform the road network, so it's a good thing.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did you achieve high public office through good looks or intelligence?
PM: Look-
BLIGH: -It doesn't have to be an either/or.
PM: I presume you're referring to some comments made by the Leader of the Opposition in Queensland. Can I say, in relation to those comments, every day I go round this country I meed fantastic women who are doing amazing things using their intelligence and using their capacity for hard work.
JOURNALIST: Do you find the comment insulting?
PM: I think they're not right for the 21st century. I think they're a bit of a throwback in time.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: We are opening GP clinics around the country and yesterday, of course, I was very delighted with the local Member here, Yvette D'Ath, to visit the GP Superclinic in Redcliffe, which is in construction, fives stories emerging from the ground, in construction and something that's going to make a big difference to health care, including health care training. As we open clinics we obviously phase in workforce. That's what's happening in the clinic you refer to in South Australia. Doctors will be available from that clinic, workforce is being phased in. The clinic's been opened with the first workers who are available and as areas in the clinic are finalised workforce will be phased in. It's the absolutely standard way of opening a new facility.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: The Minister for Health has obviously worked with the local community to get plans. It's absolutely normal to phase in workforce - nothing unusual, nothing odd, absolutely normal to phase in workforce.
You look here in Queensland, where people I believe are embracing GP Superclinics, you look at the delight in Redcliffe with the new Superclinic, which will not only enable people to get health care services, importantly it will enable training for health care professionals right here, with the ability of people who have been trained here to then stay to help their profession in the region.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I don't accept any of that critique. It's not justified by the facts and we're very happy to give you all of the full facts of the program, and can I suggest that you may want to talk to the people involved here in Redcliffe about how absolutely delighted they are with this transformative project for local health care - a good example of how GP Superclinics are making a difference right around the country.
The GP Superclinic schedule has been published by the Government. The Minister for Health has obviously made a number of announcements about where GP Superclinics are to be located. We've got Superclinics that are open and providing services. We've got Superclinics that are in construction and nearing completion, like the very transformative one I saw in Redcliffe yesterday.
JOURNALIST: Will you release the banking report over the weekend?
PM: The Treasurer, Wayne Swan, has made it clear that he will release his plans on banking and increased competition in the banking sector in December. It'll be released this month, as verified by the Treasurer.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: I don't have any current intentions to do so. My Minister's have big responsibilities and I want them to get on with the job of meeting those responsibilities in their portfolios.
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about how you made it to the top in public life? Is it all good looks or intelligence?
BLIGH: I think with the comments John-Paul Langbroek has managed to singlehandedly insult every woman in Australia. My experience is that Australian women and Australian men get success in life through hard work, intelligence and perseverance, and I think these sorts of comments frankly belong in the last century.
JOURNALIST: Do you reckon he might have got his job by his good looks?
BLIGH: You might (inaudible), but I couldn't possibly comment.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
BLIGH: Look I just don't understand why people are still talking about these sorts of things in the 21st century. Women have to work very hard, just like men, to succeed in any field - whether it's at home, whether it's at work, whether it's in sport, whether it's in something you chose to do after hours. It's not easy to get to the top in any field and for Australian women, just like Australian men, hard work and intelligence is always what takes you there, and these sorts of comments frankly belong in the last century.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, was Paul Hogan the right person to represent Australia in the World Cup bid, considering (inaudible)
PM: The decisions about who appeared in the promotional campaign were made by FIFA and what FIFA wanted to do was bring iconic Australian personalities and iconic Australian scenes woven together with a story with some humour to promote Australia to FIFA and to promote Australia on the world stage.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) $45 million is a lot of money for one vote?
PM: I think everybody is disappointed and those that worked so hard on what was a great bid are very disappointed, and I'd certainly say I believe Frank Lowy and his team have done a remarkable job.
A great bid was put together to showcase Australia to the world. I believe the bid shows that, just like the held the world's best Olympics, we would have held a great World Cup here in this country.
Getting these international sporting events to your nation is tough. People would remember that we have two unsuccessful bids before we attracted the Olympics to Sydney and what a remarkable and wonderful Olympics it was.
So, we've been able to showcase Australia to the world. I'm disappointed, I think Australians are disappointed and the key members of our bid team including great Australians that have worked long and hard, like Frank Lowy, are understandably very disappointed.
JOURNALIST: You're not embarrassed by the result, though, for Australia?
PM: We've shown Australia to the world and that's very important. People will analyse the FIFA voting decision. We're not the only nation disappointed today. Obviously the home of football, the United Kingdom, is also disappointed with the result, but let's remember: great world stage on which to showcase Australia, and we've done that. We had a great bid and it is difficult to get these big, international, sporting events. We tried twice before we successfully got the Olympics in Sydney.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I'm sure this community honours the Bee Gees in many, many different ways. Whether they want a statue I'll leave to local council to work through.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, what's Australia (inaudible) The torture video of Papuans, what does Australia -
PM: -I've had cause to comment on this matter before and when I met with the President of Indonesia he was very, very open about saying to me, and he later said to the waiting media who interviewed the two of us, that he personally wanted to see the appropriate action taken about this matter. He wants to see any wrongdoers brought to justice and is very focussed on that.
JOURNALIST: What will Australia do?
PM: These are matters for the Indonesian government. It happened in Indonesia.
JOURNALIST: Why is Australia still (inaudible)
PM: We, as a nation, have human rights values and we raise those human rights values on the world stage, that's appropriate. The President of Indonesia has made absolutely clear that he wants to see any wrongdoers brought to justice in this matter.
JOURNALIST: Premier, health bureaucrats have gotten into (inaudible), what was your reaction to that (inaudible)
BLIGH: Queensland reports incidents in our hospitals in an open and transparent way. This is the report of critical incidents in our hospitals that was published in relation to '07/'08. We publish it every two years and the next one will be due in the early part of 2011.
This material is publicly available. We report openly and transparently. In fact, we're required to under national requirements.
What we will not do - and I give the patients of Queensland this absolute reassurance - what we will not do is provide through right to information material the names of patients to journalist and nor will we provide the names of staff to journalists. I can understand why journalists want this material, but I give the patients of our health system an absolute guarantee that their confidentiality and privacy will be protected.
What we will do is provide this information as we have done consistently, I think for almost a decade. Every critical incident that happens in our hospital gets recorded and then published in documents such as this, in a form that is part of a national agreement so that we can make comparisons between Queensland and other states.
JOURNALIST: Why would they go to that length to hide information? I mean, details (inaudible)
BLIGH: I understand that the material that was not provided to the journalist in question was material that, while the name had been blacked out, still had sufficient identifying information. We will protect the identity and confidentiality of the patients of Queensland Health, as well as the staff who work in our system where appropriate.
What we will also do is continue to report in considerable detail, because we understand you only improve the system by ensuring you examine carefully those mistakes that happen in the system. That's what this report does. This report will be published every two years.
What I will not do - and I give and absolute commitment to patients in our heath system - is provide identifying information to journalists. 



PM: I'm here with David Bradbury, the Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasurer, to make an announcement relating to a Commonwealth loan arrangement with New South Wales for the asbestos-related victims of James Hardie.
Can I start by saying that when I was a young solicitor I learned at first hand the cruelty of asbestos-related diseases for Australians and their families. This is a very difficult circumstance that Australians families in their thousands have had to confront - knowing that they were exposed to asbestos, the long wait to see whether or not that would cause a disease that then, of course, meant such tragedy for families.
We've seen great Australian heroes like Bernie Banton fight against this cruel disease and fight for compensation in the full gaze of the Australian public, and I believe many members of the Australian community watched, particularly, Bernie Banton's fight with a great deal of sympathy and concern.
So, today with David Bradbury I'm here to announce that the Commonwealth has signed off a loan agreement with New South Wales for up $160 million. This money will be directed with matching New South Wales Government contributions as necessary into the Asbestos Injuries Compensation Fund. This was the fund set up in 2005 to be the source of money to deal with asbestos-related claims for victims of James Hardie.
People would recall the debates at the time; that we wanted to ensure that victims had certainty; that they would be able to make their claims and there would be a source of funds for those claims.
Now, in making this loan available to the Government of New South Wales to be drawn into the fund with matching contributions from New South Wales, we are giving certainty to James Hardie asbestos victims that there are funds available to meet their claims.
Now, this in no way overrides the moral or legal obligation of James Hardie to continue to make contributions into the fund, but the profitability of James Hardie has been affected by the global financial crisis and that has affected its ability to make contributions into the fund in recent times.
So, to give families certainty at what is an incredibly difficult part of their lives, we have determined to make this loan arrangement available. The loan will be repaid to the Commonwealth - it will be repaid in full to the Commonwealth - but it will be available now to give families certainty.
I'll turn to David for some comments and then I'll make some comments about another matter.
PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY BRADBURY: Thanks very much. It's good to be here with you, Prime Minister, to announce that earlier today I signed a loan agreement with New South Wales of behalf of the Commonwealth, and under that agreement the Commonwealth will be making available an amount of up to $160 million to the New South Wales Government. As and when funds are drawn down by the New South Wales Government under that loan agreement, those funds will be paid into the Asbestos Injuries Compensation Fund and the New South Wales Government will make payments that are at least matching and potentially of a greater amount into the compensation fund.
The purpose of this loan is to assist New South Wales in being able to ensure that sufficient funds are made available in that compensation fund to give victims and their families, victims of James Hardie-related asbestos injury, to give them the certainty and the peace of mind of knowing that their compensation claims will be paid and paid in full.
For many of the victims this means that they will be able to receive their compensation payments whilst they're still alive, and whilst no amount of compensation can ever give back to these victims and to their families that which this brutal disease has taken away from them, we do believe that it is important for the Government to do what we can to assist and to ensure that the victims are able to have those payments made to them in full.
As the Prime Minister indicated, there is in place an agreement between the New South Wales Government and James Hardie, and under that agreement there is a specified formula that requires James Hardie to make certain payments into the compensation fund. Now, that formula is linked to the performance, the profitability, of James Hardie, and as James Hardie's profitability has declined in recent times as a result of the impact of the global financial crisis, those payments have in some cases not been required to be made, and that is certainly the case in relation to 2009, although in 2010 James Hardie did make a payment into the fund of approximately $72 million.
The funds that can be drawn down and matched, drawn down under the loan agreement and matched by the New South Wales Government, will provide sufficient funds in the compensation fund to ensure that the liabilities, the compensation payments required to be made over the coming three years will be provided for and that of course is not taking into account any additional and future payments that James Hardie makes into the fund.
The loan agreement, as the Prime Minister indicated, is required to be repaid in full by the 30th of June 2020 and the loan is being made available with an interest rate that is equivalent to the Commonwealth's cost of borrowings. This measure has been included in the 2010-11 Budget and has no net impact on the fiscal balance.
I would like to take the opportunity to acknowledge the New South Wales Government, to acknowledge the trade union movement, the ACTU and Unions New South Wales for their contribution towards ensuring the victims of James Hardie-related asbestos disease have been able to obtain some justice.
I also wish to take the opportunity to acknowledge and to thank the many asbestos-related advocacy groups. As the Prime Minister indicated, most well-known amongst them has been Bernie Banton and the various groups that he has given voice to. Without the advocacy that they have provided and without the support of the New South Wales Government and the union movement then the compensation payments that are currently being paid to many of these victims would not have been made available.
So, this is an important initiative. What we are doing today, in having signed this agreement, is to formalise and to confirm the arrangements that were entered into between the New South Wales Government and the Commonwealth Government last year in the forms of a Heads of Agreement, and we certainly look forward to working closely with the New South Wales Government to ensure that payments are made to victims in a prompt and appropriate fashion.
PM: Thank you. We're happy to take questions on that matter, but before we do I would like to make some comments about one other matter.
Mr Michael Taylor, the Chair of the Murray-Darling Basin Authority, has today announced his resignation from that position.
I'd like to take this opportunity to thank Mr Taylor for his work. I am a very big respecter of people who put their time and energy into public service. Mr Taylor has done that and he's done that in circumstances where it wasn't easy. And Mr Taylor has shown, I believe, a great deal of persistence and openness in attending forums at regional communities, where often he was dealing with people who were angry, or distressed, or confused about the nature of the reforms and he has worked through with those individuals. So, I'd say to Mr Taylor that my thanks as Prime Minister and the Government's thanks go to him for the work he's done as Chair of the Murray-Darling Basin Authority.
As Mr Taylor makes clear in his letter of resignation, he has a particular view about the meaning of the Water Act and the way in which the Murray-Darling Basin reforms should occur. Particularly, he believes that the overriding outcome that should be sought from these reforms is the environmental outcome.
As Prime Minister my view is that we must optimise across the environmental, social, economic areas of work. That is the aim of these reforms; is to ensure we've got a healthy river; we've got food production; and we've got viable regional communities. We want to optimise across those three areas - healthy rivers, food production and viable regional communities.
I believe that when the Water Act first went through this Parliament under the then Howard Government and under the oversight of the then Minister Malcolm Turnbull, that the aim was optimising across these three areas. The Government will continue to see these reforms with optimisation across these three areas.
The Government will appoint a replacement as Chair of the Murray-Darling Basin Authority and our reform programme will stay on track. As people would probably be aware we are at the stage where a guide to the Murray-Darling Basin Plan has been published. There have been consultations about that guide. During the course of next year a draft plan will be published and there will be further consultations and the ultimately our Minister, Minister Tony Burke, will sign off a plan and bring it to the Australian Parliament.
At the same time as that work is happening through the independent Authority, the ministers involved - Minister Burke, Minister Crean and Minister Ludwig - will be out there consulting with regional communities and the Parliamentary Committee, led by Tony Windsor, will also be out there consulting with regional communities. So, the reform program here is on track and that is the forward work program for 2011.
We've got one chance to get water reform right. This is an area that people have talked about for a long period of time. Now we need to get it done.
We've got one chance to get it right and getting it right means optimising environmental, social and economic outcomes and that will be the reform work we will do in 2011, so that for generations to come Australians will be able to see that we've got healthy river systems, we've got food production happening in this country and we've got viable regional communities in which people make their homes and make their lives.
I'm very happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, has your view changed since Adelaide, during the election campaign, on the Murray Darling, because if I, I'm going off my memory, but, which isn't the best sometimes-
PM: -Hey, fragile source.
JOURNALIST: Sometimes. But if I remember what you said correctly in Adelaide, during the election campaign, you only spoke about environmental outcomes and you basically promised to buy every litre of water that was necessary to restore the Murray-Darling, to the environmental outcomes for the Murray-Darling, so has your position now changed to take in social and economic matters?
PM: As the year draws to a close I don't want to get into a debate with you about quality of recollections on the year that's been, but I can say to you very clearly that the election commitment I made is that the government will do what is necessary to implement the Murray-Darling Basin plan.
We have been in market buying water. We are buying water from willing sellers and the commitment I made in Adelaide was when we have the Murray-Darling Basin plan we will implement it and that will require further water purchasing from willing sellers.
So, the aim here is to get the plan. The plan needs to make sure we are optimising environmental, social and economic outcomes and we will implement the plan.
The promise I gave is in sharp contrast to the promise that Tony Abbott gave. He said he would implement the draft plan within two weeks, I think it was, of being elected. That is, he didn't want to talk to regional communities, didn't want to have any consultations, he didn't want to ask people what their views were. Well, I believe this reform is a fundamental one, it's a big one, but it's one where we should have people with the opportunity to have their voices heard and that's what's happening now.
Yes, Lyndal?
I did say Lyndal. We've got some civility in the shade.
JOURNALIST: Mike Taylor, in his letter, seems pretty clear that he believes he was acting in accordance with his obligations under the Act. Given you've had differing legal advice, would you seek to reconfirm or get new legal advice, because presumably the last thing you want, the last thing, presumably you don't want any questions of legal certainty over the final deal when it's done?
PM: I'm completely confident about the legal advice we have received. I'm completely confident that the Water Act is requiring optimising across environmental, social and economic outcomes. As Prime Minister, leading this Government, that is the reform agenda that we want to see delivered in 2011. It will require the independent authority to continue its work and then it will require the relevant Minister, Tony Burke, to bring the plan to Parliament.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Why should the Australian taxpayer bailout a company which not only produced products which killed people, and what confidence do you have that the Government won't be in the same position in 4-5 years' time if the American housing market doesn't recover, which is the main source of James Hardie's revenue?
PM: Well, no-one is bailing anyone out. What we are doing is making arrangements so that families who have had a family member diagnosed with a fatal disease like Mesothelioma, a cruel disease, know that they've got certainty that there is a fund they can turn to for their justifiable compensation claims.
I don't want families under that kind of stress to also be anxious about what is going to happen with funding their compensation claim.
It was recognised in 2005, when these agreements were struck, that it wasn't in the interest of claimants to have James Hardie go under. What was in the interests of claimants was to have ongoing arrangements, a source of funds to meet claims. We're in a circumstance where, under that agreement, James Hardie's profitability was always going to be a factor taken into account in its ability to put money into this fund. Clearly, in global financial crisis circumstances that has had an impact in its profitability, hence the loan arrangement we have announced today.
The Commonwealth will be repaid the loan arrangement and families will get certainty in the meantime.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Your Government's cuts to funding for the Tasmanian forestry industry, do you accept criticism that that'll cause the Tasmanian forestry accord to completely collapse?
PM: We're not cutting anything, so the premise of your question is entirely wrong, I'm afraid.
What the Government has said, what the Government's announced, is that as a Government we want to facilitate the historic agreement entered into by the stakeholders in Tasmania being brought to life. What's happened here is that industry, unions and environmental stakeholders, many of whom had been fighting each other for 20 years, have sat around a table and struck an agreement about the future for Tasmanian forests and the future for industry in Tasmania.
Now, for that agreement to not just be words on a page but actually to be in the real world and make a difference, for that agreement to come to life, it requires the Tasmanian Government to step up to some responsibilities; it requires engagement of the Federal Government, and yesterday we announced the manner of that engagement. It will be through a jointly appointed, empowered facilitator - an individual who will work with the groups that have signed this agreement to now take the next steps.
Paul Bongiorno?
JOURNALIST: Thank you very much. By the sound of it, Mr Taylor was pushed. Will you be looking for someone to replace him who shares your view of the Act, and anyway, won't the result of the Victorian election make it virtually impossible to come up with a national plan for the Basin?
PM: First and foremost, Mr Taylor has resigned.
Second, I am optimistic about achieving the reforms that we seek. I think Australians are saying to the Federal Government, and they will also be saying to state governments, that this is a reform the time for which has come. I think Australians will judge very harshly any leader, any government, who lets this reform moment go by, and let's remember in this parliament this is a bipartisan reform - started by the Howard Government, Malcolm Turnbull as Minster, being continued by the current Government, with optimising across the three areas: social, economic and environmental.
Now, I know there are days in Question Time when we see the Leader of the Opposition in his usual negative mode. It can be hard to diagnose that this is a bipartisan reform, but it is bipartisan in its generation here. We need to work with state governments to deliver it. I think people will judge state governments very harshly if they let this reform moment go by.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minster, timber workers say they need an assistance package of about $200 million. They say your, I think, $22 million dollar package isn't enough. Have you got any plans to deliver some more money?
PM: Well, we've got the engagement that we announced yesterday here for bringing the agreement to life, and I do want to say to all stakeholders, as a Federal Government, no-one should expect a blank cheque here. No-one should expect us to be there just listening to claims and then responding to them.
What we need is we need a process that gets the stakeholders to work on delivering the agreement. We also require the Tasmanian Government to step up to its responsibilities here and to access revenue that it can access to be put into this task, so we require the Tasmanian Government to step up.
We pointed yesterday to the fact that the Federal Government already has some money allocated in the forward estimates for forestry-related issues in Tasmania and that's the source of funds that we are looking to. We want to take a prudent, disciplined approach here - and we will.
Yes, Phil Coorey?
JOURNALIST: Can I ask you about the revelations today about Craig Thomson's past - are you concerned about any implications that may flow from that information today?
PM: Well, I'm not going to comment on a legal matter that's in train. What I would say is that Craig Thomson is very valued member of my team. He completely rejects out of hand these allegations. Consequently, there is a defamation action on foot and where there is a defamation action on foot before the courts I'm not going to be drawn into commentating on it.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) how prepared is Labor to fight a by-election if it comes to that?
PM: I didn't hear that first part?
JOURNALIST: How prepared is Labor to fight a by-election?
PM: I know it's drawing to the end of the year but I'm not sure that we've moved into flights of fancy rather than reporting news. What we've got on foot is a defamation action where Mr Thomson completely denies the allegations that have been made against him.
Kieran?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the Opposition is calling on you to confirm whether or not the advice Mr Rudd gave to Hillary Clinton last year is formal Government policy. Why won't you do that, and as we come to the end of the year, on a separate tack, what's the morale like in the Cabinet?
PM: Well, firstly on the issues yesterday, on the statements yesterday of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Julie Bishop, they have been rightly criticised by foreign policy experts today, outside Government, as cheap and irresponsible and that's what they are.
The Government is not going to be commenting on the contents of or alleged accuracy of any cables involved in this WikiLeaks process. Anybody who is asking us to do that is playing cheap politics rather than looking to the national interest.
Yes, Phil Hudson?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you mentioned flights of fancy. Today it's been revealed that a former senator under the gold pass scheme, in just two years took 147 flights costing $116,000. Is that really a good use of taxpayers' money? Are you going to shut down the gold pass scheme?
PM: I think we've got to give the prize for the most tortured word association of today, but fairly well done on that word association.
Look, I've seen that these matters have been reported in today's newspapers and that the story is authored by one Phil Hudson. I've seen that and I will be briefed on this individual matter.
I'm not in a position to comment on the individual matter now, but I will say about the question of how parliamentarians' entitlements are dealt with, that my view is it is best if these entitlements are dealt with independently by a tribunal independent of parliamentarians, that they set fair rules and that people then adhere to those rules.
I understand that there are public questions about the use of entitlements by people who were politicians. I think there's some things that need to be considered in this debate. I've said before and I'm happy to point to it again as an important example, I am the successor in the seat of Lalor to Barry Jones. Barry Jones, today, is still invited the attend conferences and events around the country associated with science. He came into this parliament famous for Pick a Box. He left this parliament famous for his passion for science and there are people around the country who still want to hear him speak and have him involved in their events because of that passion for science-
JOURNALIST: -(inaudible) for a week.
PM: Look, I believe that there's some balances there we've got to strike and I think it would be unfortunate if a figure like Barry Jones couldn't attend a school event in New South Wales to promote science. So, how you get the balance right, I think these things are best done by independent tribunals.
We'll just go, we haven't, Latika hasn't had a question.
JOURNALIST: Thank you, Prime Minister. Following on from Friday, your comments when you said the WikiLeaks case was illegal, what Australian laws do you think Julian Assange has broken?
PM: Look, the foundation stone of this WikiLeaks issue is an illegal act. The foundation stone of it is an illegal act. Information was taken and that was illegal, so let's not try and put any glosses on this. It would not happen, information would not be on WikiLeaks, if there had not been an illegal act undertaken.
JOURNALIST: But that happens with whistleblowers leaking information often. That doesn't necessarily mean the person who then brings that information to the public light has committed an illegal act, does it?
PM: The Australian Federal Police is going to provide the Government with some advice about potential criminal conduct of the individual involved. People would be aware that there's also the issue of a warrant relating to an alleged sexual assault in Sweden.
What I would say about the publication of the WikiLeaks information is it's grossly irresponsible and anybody who looks at the pages of newspaper and sees that things like critical infrastructure lists are being put on WikiLeaks would as a matter of just common sense understand how grossly irresponsible this is.
JOURNALIST: So, Ms Gillard that relates to the law in another country, the actual giving out of the information. The question, I think, was about Australian law. Have you had any preliminary advice from the Federal Police, and they've had now some time to give such advice - why is it taking so long?
PM: I haven't received advice yet and obviously our Federal Police go through thorough processes before providing such advice, but I've been asked about this matter a number of times and I want to be clear about my attitude to it: the foundation stone is an illegal act that certainly breached the laws of the United States of America. The individual involved, there are potential matters arising from Sweden and the warrant there. Then, of course, we've got the Australian Federal Police looking to see whether Australian laws have been broken and then we've got the common sense test about the gross irresponsibility of this conduct.
Yes?
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) is reforming the telecommunications sector-
PM: -Say again? I missed the first few words.
JOURNALIST: You're Government is reforming the telecommunications sector. Fred Hilmer, who's something of an expert on competition, as I'm sure you agree, has today said that you are in fact re-regulating the industry. First of all, what did you make of Mr Hilmer's comments?
And I guess as a second question, 47 per cent of Australians are willing to pay extra for electricity prices to take action on climate change. You've got the Greens, I guess, dragging you, as we all know, towards putting a price on carbon by early next year. How are you going to balance the demands of the Greens with the desires of the Australian people who don't want to pay more for electricity?
PM: Well, once again I'm not accepting the premise of the second part of your question, it's wrong, and on carbon pricing what I will be saying to the Australian people as Prime Minister is that it's in our interests, in the interests of Australians, to get our economy ready for a low-pollution future.
As Prime Minister, I am guided each and every day about what's in our national interest. What's in the interests of Australian families? It's in their interest for us to have a low-pollution economy in the future.
Australians are rightly concerned about electricity prices. They've seen big increases, and in part they've seen those big increases because we've had a decade of underinvestment in base load electricity generation, partly as a result of uncertainty about carbon pricing.
Well, as Prime Minister I am not going to allow the next decade to be the same as the last, meaning Australians will face ever-escalating electricity prices and the risk - the real risk - of black outs in peaks period of usage.
That's why as Prime Minister, working with Minister Combet, we are leading the debate for how this country should price carbon. I'm not going to pretend that it's easy - it's not easy - but it's a necessary reform: the future of our economy; dealing with questions like electricity supply; future of Australian families, and we will be working in 2011 to deliver an agreed mechanism for pricing carbon.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Oh, sorry, and on Professor Hilmer, I've seen today's comments. I believe that the reforms that we brought to this Parliament and secured through this Parliament, despite the bitterness and negativity of the Opposition, are important reforms for telecommunications, for the telecommunications industry, important reforms for competition. They are ending the vertical integration which has created Telstra as an absolute gorilla in the market. We will have NBN Co providing fibre and retail competition on the basis of it - good for Australia. We need this technology for our future - good for competition, pricing, services, and innovation.
Mark, we'll take the last question.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, given your previous portfolio, will you be intervening personally in the national curriculum negotiations, and given that New South Wales is questioning education plans and Mike Taylor is questioning some of the water plan, are you confident that 2011 will still be a year of delivery?
PM: Absolutely confident, and on national curriculum Minister Garrett has the matter well in hand.
Thank you. 



PM: Can I start by saying it's a great pleasure to be here at St Vincent's and I thank everybody for having hosted and shown us around. I'm joined by the Minister for Health Nicola Roxon. We're here in Melbourne looking out on a grey and rainy day so I did want to start by acknowledging that right around the country many Australians are battling with floodwaters. There are problems in Queensland, in New South Wales, in Victoria and in South Australia. Some areas of disaster have been declared in New South Wales and Queensland and as result the Commonwealth is providing disaster relief payments. We are obviously working with State Governments and emergency services around the country, continuing to monitor situations closely and standing by ready to assist as communities and individuals battle impending floods.
As Prime Minister I do want to say to those community members that our thoughts are with them and that the Federal Government will provide the assistance necessary as we deal with floodwaters and lots of rain in many parts of the country.
I also want to send my congratulations to all of the emergency services personnel and volunteers who do such remarkable work in these difficult circumstances. And while in four States we are seeing a lot of rain and a lot of water, we should remind ourselves that over in Western Australia farmers are still facing a heartbreaking drought and our thoughts are with them as well as they continue to battle with drought and its effect on their farms.
Can I turn now to saying something specifically about health and the visit here at this great hospital today. As a Federal Government we announced that we would provide $600 million to assist Australians to get elective surgery. We know that too many Australians have had to wait for elective surgery procedures, we wanted to make a difference to that so we announced a $600 million plan.
Now part one of that plan was the funding of 70,000 more elective surgery procedures. Part two of it was providing more resources to 120 hospitals around the country to make a difference to their facilities. And I'm here today with the Minister for Health to announce part three and that is the payment of $108 million in reward money to states and territories.
We didn't want the extra 70,000 elective surgery procedures to be a one hit wonder, we wanted higher levels of effort, more elective surgery to be provided over time. So we said to states and territories that we would provide reward money if they did provide extra elective surgeries to their citizens and states and territories have risen to that challenge and I congratulate them.
As a result we are able to make available this $108 million in reward payments.
For Victoria this means an extra $27 million. Victoria well and truly exceeded its target and I congratulate all of those involved in hospitals in Victoria, all of the staff in achieving that result.
Now what this shows in a really practical way is what health reform can achieve, what the Council of Australian Governments can achieve, what working together between Federal and State Governments can achieve for people who need healthcare, and when it comes right down to it our health reforms are about more doctors, more nurses, more beds in hospitals, more Australians getting the healthcare they need.
Our hospital reforms for Victoria would mean an extra $4 billion of resources for hospitals. Yes, as part of these reforms, the Federal Government would take back a share of Victoria's GST, but the extra amount available to Victoria would be $4 billion, that is more money would come into Victoria for health than has been retained by the Commonwealth in GST.
This is an important reform for Victoria, an important reform right around the country. I will continue to talk with Premier Baillieu and to work with his new Government because I believe here in Victoria and right around the nation Australians want to see the Federal Government working with State Governments to deliver real change like more doctors, more nurses, more beds, more healthcare services available for Australians.
Can I conclude by saying COAG is dealing with a number of important reform agendas, health is one of them. Another very important reform agenda is education and today in Canberra Education Ministers are meeting and discussing a broad range of issues, but most particularly the national curriculum.
Education Ministers will deal with this issue in detail today but Education Ministers are working their way through in this meeting so that the national curriculum will be a reality in schools.
Coming out of today's meeting we will see states and territories working with the Federal Government to deliver the national curriculum from 2010 on. This is an important reform for Australian schools and Australian students - a national, high quality curriculum being taught in every school.
I'll turn now to the Minister for Health for some comments.
MINISTER ROXON: That you just some brief comments. It's great to be here again at St Vincent's, of course this is one of Melbourne's leading hospitals and it's provided, despite it being a non-government organisation, it plays a vital role in the public service delivery of health services for Victorians. The Prime Minister and I met today two patients who've had their elective surgery undertaken as part of a program under the Victorian Government, funded by us and run jointly, which allows people waiting on public waiting lists to be able to get their surgery undertaken here at St Vincent's and I think this is an example not just of a partnership between State Governments and the Commonwealth, but also between the public and private sector.
Our reforms want to be able to make the most of the capacity across the whole health system and this is an example of how that's been done well. The Prime Minister has outlined our determination to be able to work with the new Victorian Government to ensure those benefits continue to flow to the community in Victoria, and an example is that the Brumby Government committed as part of their implementation plans for COAG, a $4 million investment here at St Vincent's, to be able to upgrade the intensive care unit and the higher dependency unit, providing more than 20 extra beds. We hope that the new Government will look at those sorts of benefits and work with us to implement this plan, because we believe it has a lot to offer not just for Victorians today, but for generations to come.
PM: Thank you we're happy to take questions.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I had an initial discussion with Premier Baillieu by telephone shortly after the Victorian election.
I said I would like to meet with him to talk about a number of things on the COAG agenda. Premier Baillieu understandably said that he wanted to get his feet under the desk, get his office set up and be fully briefed on these questions. I spoke to him before he had even made the transition into working from the office of the Premier. So I well and truly understand that and I'm looking forward to that discussion at the appropriate time and of course we will have, I have written to my State and Territory colleagues including Premier Baillieu indicating that we will have a COAG meeting in the new year on the 14th of February.
JOURNALIST: On the leaked US diplomatic cables, it seems the US Government agrees with you that under Mr Rudd Australia had lost its way. Are you still confident that Mr Rudd is the right person for Foreign Minister, given the United States has called into question is judgement on foreign affairs?
PM: Well firstly I'm not going to comment on the content of any cables, I've made that clear about the Wikileaks matter and I won't be commenting on the specifics of any cables that are released through Wikileaks. On the question of Kevin Rudd, Kevin Rudd is doing a fantastic job as Foreign Minister. Kevin Rudd is a man who throughout his adult life has devoted himself to expertise in foreign policy, he's bringing that expertise to bear for the Australian nation and doing an absolutely first-class job.
JOURNALIST: You can't just push those cables away though, they're out there, they're causing embarrassment worldwide, so could that cause problems in having Kevin Rudd being the front person for (inaudible)
PM: Certainly not and on the cables, let me say, people are going to talk about individual cables, I understand that. But what we're seeing is a grossly irresponsible release of thousands and thousands of cables and I am not going to be drawn and the government is not going to be drawn into commenting on confidential cables released through Wikileaks.
JOURNALIST: Were you aware that Mr Rudd had this reputation with diplomats?
PM: Well I'm not going to agree with the premise of the question. We're talking about one cable, obviously there are hundreds of thousands of diplomatic cables drawn up by countries around the world as a normal part of diplomacy, year in and year out. It would be foolish indeed to extrapolate from one cable a whole attitude. The alliance between Australia and America is strong. When I met with President Obama I described our two countries as great mates. That's what we are, that's what we'll continue to be.
JOURNALIST: Do have concerns about other countries about (inaudible) approach to the world?
PM: That's a laughable question, absolutely not.
JOURNALIST: It does seem to be more though than just the one cable. Are you at all confident that (inaudible) assessment of Australian foreign policy under your leadership are any better than (inaudible)?
PM: The thing you should judge foreign policy on is outcomes and let's look, standing here in this great city of Melbourne at outcomes. The incredibly successful AUSMIN meeting we had here, out annual strategic dialogue with the United States, Secretary of State Clinton, Secretary of Defence Gates, in Melbourne and obviously delighted to be here to participate in an annual dialogue that had real outcomes about further cooperation in our defence and security relationship, including further cooperation dealing with the new threats of our age, some threats in space, space junk and threats with cyber terrorism and cyber security.
These are the outcomes of foreign policy, as Prime Minister I've had the opportunity to attend a number of meetings including the East Asia Summit where we realised Australia's vision of having a piece of regional architecture, a meeting where leaders went which brought around the one table the President of the United States, with the Leader of China, with the countries of our region, talking across strategic issues, defence questions and economic questions. These are real foreign policy outcomes, good for this country.
?JOURNALIST: Do agree with Ambassador Beazley's position that Australians would side with Americans, with America in any conflict?
PM: It would be irresponsible for me to deal with hypotheticals about conflicts and I'm not going to do so.
?JOURNALIST: There's been a view that political correctness gone mad in (inaudible) taking decorations down (inaudible)
PM: Always very delighted to see Christmas decorations, I was actually commenting to the friends from the hospital as we moved around, I didn't quite break into song, but I did use the expression that it's beginning to look a lot like Christmas when we saw so many Christmas decorations.
I think Christmas decorations are a wonderful and joyous thing they should be where ever people want to have them, including schools and school buses.
JOURNALIST: On the Murray Darling Basin Authority, would you consider reforming the Water Act?
PM: There's not need to reform the Water Act. The Water Act enables us to deliver a plan for the future of the Murray Darling Basin that optimises across environmental outcomes, economic outcomes, social outcomes. What that really means is a healthy river, food production and viable regional communities.
The Water Act is constructed to enable optimising across those three, that's what Minister Turnbull, Malcolm Turnbull said when the Howard government legislated the Water Act and we are pursuing this reform agenda to its conclusion and we will stay on track for delivering those reforms in the timetable we've already outlined.
JOURNALIST: By tweaking that question though couldn't you just remove any uncertainty whatsoever (inaudible)
PM: We're very confident that the Water Act enables us through the Murray Darling Basin Authority, and we do need to remember of course it's an independent authority, but the Water Act enables the Murray Darling Basin Authority to produce a draft plan for consultation and then a plan for the Minister and the Minister will of course then bring the plan to Parliament, enables that to be done optimising healthy river, food production and viable regional communities.
?JOURNALIST: Another Labor MP had quit in NSW, are you worried about the party down there?
PM: That's a matter for the NSW State Government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, again on the Wikileaks cable, it is disappointing to see evidence that Australian diplomats were making disparaging comments about the then Australian Government to the Americans and can you give an assurance that none of the diplomats that have been named in the cables will suffer any repercussions?
PM: I'm not commenting on the contents of cables. We select our diplomats on the basis of competence and their ability to represent Australia and I've got every confidence in the diplomats we've selected and of course our diplomatic relationship, our alliance with America is incredibly strong and I'd refer people to the AUSMIN meeting here, to my own discussion with President Obama, two countries, great mates, working together on a shared agenda in so many areas, defence, strategic geopolitical agendas around the world.
?JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
MINISTER ROXON: Well I can absolutely clarify it, there's no uncertainty from the government's point of view. GP Super Clinics must include GPs, that is part of the requirement for every contract we enter into. The report I think is quite misleading and actually actively wrong. We have made an offer to establish a Super Clinic in Rockingham, we are conducting those negotiations right now with the division of GPs. They know that that offer requires GPs to be part of the clinic, if they chose not to follow that course then of course we would negotiate a contract with another provider. So I think there's a little bit of positioning going on in those negotiations.
This was a commitment that was made at this recent election, so we're actually in a very good position that we're negotiating a contract with them right now that would enable services to be provided in the Rockingham/Kwinana region of Western Australia.
So we need to be very, very clear here, the GP Super Clinic program is about getting more GPs closer to people's homes, where they need them and encouraging GPs to work with other health professionals, nurses, dieticians, physiotherapists, podiatrists and others. Is it not about providing services without GPs, although of course there are many, many more services that are being provided now in multidisciplinary teams to enable the best type of care that can be provided to local mums and dads not having to run around with their kids between lots of different services and getting more of their care in the one place. 



PM: I have this morning been briefed by a range of officials, including Deputy Commissioner Colvin, on the tragic situation at Christmas Island. Can I start by saying this is a tragic event. We have seen loss of life. There are people on Christmas Island who will never forget the dreadful sights that they have seen in the last day and a half. Those memories will be with them for the rest of their lives. And of course we know in circumstances like this, that Australians want to understand what has happened. I will today be providing an update from Christmas Island and the tragic circumstances there, but I do want to be clear - what we know from past events like this one, is that the facts take some time to compile and so things that I will talk about today are advice to hand presently, but further details will become available over time.
Let me outline what we do know at this still relatively early stage. Border Protection Command was first notified of this vessel early yesterday mornings, when it was clearly in distress and hard up against the Christmas Island shore line. Navy and Customs vessels responded rapidly, but were unable to reach the vessel before it hit the rocks. A search and rescue operation was launched and it continued yesterday in extremely bad weather conditions, it continued while there was light. And this operation has been recommenced; it is underway as we speak with Navy and Customs assets. A P3 Orion has also been tasked out of Darwin to provide additional search and rescue capability. As of this morning, on the most recent advice available to me, 42 passengers from the vessel have been rescued, though this number may move around as we clarify through officials at Christmas Island the number of people who are now there on the Island in their care.
28 bodies have been recovered and of those 28 bodies, a number are young people and children. We do not know with any certainty how many people there were on the boat, so we've got to prepare ourselves for the likelihood that more bodies will be found and that there has been further loss of life than we know now with the numbers available to us now.
Our initial assessments, though these are not yet confirmed, are that the passengers on the boat are on Iranian, Iraqi and Kurdish origin. All survivors were originally brought to Christmas Island and the injured are receiving care. Two passengers were evacuated overnight to Perth because of the serious nature of their injuries and the need for the kind of assistance that can be made available in Perth, than cannot be made available on Christmas Island.
We expect a further three survivors to be transferred to Perth today, once again to receive additional medical care. A further three survivors are being observed in the Christmas Island Hospital. A team of trauma counsellors, Red Cross carers, interpreters and Immigration Officials is on its way to Christmas Island to provide additional support and we're also making every effort to respond to the needs of the Christmas Island community, including offering counselling and support to those who were witness to these dreadful events.
Yesterday we saw a truly horrific event, a terrible human tragedy, on what is a very dangerous coastline at Christmas Island and I know the nation is shocked by what we have seen. We condemn the trade of people smuggling, it is an evil trade, but I believe Australians are responding to these events today as human beings. We're seeing other human beings in distress and they're imagining to themselves - how would I feel if I was in those circumstances, how would I feel if I lost my wife, my husband, or my child in such rough and dangerous seas. I think we are seeing Australians respond with the kind of compassionate response that as Australians we are known for.
I want to today pay tribute to the people of Christmas Island. They were magnificent in these really difficult circumstances. They responded with great bravery and great compassion. I want to pay tribute to the professionalism of the men and women of the Australian Navy and Border Protection Command. They put themselves in harm's way, in dangerous seas, to help others. I think they were magnificent in how we've seen them respond and I think Australians who have seen the photographs would see that for themselves.
Together the people of Christmas Island and our Navy personnel and Border Protection personnel have rescued over 40 people and we owe them a debt of gratitude for that.
Finally, I also want to thank Western Australia, its Police and Emergency Services personnel, its health workers. I want to convey my thanks to the Premier of Western Australia; they've been very supportive as this incident has unfolded. I do also want to convey my thanks for the work that is still being undertaken by the Australian Federal Police and of course the work that will continue to be undertaken by the Immigration Officers of our own Department of Immigration.
Clearly it's going to take some time to establish exactly what has happened here. We expect that there will be a WA Coronial investigation, which will cover all of these events in detail. The scope of that investigation will be determined by the Coroner. There will also be a criminal investigation under Australia's people smuggling laws. There will be an immediate review carried out by Customs and Border Protection, this will involve and initial collection of facts and the initial assessment indentifying any immediate action required. The information from that assessment will be provided to the Australian Federal Police, in the context of their investigation and their anticipated report to the Coroner.
I believe it is vital that the truth, every fact, about this tragic incident is known to decision makers and to the general public. I'm sure that each Parliamentarian and every member of the Australian community would see it that way, they would want to know what the facts are.
I want to take this opportunity to thank the Opposition for their very responsible approach and responsible public commentary as this matter has unfolded and while search and rescue operations are still underway, as they are today.
Inevitably there will be public debate about policies relating to asylum seekers and refugees. As I've said before, I'm all in favour of frank, open and honest national conversations about policies in this area and generally. These conversations will be had as they should be had, but these conversations are best had when they're fully informed by the facts.
Whatever the debate to come about policy is, the facts are the facts. To ensure the facts are known I have decided to invite the Opposition, the Greens and the Independent Members of Parliament to work with the Government and the relevant agencies for managing the response to this incident.
Specifically, I believe it's appropriate to bring together the Ministers for Immigration and Home Affairs, that is of course Minister Chris Bowen and Minister Brendan O'Connor, together with their Shadow Ministerial counterparts, Mr Morrison and Mr Keenan, a representative of the Greens and a representative of the Independents in the Parliament, and that these people form a standing group that receives direct reports from all of the government agencies that have been involved in this incident. That includes Defence, Customs and Border Protection, the Australian Federal Police, the Department of Immigration, amongst others.
This will ensure that all have access to the same reports and insights about this very tragic incident. I believe this bipartisan reporting mechanism will assist the whole Parliament and the Australian public to understand the facts and to draw properly informed conclusions about the operational processes at work in this incident and whether in operational terms anything would be done differently should a comparable incident arise in the future.
I intend this group to first meet when the immediate response to this incident has been concluded and there is no risk of resources being diverted from the urgent search and rescue and response task. I anticipate therefore, that the group will meet before the end of the year, the group would then meet as necessary in the new year to hear further reports as more facts are established.
This is an unusual step, but one I've determined to undertake because I believe it's important that the comprehensive facts are available to all. I'll now turn to Deputy Commissioner Colvin for some comments and then we'll happily take you questions.
Thank you.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER COLVIN: Thank you, Prime Minister.
As the Prime Minister has already said, this is a very fluid situation, and it's being conducted in what are quite difficult circumstances. Weather conditions on the island are poor, which are making very difficult for all agencies involved in the search and rescue and the recovery efforts.
From the Australian Federal Police perspective, we currently have 45 personnel on the Island. We're joined by 13 officers from the West Australia police, which we're very grateful for, as well as three officers from the West Australian Coroner's office, who'll be involved in the investigation.
Obviously enough, this is still early days in this response and recovery. Our officers are focussed today on the land-based search, and gradually, over time, that will transition to a focus on both the Coronial investigation and the criminal investigation that the Prime Minister has mentioned.
As part of that, we will need to go through the necessary disaster victim identification process. Many of you are familiar with that process. It is a difficult process and can sometimes take time and we are in the very early stages of that at the moment.
At this stage, there's not a lot more that I can say to you that the Prime Minister has not already said. As more details become available today we'll be, obviously, speaking to those survivors and talking, as well, to eye witnesses and getting accounts of what they saw, and piecing together exactly what happened yesterday morning.
Thank you.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you have any information yet on how the boat got so close to Christmas Island without being detected?
PM: The advice to me is that the boat approached Christmas Island when it was dark and in extreme weather conditions, and consequently the boat wasn't detected until it was seen from Christmas Island itself.
JOURNALIST: Just a question on the response time, how long did it take rescuers to arrive at the scene of the incident after they'd been alerted to the presence of the boat? How long did it take them to get to (inaudible) to the scene and (inaudible)
PM: Well, can I refer you to a timeline that is in the process of being released by Customs and the Border Protection Service, so that will be available to you in writing. That constitutes the best advice to me.
What I can say to you of that advice provided by Customs and the Border Protection Service is that it was at 5.48am local time - of course, Christmas Island has a 4-hour time difference from the east coast of Australia - 5.48am local time yesterday that Border Protection Command was notified that a vessel had been sighted 200m from Rocky Point, Christmas Island. At approximately 6am local time HMAS Pirie was tasked to respond to that sighting. At approximately 6.31am local time Australian Federal Police officers on Christmas Island reported sighting the vessel being was onto the shoreline at Rocky Point, causing the people on board to be thrown into the water, and then the timeline that has been provided by Customs and Border Protection continues that at approximately 6.35am local time HMAS Pirie requested the assistance of the Customs vessel Triton to respond. The Triton immediately responded, and then that the tender - that is, the inflatable craft you've seen pictures of, or various craft, I should say, there was more than one of them - from the HMAS Pirie arrived on the scene at approximately 7.01am local time and rescue operations commenced.
So, that written timeline will be available to you. It's being released by Customs and Border Protection.
JOURNALIST: So that's - sorry - that's an hour and 13 minutes from the point at which the boat was first sighted. How far away from the scene were they, because they were on the lee side of the Island? Is that correct?
PM: That's right, they were on the lee side of the Island, and I was advised this morning that in terms of the distances in those kind of weather conditions, we're talking about a transit of least 30 minutes from where they were round to where the incident happens, but can I just say let's be very, very careful here. These things will become clearer over time. This is the best timeline that has been made available at this stage.
JOURNALIST: Are you satisfied - sorry, just a final question on that point - are you satisfied with the adequacy and the timeliness of that response? Is that (inaudible)
PM: To that I want to say two things. I certainly want to congratulate the Navy personnel and the Customs personnel who put themselves in harm's way in difficult and dangerous seas to rescue people whose lives were at risk, and tragically a number of them have died.
In terms of the operational questions here about responses, about clarifying all of these matters, I think that that will occur in the days to come. What history teaches us about these incidents is that it does take some time to establish the facts. We will need to work through to establish those facts, and one of the reasons that I've determined it's the appropriate course to bring together Government Ministers, Opposition representatives and other representatives from the parliament is as the facts become clearer and clearer they are known to everyone.
JOURNALIST: But Prime Minister, do you acknowledge that the fact that no-one knew this boat was one its way until it was almost crashing on the cliffs indicates that there's a problem with the surveillance system?
PM: I think what it indicates, on the advice to me, is that in very rough and very difficult circumstances there are clearly limits. Minister O'Connor has been dealing with this question today and has been very clear that in very rough and dangerous seas there is a limit to what can be achieved through the use of radar and other surveillance mechanisms.
I'll go there and then go here.
JOURNALIST: Thank you. Your Government has attracted a great deal of criticism over its handling of boat people. You're inviting the Opposition, the Greens and the Independents to have their say. Are you in fact admitting defeating and you just don't know how to go forward or handle this situation?
PM: Well, you've misrepresented what I've just said to you. What I've said to you is that I thought it was important that across the parliament we had a mechanism so people could hear reports from the relevant agencies and so everybody could have a comprehensive view of the facts. Whatever policy view people take the facts are the facts, and I think it's important that all parliamentarians and members of the public have access to the facts. That's why I set this body up.
JOURNALIST: Have you talked to the Opposition about this?
PM: Yes, I have. I've had the opportunity, a short time ago, to speak to Mr Abbott. He is in Japan, as I think is well-known publically. We did contact his Chief of Staff earlier in the day and then were able to make a call to him, so I have indicated to him that I'll be making these public statements and seeking to bring together this group.
I also asked Minister Bowen to have the same discussion with his counterpart, Mr Morrison. Mr Morrison is in Sydney today and that discussion did occur between the two of them a little bit earlier today.
JOURNALIST: They accepted the invitation?
PM: Well, what Mr Abbott and Mr Morrison have said is that they, of course, do want access to briefings, but I'll allow Mr Morrison - he available in Australia, clearly Mr Abbott is overseas - but Mr Morrison will probably want to convey his own views himself, so better if he does that than I endeavour to do it for him.
JOURNALIST: Just on the question of policy, Prime Minister - last July at the Lowy Institute you said, and I quote, that 'there is nothing humane about a voyage across dangerous seas with the ever-present risk of death in leaky boats captained by people smugglers.'
Now, doesn't it follow from that, from your own words, that it's morally incumbent on your Government now to do whatever it takes, within reason, to stop these boats from coming, including a much tougher set of border protection policies?
PM: Well, the Government does have a tough set of border protection policies. We've got more assets patrolling Australia's borders than we've ever had before.
What I would say to you as well is Australia's history teaches us that when people set sail with people smugglers in vessels trying to get to this country, tragically that can end in loss of life. It's happened in the past. It's happened in the last 24 hours.
We are not alone in confronting these circumstances. If we look right around the world, we see people who are seeking to move, flee war and persecution, and tragically a number of them die in the hands of people smugglers in the attempt, so let's not lose sight of the fact there is a real responsibility here on the shoulders of people smugglers who ply an evil trade attempting to profit on human misery, and the plying of that evil trade too often ends in tragedy and loss of life.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I know you said you wanted to wait for the facts, but the slamming has begun by commentators saying that you've got blood on your hands. Do you feel like you've got blood on your hands?
PM: Well, look, I believe in dealing with the facts. I believe in making sure that the facts are available. I want to again congratulate the Opposition and thank the Opposition for the responsible approach they've taken to this incident, the responsible approach they've taken to public commentary on it, when search and rescue is underway and where, inevitably, not all of the facts are to hand and facts will become clearer in coming days. That's the responsible approach the Opposition has taken.
We'll go there and come forward.
JOURNALIST: It seems that there won't be a full, independent, judicial inquiry into what's happened?
PM: Well, I'll actually have our Deputy Commissioner comment on this too, but there will be, we anticipate, a Coronial inquest. Interestingly, the Coronial responsibilities on Christmas Island are undertaken out of Western Australia, and so it would be the WA Coroner who is responsible for that Coronial inquest, and the WA Coroner would set the scope and terms of how they would go about that inquest task.
Of course, there will be an Australian Federal Police investigation into the criminal potentials of this. People smuggling is illegal, and so there will be an Australian Federal Police investigation.
What I have also announced today is that I would bring together a group of parliamentarians across the parliament to be able to have access to the continuing streams of reports from agencies involved in handling this matter so the facts of it can be available across the parliament.
But I will ask Deputy Commissioner Colvin if he wants to add on investigations.
DEUPTY COMMISSIONER COLVIN: Thank you, Prime Minister.
I think it's fair to say that we don't want to pre-suppose the breadth of what the West Australian Coroner decides or determines, as is his right a duty to do how broad he wants his investigation to be.
Obviously, the investigation that we will conduct, along with West Australia police, will help him inform the breadth of his inquiry, as well as inform our own criminal investigation. I'm sure the full facts of the matter will come out in that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, just on this bipartisan working group that you set up - one way of looking at this group would to be to say that this is a Government attempting to share its political risk on this and its political liability on this by turning the aftermath of this terrible tragedy into some sort of bipartisan exercise.
What do you say to that observation or interpretation?
PM: There's one motivation behind putting this group together, and that's to make sure people have got the facts.
Now, people will take different views about the policy, they'll take different views about what they want to say in the public domain. I'm all for open, frank national conversations. I'm all for policy discussions and debate. I made that very clear when I first spoke about the question of asylum seeker and refugee policy at the Lowy Institute, but that debate is best had informed by facts, and what we know from past instances in this area of policy is that there have times when there have been a lot of misunderstand and a lot of debate about the facts.
Well, I want the facts to be known. I want them to be understood. The facts are the facts. They're not a matter of debate. They can be shown and proved and demonstrated to people, and then when everybody's got the facts then the policy debate can then happen informed by the facts.
That's my motivation in bringing this group together to make sure the Government, the Opposition, other parliamentarians and therefore the national conversation is informed by the facts.
JOURNALIST: Did you seek or receive any undertaking from the Opposition in these discussions about not attempting to politicise this issue?
PM: No, I did not seek one, and certainly none was volunteered. No, that is not what this is about at all. This is about what I've just said - it's about ensuring that people have got access to the facts.
JOURNALIST: Just one question on the relationship between facts and policy, it's a fact that during the years of the Pacific Solution a very small handful of boats arrives and since its dismantling in 2008 you've had, I think, more than 200 now. Do you accept that there is any relationship between what was done in 2008 and the onflow of boats that we've seen since then? Any relationship, causal relationship, at all?
PM: Let's go through policies here. We see circumstances change around the world as to what gets people moving, circumstances change and for example - to deal with something that's been quite contemporary - when we saw the situation in Sri Lanka become more acute with the country at one point, effectively in a civil war that caused people to get on the move. So these things happen, we see world events change, cause people to get on the move. What I certainly accept is that as Prime Minister, as the Government of this country, we've got an obligation to strongly protect our borders and we do.
JOURNALIST: Is there any way to treat these people any differently, will the survivors of this disaster be waking up behind the fences of the Christmas Island Detention Centre tomorrow?
PM: People will be cared for as necessary depending on their personal circumstances, as I have indicated there are some who require medical assistance that can only be provided in Perth. Our Immigration Officials will deal with this on a case by case basis, but people will go through assessments at the appropriate point and we are talking, people are obviously going to need time to recover from this dreadful incident, but people will at the appropriate point go through assessments of their claims.
JOURNALIST: Will they stay in detention until that point?
PM: As you would be aware we relatively recently announced some new policies about detention, about the circumstances in which people, how people will be detained, so those policies will apply to these individuals as well and there is clearly some case by case assessments there as to the circumstances in which people are detained, but as a Government we are very firm on having a mandatory detention policy.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you say you're waiting for the facts to come in, as the facts do come in, if the facts do prove that the policy has flaws, will you then change the policy, are you open to that?
PM: The Government makes policy decisions, that's our job and we've made policy decisions, we've made policy decisions to have strong protection of our borders, with more assets patrolling our borders than ever before. We've made policy decision to have a strong mandatory detention system. We've made policy decision to ensure that claims are assessed rigorously and that people whose claims are not bona fide claims to be refugees that arrangements are made for them to return to their country of origin, that's part of our policy setting. And of course our policy setting includes strong cooperation with our region, indeed Minister Bowen has very recently been in Geneva pursuing this dialogue with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees about regional processing in the Regional Processing Centre. So they're the government's policies, but the group that I'm bringing together, I'm bringing together so that there is a common understanding of the facts here, the facts are the facts. If we look back in Australia's history there has been times when people have long debated what the facts of a particular incident are, I don't want us doing that, I want everybody to have access to the information and to understand what the facts of this matter are.
JOURNALIST: Just a question going back for a moment to the incident itself, you said in your opening remarks that a number of deceased were young people and children. Can you tell us exactly how many children are known to be among the dead and whether or not there is a feeling that this was one of those boats that was loaded with, there were a lot of families on board it would seem, according to eyewitness accounts, is that your information that there were a number of families on this?
PM: I don't have any information that I can give you about the question of loading of the boat. I can't help you with that. On the question of the deceased and numbers of men and women and children, I believe that that information will be made available; obviously our Customs and Border Protection people are making information available as best they can. So I will leave it to them to finalise that information to make sure it's accurate and released at the appropriate time.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you know if the people smugglers themselves, or the skipper, or the people smuggling operators were on the boat and survived?
PM: Well, I may defer to the Australian Federal Police on that.
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER COLVIN: Prime Minister, look it's too early for us to be categorical, we're working through the process of who survived and who the deceased are, that will form part of the DPI process and also as we interview people, obviously we will ascertain what their role is, but it would be presumptuous for me to try and answer that now.
JOURNALIST: At 5:48 Prime Minister, just back to the timeline, was Border Protection Command told that this is a vessel in distress or were they just alerted to the existence of this vessel?
PM: I'm not in a position to take you through word by word what people were told at that stage, as I've said we've got to be cautious here, I think we all recall incidents in the past where perhaps assumptions were made and things said that later didn't prove to be right, I'd rather take the cautious approach and as facts are available, then I'm specifically setting up a mechanism to ensure that those facts come to public attention.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Tony Kevin , he was a former diplomat and whistleblower over the SIEV X disaster in 2001, in which 303 people died, (inaudible) border protection in Australia in situations such as this, (inaudible)
PM: What I think is necessary are the things that are announced.
JOURNALIST: Just on the boat itself, you said it wasn't being - it just sort of slipped in past under the cover of night. Did we have any information on the existence of this boat from the Indonesian side, we get pretty good intel out of Indonesia, did we know that this boat had got in, was on our radar in that sense?
PM: Well the advice to me is that this boat was not sighted until the time that I've given you when it was sighted from Christmas Island, and we do have to be very clear here, we're talking about very difficult weather conditions, very difficult weather conditions.
JOURNALIST: I was just wondering if you had any discussions with your Indonesian counterparts about this particular boat?
PM: No, I haven't had discussions with Indonesian counterparts about this incident; obviously my focus has been on being briefed about search and rescue operations and management of the incident, which is still continuing. You've got to remember of course we've got people out there now who are looking hopefully for survivors, though we do have to brace ourselves for the likelihood that they will identify more people who have died in this incident.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look Minister O'Connor is there and is consequently about to provide me with direct reports from Christmas Island.
JOURNALIST: Why shouldn't there be an independent commission of inquiry, in the search for facts why should we rely on the Opposition or the Greens or the Independents?
PM: You've just been advised that there will be a Western Australian Coronial inquiry, you've also been advised in my opening statement to you that there will be an assessment by Customs as I outlined.
JOURNALIST: Are you going to resume your holidays or are your holidays off?
PM: Well I did return to work yesterday having had a few days off and I will make some assessments about what's the appropriate thing to do next, I haven't spent any time considering that question yet.
Thank you. 


Adelaide
Thank you very much for that welcome and can I start by acknowledging friends who have joined us here today including His Excellency the Governor of South Australia, my colleague and friend Premier Mike Rann, Dr Rollond the Mayor here, thank you very much for your insights into the history of this place and I know that is part of your special passion to understand the history of this place.
I've also very much like to acknowledge my Federal Parliamentary colleague, Steve Georganas who represents this area so well in the Federal Parliament. Can I also acknowledge the indigenous owners of the land on which we meet and in the spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and present. It is such an important part of our Australian past, our Australian present and our future that we are a nation that is the custodian of the oldest living culture on earth. I acknowledge it and I honour it.
As we meet here today in this very moderate temperature with a gentle breeze, with a beautiful blue sky, it's also time I think to remember Australians in other parts of our nation who are not dealing with such lovely climate conditions. I am of course particularly thinking of those in Queensland who are battling flood waters even as we meet here today. Over this Christmas season there have been many Australians who have had to battle the extremes of weather; floods on the one hand and extreme heat on the other. Of course when Australians battle natural disasters, when we battle our sometimes harsh climate, we do it by coming together and you will have seen on TV screens and heard on your radios how Australians have come together in these circumstances, working of course with their State Governments and the Federal Government is there ready to assist in any way which is necessary. But as governments play their part we know that when Australians have to battle flood and heat, it is community volunteers who bear the brunt of that work and I'm sure our thoughts and our very best wishes are with them today in other parts of Australia as we gather here in a beautiful Adelaide.
To South Australians gathered here today it's such a special privilege to be able to join you on Proclamation Day. For me Christmas of course is about coming to Adelaide, since I migrated here as a four year old every Christmas of my life has been spent in South Australia in Adelaide, it's a very special part of who I am and who my family is that we get to come together in South Australia each year no matter how far afield we may have been in the 12 months in between. And the Christmas season here in Adelaide not only offers that time with family and friends, but on Proclamation Day it offers an opportunity to reflect on the past and to think about the future.
That's why I believe it was so appropriate for Dr Rollond today to speak to us about the history of this place and particularly the history of the Thomas and Skipper families; their part in building this place, and I do acknowledge Dr John Skipper and his wife Betsy who are with us today, descendents of the Thomas and Skipper families. And when you reflect on the story of Robert and Mary Thomas, it is of course a perfectly South Australian story. Free settlers, who not only founded a life for themselves and their families here in this place, but free settlers who played a special part in building a new colony and a new nation, and if I can echo some of the words of the Governor is his Proclamation Day address today, it's hard to imagine in an age of instantaneous information what an important thing it was to have a printing press, to have a way no matter how slow, how cumbersome by today's standards, for a young colony to tell its stories to itself, for a young colony to record its news, its history. For a young colony to have a way of exchanging information, and we've heard today as part of the history of this place, about the development of one of the schools. Once again something so South Australian, putting such a focus on education, equity and the opportunity that education brings.
South Australians are of course hard working people, with a great faith in the future, great faith in education as the key for their kids and great faith in their ability as a people to work together in good times and in bad and we've shown time and time again as South Australians that we can do just that, look after each other in times good and times bad.
Of course on a day like today when we reflect on history, we tell perhaps one or two individual stories. But the history of this state is the combination of all of our stories and I know that many of you sitting here today are taking this moment to reflect on your story, on your family's story, to reflect on what it is about you that has brought us here today, brought us here together. Because of course history, at the end of the day, is made up by the mixture of the remarkable and the ordinary, that is everyday life and the writing of the history of the nation.
I'm proud that my family's story, my own story, is rooted in this place; just one of the many millions of stories that make up South Australia.
Today we rightly reflect on the struggles and achievements of Adelaide's founders. It is easy to recognise the distance between them and us and the difference between their times and ours. But I think what we share with those people is real. Most of all, I feel very deeply that we share their vision and imagination, their confidence and optimism. How much confidence and optimism would it have taken to build this city from this landscape?
When South Australia was proclaimed, under the old gum tree, they knew the best days were ahead of them, that they were just starting, and I believe that that is still true today. As remarkable as our history has been, the best days lie in front of us. The old tree, held up today with concrete, is of course a poignant sight, but it does make me very proud. I believe those who heard Governor Hindmarsh read the Proclamation here absolutely intended this new society to live longer than this historic tree.So I do not see the old gum tree as a sign of our age. It tells me one thing and it tells me this: We have outlived the shade of our founding and yet we remain young. Lawson wrote of "the old dead tree" and "the young tree green". The old gum tree may have withered, but our state and our country is still young, still looking forward to the best days to come.
Hindmarsh proclaimed South Australia 174 years ago. My wish for 2011 is that each of us makes our own proclamation, makes our own proclamation that we will dedicate our best efforts for our State and country in the year ahead, confident in its future as we should be.Thank you very much.



For those of you who haven't been to Manuka Oval before, I'm sure you are loved being here today. It's a lovely place. I've grown fond of this ground, coming and watching the Western Bulldogs play here during football season, but as a cricket ground I'd have to say it's even better.
This is a wonderful, wonderful place - a Cathedral end, a caretaker's cottage I think the envy of many Canberra residents, that caretaker's cottage, a canopy of trees. It really is a very lovely place.
We're here in the Bradman Stand. As we watch the game we've got the Hawke Stand to our left and the Menzies to our right. That's telling you something about Canberra, that they managed to get that touch done so well.
And as we watch the game, we are of course looking out at the Jack Fingleton scoreboard.
And Fingleton had two careers: he was one of our toughest cricketers; and second he became one of our most respected Canberra journalists, and so it's a fitting symbol that the scores of this game are put on a scoreboard that bears his name.
Now, I want to tell you just a brief story about Fingleton, because I think he's a man who generated many stories, but one of them that he met the great fast bowler Harold Larwood in 1948 in England and they became great friends - such great friends that Larwood viewed it as 'well, OK.'
That on Saturday in 1950 he would send to Fingleton a which read:
"LEAVING TOMORROW WITH WIFE, FIVE DAUGHTERS AND ELDEST DAUGHTER'S FIANCE STOP CAN YOU FIND JOBS AND ACCOMMODATION STOP"
Now, whether you got that by text in the modern age or whether you got it by telegram back then, that would be a bit of a stressing request, wouldn't it?
And so it was a stressing request for Fingleton, who later said that he was asked to meet this very tall order during a time of housing shortage, so he thought that he better enlist the help of the Prime Minister, Ben Chifley, to get this job done.
And so the job was done, appropriate accommodation found and Larwood was simply delighted when he arrived here and saw what had been done on his behalf.
Apparently, Fingleton then thought it appropriate that there be an opportunity for Larwood to thank Chif in person, and so he took Larwood to Chifley.
Chifley said some words. Larwood looked at Fingleton for a translation. Fingleton helped out.
Chifley said a few more words, and translation was once again sought.
So I tell you this story to prove that I'm not the first Australian Prime Minister with the kind of Australian accent that I bear.
Fortunately, though, my Australian accent is not so bad that any of our English cricketers asked me to be translated last night - or perhaps they were simply being polite. We just don't know.
But it's truly a great experience to be here for this match.
I also wanted to take this opportunity to thank cricket for everything it is doing to assist our flood victims right around the country, and particularly in Queensland.
I've had to stop watching this very successful bout of cricket, our cricketers still out there, I've had to stop watching that and go back to Parliament House for a press conference to announce further disaster relief for flood victims.
But, of course, cricket is playing its part and it's particularly going to play its part later this month at the 'Gabba, and I take this opportunity to thank you.
Now, we've got Tim Paine and his team out there today, and they are the future of Australian cricket. I think I'm pretty well known for saying as a general motto that the best days of this country lie in front of it, not behind it, and that's true of the best days of Australian cricket as well.
And what I can certainly guarantee you is if today Tim Paine and his team are successful, then I am certainly going to have some great boasting rights. Most particularly, I will be boasting to Bob Hawke that at my first PM's XI the Australians succeeded.
Thank you very much.



Australians all,
It's always wonderful to be back in my home town.  I was last here for a family Christmas and the celebration of Proclamation Day, a celebration of the spirit of South Australia. 
Nothing better symbolises that spirit than the place we gather in today - Adelaide Town Hall.
Nearly a hundred and fifty years ago Adelaide's citizens decided to build the largest municipal building in the Southern Hemisphere.
There's much I wouldn't recreate about nineteenth century politics! 
But that optimism and confidence, that vision for the future and practical will to build it now, is something we should hold dear, in the best of times and the worst of times.
Today, we come together to celebrate the spirit of our nation.
The days of summer have an iconic appeal for Australians.  We hope for lazy days, watching the cricket or playing it in the back yard, time at the beach or around a barbie, the special joy of more time with family and friends.
But this summer, such hopes have not been realised.
Instead, as a nation we have endured some of the worst floods in our history. 
Together we have shared the shock and then the horror at the scale of the destruction.
Together we are grieving for the lives lost.
And we have bonded together and worked together to see the nation through.
From Premier Anna Bligh, who faced the floods with steel in her backbone and occasional tears in her eyes, to the volunteers who have been in evacuation centres with a cup of tea and a welcoming smile, even when their own homes were threatened, to the soldiers who cancelled their leave to move mountains of rubbish, to the unbelievable number of Queenslanders who turned up to help a stranger, we have pulled together.
I have been privileged to share some precious moments with those whose courage in adversity simply takes your breath away and those Aussies whose good humour has never failed them not matter how hard life is.
- the teenager evacuated in the middle of the night sitting still wearing her Hello Kitty pyjamas and a big smile as she sits in an evacuation centre surrounded by strangers;
- the Mayor of Lockyer Valley Steve Jones who saved so many with a friend, a bulldozer and a truck;
- the child in the Helidon evacuation centre who told me her story of sitting on the roof hoping for rescue and who survived even as half the house fell away;
- the brave man from our Defence Force who waded through chest high water to rescue an elderly lady and get her on to a helicopter even though a nearby live electrical cable could have ended both their lives;
- the clown who turned up to entertain the kids in an evacuation centre clutching a chicken called KFC.
Even as I have listened, held a hand, shared a laugh, helped dry some tears ... even in the depths of the sorrow, I have been so very proud.
I'm proud of everyone associated with the rescue and recovery effort  -  both those on the ground and those who have expressed their concern through donations, prayers and every kind of support. 
I'm proud of the evacuees. 
I've met people who lost everything they owned, people with nothing but the clothes on their back and their wedding photos under their arm and who said to me over and over:
We'll be alright, there are plenty worse off than us.
You couldn't make it up.  It's just so humbling to meet people like that.
I'm proud of the thousands of clean up volunteers. 
They are amazing.  Brisbane needed help.  And so who helped?  First of all, Brisbane.
With sun hats and strong gloves, with long pants and work boots, with complete determination and complete good humour, they came.
Some people said it's incredible, the generosity of strangers.  But they weren't strangers, really. 
They were Australians.
This Australia Day, mateship lives.
When things get hard, Australians stick together.  We just do.
I've long admired what historian Gavan Daws said about the Allied prisoners of war under the Japanese in places like Changi:
...all the way down to starvation rations, to a hundred pounds of body weight and less, to the extremities of degradation  -  all the way to death  -  the prisoners of the Japanese remained inextinguishably American, Australian, British. 
The Americans were the great individualists of the camps. 
The British hung on to their class structure like bulldogs. 
And the Australians kept trying to construct little male-bonded welfare states.
While time has moved on, and today we have moved beyond simply male bonding and welfare states, when things are tough, Australian mateship comes through.
Over this devastating summer, Australians have reached out to each other with the hand of mateship and we haven't let go.
The force of the story about Aussies in Changi isn't the mateship that was shown on the first day of imprisonment, it is that the mateship endured through the continuing hell.
On this Australia Day, I am calling on our nation to dedicate ourselves to continuing the spirit of mateship, to not letting go in the hard days of recovery and rebuilding to come.
And on this Australia Day, I am calling on our nation to pursue with new determination the Aussie fair go, which alongside mateship, defines the spirit of our nation.
Here in Adelaide, I grew up surrounded by this kind of Aussie spirit and I am still driven by those values today.
From their little Welsh town to Pennington Migrant Hostel to their own home in the suburbs, Dad worked two jobs and Mum worked the afternoon shift to buy a home and educate their kids.
And they thrived in this egalitarian country with its larrikin embrace of informality because they are egalitarian by instinct.  They embraced the sense of opportunity and community that they found in Australia and the sense of future possibilities for their children that Australia so clearly offered them.  
They always taught me that everyone is equal and worthy of respect.
It's wrong to view yourself as better than the person who waits on you in a restaurant  -  or at a flash Town Hall lunch.
It's wrong to believe that you should defer to anyone simply by dint of them having a title, occupation or background different from your own.
I was a shy child, who through the nurture of my family found the sense of self to face the world with confidence, to look others in the eye and greet them with a firm shake of the hand.
I grew up an Australian.
And I've always known that the overwhelming majority of Australians are as thoughtful and tolerant and compassionate as we've seen these last two weeks.  
I know this because they are my neighbours and friends.
And as Prime Minister I am reminded of it every day.
Through my work, I have met some remarkable Australians.  Some famous, most unknown.  I've learnt so much from meeting them and been reminded of many things I already knew.
In the plants and mines in the west and the north I've seen the great Australian cultural tradition of informality that rejects the sort of snobbishness and expectations of obsequiousness that infect other societies.  Oi Julia, give us a wave.  They don't talk like that to the President of France.  And I love it.
In Afghanistan, I've met Australian soldiers, and I've seen Australian strength and compassion.
As our diggers risk everything they have, to deny terrorism a safe haven, while protecting the weak and allowing little girls to learn to read.
And in schools and hospitals and at factories and on farms all over Australia I've met all sorts of workers whose very lives show the benefits and dignity of work itself.
It's when I am lucky enough to share the life stories of working Australians and their families that I renew my determination to make Australia fair forever.
To make sure Australia is a place where demography is not destiny and where success in life is defined by preparedness to work hard not by where you are born or what your parents did.
A place where you get a fair go.
This week we will be reminded of so much that is good about our country.
I'll be privileged to travel from here to Sydney, and Perth, and Canberra, and see so many Australians in so many phases of life.
Raising our flags, singing our songs, sharing our sorrows, celebrating our achievements.
I'll meet a new Australian of the Year and I'll meet new Australian citizens.
Australians will picnic and barbecue, read poems and give speeches, from the Rocks to the Rock.
Play cricket and tennis and probably crack whips and chop wood too.
It's a time to celebrate, and we will.  And we'll reflect.
Of all the unforgettable things I heard in Queensland last week, one that will live with me through my life as Prime Minister is the families who were together in the worst moments as the water tried to tear them apart and who told me that in that moment all they could say to each other was
Don't let go.
And they made it, together.
As people, as families, as a country, we have so many good things already in our hands, good things to pass on for the future.
Our wealth, our way of life, our values.
As we prepare for Australia Day my message to you here and to Australians all, is simple.
Don't let go.
We will hang on to each other in the worst times and in the best.
We will hang on to our Aussie mateship and our Aussie fair go in the worst times and in the best.
Because we are Australian. 



I want to begin by acknowledging two great Australians, Gough and Margaret Whitlam. The Chinese community  -  and the People's Republic  -  have no truer friends and I know Gough and Margaret are with us in spirit tonight.
I am a migrant.
I came here on a long journey with my family in search of a better life.
I found that better life  -  better than I could ever have imagined: a great education; a great job; and a humbling opportunity to serve our nation in public life.
But more than these things:
I found a home.
A place to belong.
A place to dig deep roots.
A place to bond with and people to bond to with.
To me that is the meaning of Australia Day.
Acceptance.
Commitment.
Mateship.
Belonging. 
And in the history of this nation, few have such a sense of belonging as the Australian Chinese community.
We don't know the name of the first Chinese migrant to come to this land; what he did or when he died.
But we know for certain that from the 1820s onwards, the Chinese have been a proud part of this nation and the story of its building.
The Chinese were there in the long decades of striving and struggle:
On the farms and the gold fields.
The docks and the warehouses and the workshops.
The story is told in records and artefacts.
In temples and churches and stores that survive.
And in the Chinese headstones to be found in cemeteries across inland Australia.
There's even a bookmaker's ledger in Launceston showing Melbourne Cup bets written entirely in Chinese.
But friends,
We know the story most directly from the families who have treasured their Chinese identity down the generations, while retaining a fierce and abiding loyalty to this country.
The journey was not always easy.
As we know from the current floods and the recent drought, this country can be harsh and unforgiving.
It took remarkable courage to travel from a different culture and build a new future in a strange land.
For some, it was too hard.
I was touched by the story of Kwan Hong Kee, a businessman who came to Australia from China in 1885.
Despite high hopes, his career was beset by frustration and failure.
But just before he passed away, he wrote a memoir for his children and it is a work of great wisdom and deep humility.
At the end of the book, looking back over his life, he had this to say:
If you have good fortune, do not be proud, and if you have misfortune, do not be downhearted. Be diligent, and thrifty.
Look forward with courage. Do your best.
Yesterday, in my home town of Adelaide, in my own words, I called on our nation to look forward with courage as we overcome adversity.  I called on the nation to make this Australia a celebration of and rededication to the great Australian values of mateship and a fair go.  To Australians, who have joined hands in such tough times, my message is don't let go'.
Here, tonight, I acknowledge that across our history the larrikin embrace of this nation was not always extended to the Chinese community.
But you never lost faith in the nation.
So much so that the Chinese community welcomed the advent of Federation with open arms, and sent one of its finest sons to Gallipoli, Billy Sing.
Culture, language, background  -  none of these determine our right to belong.
If you love this country, embrace its values and work hard for its future, you are Australian.
There is no other test.
There is no other bar.
Friends,
As we approach two centuries of Chinese settlement in Australia, we do so with pride and with satisfaction.
Today, the equalitarian embrace of this nation does extend to the Chinese community and we won't let go.
Instead, today, we warmly celebrate the Chinese community's growth in size and in influence: a population approaching 700,000; a sophisticated range of community services; and extraordinary success in the professions, the arts, media, sport, politics and academia.
It has been an incredible journey  -  a journey made all the more significant by Australia's renewed engagement with China, pioneered by Gough Whitlam in 1972 and nurtured by every Prime Minister  -  Labor and Coalition  -  in the four decades since.
My commitment to the Australia-China relationship is enduring and strong.
I welcome Ambassador Chen to his new post.
And look forward to visiting China in the months ahead.
I will do so conscious that this is a decisive decade for China and her place in the world.
Australia welcomes the emergence of China as the world's second-largest economy, and as an important partner in dealing with challenges such as global financial reform, climate change, poverty, food and energy supplies, world trade and regional security.
We are proud to be partners in her journey of progress and prosperity.
Central to that partnership is you  -  the Australian Chinese community  -  who form a special bridge of friendship and understanding.
For two centuries, you have been at the heart of the Australian story.
And so it is truly fitting that Chinese New Year and Australia Day fall so close together. Our celebrations and our stories belong together.
As this lunar New Year begins, I honour the Australian Chinese community and say thank you.
And to those born in the Year of the Rabbit, I offer my special good wishes.
Those born under the sign of the Rabbit are said to be articulate, talented and ambitious.
I was born in the Year of the Ox and we oxen, in turn, are said to be steadfast, confident and determined.
I am indeed determined.
Determined that in this year ahead, we will face the nation's challenges with courage and resolution together.
Restoring the cities and towns hit by floods.
Harnessing our economy's strength to build a society with fairness and opportunity for all.  Ensuring demography is not destiny.
And friends,
We will succeed.
We'll succeed together.  We'll stay together.  We won't let go.
Joined by mateship, driven to deliver a fair go to all, we will be proud of our history even as we build a better and fairer future.
Our best days are yet to come. 


Canberra
Thank you to Karl and Lisa for that welcome.
We're here tonight to celebrate some Australian spirit and tomorrow Australia day will be dedicated to celebrating the spirit of mateship that has brought the nation together during such tough times, the spirit that means people come together to lend each other a helping hand, the spirit which means volunteers keep on volunteering even as their own homes are flooded, the spirit that means soldiers come off leave in order to move rubbish for their fellow Australians, the spirit that means Australians in their millions tomorrow will hold barbeques to raise some money for flood victims in Queensland and around the country.
And as part of celebrating that Australian spirit tonight we are going to celebrate and congratulate some remarkable Australians.
I've had the privilege of meeting the nominees earlier today, they come from a broad range of backgrounds, but the one things that ties them together is that they constantly and selflessly give of themselves to the community that they seek to serve.
This is a tremendous occasion to be celebrating these great Australians, I'm looking forward to it and announcing the Australian of the Year. Thank you very much. 


Regatta Point, Canberra
Around the nation today, Australians will come together, and I believe on Australia Day, we do three things.
First, we celebrate Australian mateship. We celebrate friendship, the bonds that bring us and hold us together, and on this Australia Day, more than many, we will be celebrating those bonds of mateship because we've seen them on such strong display as the nation has come together in the aftermath of the Queensland floods and floods which have hit other parts of our country.
We've seen a remarkable extension of mateship from Australian to Australian, a reaching out of the hand of mateship to help someone in need, and during 2011 we won't let go. We will make sure that that hand of mateship is there as people recover from these devastating floods.
And on Australia Day we also reflect on our national characteristics and attributes: our courage; our humility; our humour; and our fierce determination to make sure that everyone gets a fair go in life, and in an audience containing so many children it's a great day to remind ourselves that truly believing in a fair go means that every Australian child should get the best possible start in life; that for no part of our nation should demography be destiny; that success in this country should be determined by a person's character and attitude and propensity for hard work, not the circumstances of their birth.
And on Australia Day, thirdly, we welcome new members of the Australian family. We will welcome some here today. We will welcome 13,000 around the country.
Now, no migrant's story is the same as another. Every story is unique. Every migrant family can tell the tale of what brought them here, the very special set of circumstances that led them to calling Australia home.
I can lend some insight into the migrant experience, being a migrant myself. We, of course, are Ten Pound Poms. I arrived here in 1966 with my family, with father John and mother Moira and my sister Alison, and whilst I never stood at a citizenship ceremony the way we will see people stand at this ceremony today, and the way 13,000 people will stand at ceremonies around the country, I do remember the debates in the family home as my parents determined that they would become citizens of this nation.
And having chosen this country, they've loved it with a fierce determination, with a fierce passion.
I know that the 13,000 people who join the Australian family today will do the same  -  love this country with a fierce determination. And we will be bound together by a love of country and by the Australian values that we hold so dear.
Australia Day is a wonderful day. A wonderful day here, a wonderful day for celebrations, whether they're formal citizenship conferrals or whether they're days with families and friends. Right around the country people will be marking Australia Day, and on Australia Day citizens old and new can re-affirm their pledge to this country.
I invite you to do that, no matter whether you've been born here or been here for many years. Today is a great day. Re-affirm your love of Australia, your embrace of this country, your embrace of your fellow Australians.
Thank you very much. 


Picnic Point, Toowoomba 
Thank you very much, thank you for that great welcome and thank you to your local Mayor for being such a great community advocate during this difficult period. I've had the opportunity to meet with him to discuss your community's needs and also to hear so much about your community spirit, even during these very difficult days.
I also want to acknowledge my Federal Parliamentary colleague Ian Macfarlane, known as Macca, he's been texting me signed Macca, confusing me because I've got a mate called Macca too, so if we keep doing that I might send you back something on the text you'll be very confused about, but it's nice to be here with Ian Macfarlane.
And can I also acknowledge Mr Kerry Shine, the State Member for Toowoomba North, Mr Mike Horan, the State Member for Toowoomba South and can I say what an amazing job done by your local town crier Ralph, I've had the opportunity to already be at some Australia Day celebrations today and I haven't met a town crier quite like Ralph, so well done to Ralph.
Today across the nation we're celebrating Australia Day and in many ways we're doing the things that we've done on other Australia Days, from Toowoomba to Tassie, from the Rocks to the Rock, Australians are out celebrating what it means to be part of this wonderful nation.
But of course this Australia Day is different. It's different because we are also taking the time to stop and reflect on the devastating floods that our nation has faced in the last few weeks and I know as communities do that around the nation, here in Toowoomba too, you are thinking about what your community has been through.
We are grieving the loss of life, but we are also celebrating tremendous community spirit, as people work together in the most difficult of times, in the darkest of hours and as people are continuing to work together in the rebuilding.
We will never forget those we have lost in this period, but we should also never forget the community spirit that has been shown, by strangers who have done courageous things to help each other as flood water has threatened, by volunteers who have been there to support their fellow Australians, even though some of themselves have faced flooding in their own homes, the work we've seen done by soldiers who cancelled their annual leave and just came back in order to move mountains of rubbish and help their community, the work we've seen done by local councils, by Red Cross, by Lifeline, by local community organisations in all their shapes and form, reaching out helping people when they needed that helping hand.
Today on this Australia Day more than any other we are celebrating that spirit of mateship, that spirit of mateship that caused us as Australians to reach out our hands to each other in a time of desperate need, and in 2011 having reached those hands out in the spirit of mateship we won't let go.
There's a lot of rebuilding to do, there's a lot of grieving to do, there's a lot of families who still need support as they mourn their lost loved ones, as they rebuild their houses, as they rebuild their businesses and farms, as they rebuild their lives.
And in all the many months ahead as we go through that difficult journey of rebuilding we won't let go. This spirit of mateship that we are celebrating today will see us through.
I wanted to come here today to say hello to this fantastic community, but I also wanted to come here because I thought this was the right place in the nation to make a very special announcement about how we will honour in the future those who have done such courageous things, such selfless things, during these dark and difficult days.
Through the Governor-General, I have requested of  the Queen that in Australia Day in the future we will have special honours, special honours where we will acknowledge Australians who have done that extra bit during natural disasters and emergencies, Australians who have gone out of their way to extend the hand of mateship to their fellow Australians in times of need.
We will first award those honours next Australia Day, we will backdate the awarding of those honours so that they can catch the heroic acts, the selfless acts, the volunteering that happened here and across Queensland during the time of the floods and we will indeed backdate these honours so that the selfless and courageous acts that happened during the Victorian bushfires can also be recognised because so many Australians then also extended the hand of friendship and they haven't let go.
In the time between now and next Australia Day we will also work together to recognise those who made a special contribution during the days of the flood.
Premier Anna Bligh has announced that Queensland will strike a special medal to recognise those who did those very special things to help others and I will be working with Premier Anna Bligh and with Premiers and Chief Ministers around the nation, so that we can recognise throughout this country those that gave of themselves to help others over this summer, during these floods when time were tough.
Here in Toowoomba I know that you are pulling together, the community spirit is strong, the sense of rebuilding is strong, the sense of mateship is strong. I've come today to share a moment of that with you, so can I conclude by saying a happy Australia Day, a time of reflection, a time of pause, a time of mateship and a time where we will say to each other we will rebuild for the future, we won't let go.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Yesterday was Australia Day, and in some ways, it was an Australia Day like any other.
Picnics and barbecues, tennis and cricket, a new Australian of the Year and new Australian citizens - in so many ways it felt just like last year did and just like next year will.
But yesterday in Toowoomba, Australia Day felt different to any I have known.
I went to Toowoomba yesterday to be with some of the people I have met in these last weeks. I went to Toowoomba, where shock has been followed by horror and horror has been followed by grief and where grief's long season has only now begun, because I wanted the people I have met to know that their Prime Minister won't let them go.
I also went to Toowoomba to express my admiration for the way Australians have started rebuilding already.  Whether with a mop or a shovel or a bulldozer, Australians see what needs to be done and are doing it.
It is no different for the Government. I see what needs to be done and I will do it.
We will rebuild.
The great floods of this summer have been a national tragedy, not just a natural disaster, because of the awful loss of human life.
The great floods of this summer have destroyed billions of dollars of wealth and robbed us of billions of dollars of income.  In time they may prove to be the most expensive disaster in Australian history.
We are grieving.
We are burying the dead.
We are thanking many thousands for their courage and selflessness.
We are moving from crisis to recovery.
Now is the time to count the cost and to start to rebuild.
THE TASK BEFORE US
So today, I want to explain what we already know about the task before us and what we plan to do.
Queensland is of course the worst affected, but there are flood affected areas in almost every state, and the effects are being felt in the whole country today.
In order to think clearly about the best way to rebuild we need to understand not only the costs to the economy and the Federal Budget, but the growing capacity constraints on the economy, as well as the importance of the Government's long-term reform agenda.
The economic costs begin with the immediate cost of damage and destruction of property.
Private homes and cars have been wrecked, business equipment ruined, public ferry terminals and highways have been damaged, even the ocean floor of Moreton Bay itself needs cleaning up.
That is a huge, one-off cost  -  simply replacing the things the floods have destroyed.  These costs will be shared by people and families, by firms and insurers, by all levels of Government. 
The Australian Government's greatest part is through direct payments to affected individuals and businesses and through the cost of rebuilding.  And in rebuilding, the Australian Government pays the greatest share.  Under our longstanding natural disaster arrangements with the States, we meet 75 per cent of this cost for major disasters.
Today's estimates of the Federal Budget costs of these floods over the next four years are of course preliminary, but they are the best figures we have before us.
The Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payments  -  which have given short-term financial assistance to half a million Australians affected by the floods  -  are estimated to cost over $600 million.  The Disaster Income Recovery Subsidy  -  helping workers, small businesspeople and farmers who have lost income  -  will cost another $120 million.
At this stage  -  and I stress the estimates are preliminary and costs may well rise  -  the cost to the Australian Government of rebuilding flood affected areas outside Queensland is estimated at $1 billion.
Rebuilding flood affected areas in Queensland itself is estimated to cost us $3.9 billion.
Bringing all of those elements together the best preliminary estimate of the direct cost to the Federal Budget of this summer's flood disaster is just over $5.6 billion.
So that is the immediate Budget challenge, to find over $5 billion.
Although our economy remains strong, there is also the one-off effect on economic activity because of the immediate disruption from the floods. 
When a city of millions is closed for business for days, the cost to the economy is huge.  When roads are closed all over a State that represents a fifth of GDP, the cost to the economy is enormous.
And the cost of this disruption continues into the future.  Some coal mines won't return to full production for months and farming will be affected for seasons. 
Treasury's preliminary estimates are that GDP growth in this financial year will be around half a percentage point lower due to the floods.  The Treasurer will be saying more about the future impact on the economy in coming days.
But we still have the advantage that our overall economy is strong and that means we have the capacity to pay as we go.
With our growing economy and rising national income, we can pay for rebuilding now.  And if we can, we should.  We should not leave the task of finding the money until future years.
My experience in Government since 2007 tells me that while we must plan to sustain growth we must never take future growth for granted, so we should not put off to tomorrow what we are able to do today. 
Solely borrowing to rebuild Queensland is a soft option I am not prepared to consider. 
My Cabinet's job is still to make the decisions which will bring the Budget back to surplus in 2012-13.
In a growing economy, we pay as we go.
In addition to the Budget challenge there is a wider economic challenge as well: building and managing economic capacity.
This is because we don't only need to be able to pay for the new things we now need  -  we quite literally need to be able to make the new things we now need as well. 
The floods have not washed away piles of hundred dollar notes.  They've put holes in roads, buckled rail, broken up sections of ports, wrecked factory equipment, washed away fencing on farms.
So we're not just going to need money, we're going to need concrete and rubber and steel  -  and more importantly, we're going to need carpenters and bricklayers and road gangs.
And while the advantage of a strong economy is felt when we come to fund the rebuilding, the challenge of a strong economy is felt when we look for the capacity: delivering the actual rebuilding itself.
There is unprecedented demand in many parts of Australia for skilled labour.
Unemployment is already low and participation is already rising. 
And that's before we add one extra tradie or truck driver to rebuild after the floods.
There is unprecedented pressure on Australia's infrastructure as well. 
More infrastructure is already needed to nurture the mining boom and support economic growth, so the Government is investing in long lived economic assets and infrastructure like high speed broadband, ports, roads and rail.
Now we have thousands of kilometres of roads and rail to rebuild as well.
Simply spending to rebuild without addressing the balance between supply and demand in the economy as a whole is not an option. 
That would only drive up the cost of skilled labour and the cost of building materials and other economic inputs, reduce value for money in the rebuilding itself, rob our mining industry and other economic sectors of the skills and material they need, and ultimately spill over into higher inflation and interest rates.
To make up for the demand we are putting into the economy with our rebuilding efforts the Government must take some demand out of the economy at the same time.
So sound Budget principles say we should pay as we go  -  and sound economic principles say we should not add to capacity pressures.
And we must drive reforms for the future as well.
I know Australians expect that while we rebuild after the floods, the Government will not lose sight of our long-term reform agenda.
Australians expect their governments to do more than one thing a time. 
So 2011 remains a year when I will be delivering the national broadband network, creating more opportunity through education reforms and improving health care as well as a year when I will make long-term decisions on workforce participation and a carbon price. 
That is my job and that is what I will do.
DELIVERING REBUILDING
Here's how I'll begin.
I will make an immediate upfront payment to Queensland of $2 billion.
With this money rebuilding can start in more than 60 flood-affected communities across Queensland. 
The payment will be made in the current financial year, as soon as financial controls and arrangements are finalised.
I'm acutely conscious of the desire of the Queensland Government to use their powers to cut through red tape and deliver rebuilding as fast as they can. I want to ensure that nothing in the funding arrangements holds them back.
I want this money to be available immediately. In my meetings with Premier Bligh and with Major General Mick Slater they've stressed that no town should be closed for a day longer than is necessary because of a lack of funds ready to be spent. And from my discussions with local community leaders and small and medium business owners, they want funds to flow as soon as possible so economic life can return to the main streets of regional towns.
A National Partnership Agreement with Queensland will establish the conditions of the funding. I expect this to be a simple, transparent and generous set of guidelines which ensure public money is spent in the right ways and at the right time.
Queensland will get what it needs.
The money will be managed by the Queensland Reconstruction Authority, which will scope and coordinate the total statewide rebuilding program and develop a statewide reconstruction plan. This will take into account unique local problems and opportunities in each flood affected community.
Payments to other states will be made through the Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery Arrangements in the usual way. We are working closely with the responsible State Governments to ensure all this assistance is delivered when and where it is needed.
The Australian Government's total commitment  -  which our best estimates suggest will reach $5.6 billion  -  is absolutely vital to the rebuilding of our country and our recovery from the floods.
FUNDING AND SKILLING REBUILDING
We will meet the cost.
Rebuilding after the floods in an economy with growing capacity constraints for the present while delivering reforms and making decisions is a big joband there'll inevitably be setbacks. 
But as a nation we are up to the challenge and we are up to managing the economic strains. 
So we can do just that, I have made a set of decisions on funding and managing economic demand.
I announce today a $5.6 billion funding and skilling package for flood rebuilding.
A balanced package which cuts some spending programs, defers some new infrastructure and applies a one-off levy to most Australian income earners from 1 July this year.
Two dollars are saved in spending cuts for every dollar raised by the levy.
With other changes to ensure we have enough skilled workers to get the new work done.
First, we will deliver a one-off levy. It will not include lower-income earners.
A levy of 0.5 per cent will be applied on taxable income between $50,001 and $100,000 and a levy of 1 per cent will be applied on taxable income above $100,000. Anyone earning under $50,000 will not pay the levy.
In other words it is not like the Medicare Levy, which for most taxpayers applies to all their income  -  it is like income tax rates which apply only above certain income levels.
Under this levy, someone who has an income of $60,000 will pay just under $1 extra per week.  A person earning $100,000 per year will pay just under an extra $5 per week.
The levy will apply only in the 2011-12 financial year and it will raise $1.8 billion.
People who were affected by the floods will not pay this levy.
Anyone who receives the Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment for a flood this financial year will be exempt. 
And importantly, this levy is completely separate from donations. 
People who have generously donated are helping out individuals in their time of need.  People who pay this levy will be helping to rebuild the infrastructure  -  roads, bridges, ports  -  which has been torn apart by these floods.
The great majority of Australians are ready to contribute, I have no doubt about that.
The legislation will be introduced into the Parliament in the first sitting week.
Second, we will defer some infrastructure projects to help manage capacity constraints and to redirect funding to immediate rebuilding.
Six Queensland roads projects will be delayed by periods of one to three years. This will save $325 million in the Budget period.  And these changes have been agreed to by the Queensland Government.
I have also identified a number of projects in other states where delays and reductions in Australian Government funding will save approximately $675 million.  Over coming days I will be discussing these projects directly with the affected State Governments before the Minister for Infrastructure publicly announces the details of our changes.
The savings from these infrastructure decisions make a major contribution to funding the rebuilding.  Perhaps even more important, these decisions will free up skilled labour for rebuilding. This is part of ensuring we not only pay as we go, but manage capacity as well.
These decisions will also ensure value for money when these projects are delivered.
That's an important part of my thinking in deferring these infrastructure works: for these long-term projects, I am determined to ensure value for money.  Pressing ahead now would inflate the cost to taxpayers considerably.
Third, we will cut some spending programs and cap some others.
I am abolishing, deferring and capping access to a number of carbon abatement programs.
These include the Green Car Innovation Fund, Cleaner Car Rebate Scheme, the Carbon Capture and Storage Flagships and Solar Flagships, the Solar Hot Water Rebate, Green Start Program, Solar Homes and Communities Plan and the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
The key to these carbon abatement program savings is my determination to deliver a carbon price. 
There is complete consensus that the most efficient way to reduce carbon is to price carbon. Some of these policies are less efficient than a carbon price and will no longer be necessary  -  others will be better delayed until a carbon price's full effects are felt.
And these decisions also mean cuts to industry programs. Business will be doing its part.
With the major call on the Budget for rebuilding, it is now appropriate to reduce this spending, in the knowledge that the objectives will be delivered better through the Government's more economically efficient policy of a carbon price.
I am also capping some programs to limit their cost: the National Rental Affordability Scheme and the LPG Vehicle Scheme.  And some lower priority education spending, where the desired outcome can be achieved through other programs, will be discontinued.  This includes the Capital Development Pool and the Australian Learning and Teaching Council.
And Building Better Regional Cities funding and Priority Regional Infrastructure Program funding will be redirected to the highest priority infrastructure demand on Government  -  flood rebuilding.
There are no easy savings, but this package is balanced and appropriate. 
I am confident Australians will understand the need for these decisions.
Skilled labour will be as important as funding for rebuilding.
The 457 visa program for temporary skilled migrants has proven to be very responsive to prevailing economic conditions. The program is entirely demand driven by employers.
So I am announcing quicker approval for temporary skilled migrants who work on flood rebuilding.  There will be extra resources, assistance to employers and simpler processes to ensure a five day turnaround for decision-ready' applications for workers in a host of nominated occupations to work on rebuilding Queensland.
I am also doubling the pilot of relocation assistance for people on income support and directing it to Queensland.  Up to 4 000 eligible jobseekers who want to get a job helping out will now receive support to move to Queensland and make a difference on the ground.
The offer to these jobseekers is simple: we can get you help to get there if you can stick at the job.
The funding and skilling package is the right one.
Two dollars saved in spending cuts for every dollar raised through the temporary levy.
Cutting less efficient carbon abatement programs because the carbon price will deliver a market based solution. Business doing its part through cuts to industry programs.
Capping demand-driven programs to limit costs. Redirecting infrastructure spending to the highest priority, flood rebuilding.  Delivering the skilled workers we need as quickly as we can.
Paying as we go and managing demand.
THE INVALUABLE WORK OF THE COMMUNITY AND BUSINESS
As important as the role of government is in responding to this disaster, others will also play a vital role.
Australians have given generously to the Premier's Relief Fund in Queensland and similar funds in other states. I am very proud of that helping hand of mateship.
This will help meet the hardship and distress of individual flood victims.
The Australian Government has pledged contributions to these funds as well as encouraging business to give generously. 
And I do want to take a moment to pay particular tribute to corporate Australia's contribution in the crisis.  Hundreds of Australian big, medium and small businesses have already pledged money and donations in kind.
My meeting with business leaders in Brisbane on Monday confirmed that more money was on its way to rebuild and repair  -  as well as trucks to remove the rubbish, bottled water for drinking, clothes and toys for people whose houses were lost or damaged. 
These are just examples of the substantial corporate assistance coming through.
I'm proud of the way corporate Australia has given something back this month.
I believe all insurers should show as much compassion and flexibility in dealing with individuals affected by the floods.
Australia's insurance industry has a very positive record of assisting communities after natural disasters, but I know a number of questions have arisen as a result of the floods about definitions, coverage and consumer protection.
Already the Treasurer and Assistant Treasurer have engaged in a frank and constructive dialogue with the Insurance Council of Australia and the major flood affected insurers and we have seen RACQ lead the way by announcing a $20 million package to assist flood victims.
This is an example the industry should follow.
But the rebuilding cost for government is something quite different from corporate assistance and the relief funds or the costs met by insurance.
Donations will provide invaluable extra help. 
Government funding will provide the core assistance all Australians rely on and rightly expect from their Government.  This will largely fund the restoration and replacement of essential public assets and long-term economic infrastructure.
Roads and rail to get farm produce to market and coal to port - Integral parts of the public infrastructure, which urgently need to be brought back into service, and for which the costs run into the billions.
A CHALLENGE FOR OUR NATION 
I've spent a lot of time in flood-affected parts of our country in the past two weeks.
I wanted to be on the ground to make sure that the Queensland Government could get whatever it needed from the Government straight away. 
I also wanted to be able to see my Government's efforts with my own eyes and ensure it was all working at its best, across the country.
What I have learnt has certainly been instrumental in my own thinking as we've put together this package to rebuild after the floods.
And while what I learnt was important, what I was reminded of was so much more.
I was reminded about our people.
Flood affected people in Queensland who feel the sorrow, even the grief, but who know the sun will come up and are determined to endure.
Flood affected people outside Queensland who keep telling me there's worse off than them, and they are glad there hasn't been greater loss of life in their parts.  But flood damage is flood damage and in a quiet way, they also say to me ... don't forget us.
Australians not affected by floods who just want to help.  Not just Brisbane's amazing clean up volunteers, not just friends filling sandbags for friends, but all Australians, especially those far from the waters, are looking for a way to make a difference.
As I reflect on these floods and what has happened, I can't escape the sadness.  None of us can.  But I won't forget the pride in what we have done together.
But then I look forward and I know what needs to be done: Investing in rebuilding; investing in future growth; managing demand; reforming for the future. That's what we will do.
My plan for rebuilding after the floods is the right economic solution, but it is more than that.
It is what Australians have a right to expect.
Putting the national interest first.
Working to build consensus.
Tackling the big challenges.
Focussing on delivery.
Doing it the Australian way.
Sharing and sticking together.
Everyone doing their part.
We put out a hand to help the flood victims on the first day when they needed us. They still need us.
We won't let go. 


Hilton on the Park, Melbourne
Last week I spoke at the National Press Club on meeting the challengesof flood recovery while retaining our commitment to fiscal responsibility.
Today I want to take a broader view of our nation's economic future in the years and decades ahead.
Two months ago I spoke to you on CEDA's 50th anniversary, and what remarkable years they have been for our nation.Those five decades divide neatly into two very contrasting eras.
The first 25 years were a time of complacency when we sheltered from the outside world.
The next 25 years were the age of reform.
Through good decisions and hard choices, we built an open and competitive economy based on skills, productivity and innovation.
I am a product of that era.
That is why I know that our continued economic success dependson continuous reform.
Reform to nurture us through the resources boom.
But also reform to take us beyond the resources boom.
Nurturing the boom and sharing the growth won't just happen,it will take national leadership and decision-making.
Reform is essential if we are to realise our aspirations to progressas individuals and as a nation.
One thing is clear.
Managing the current expansion through the conventional tools of fiscal and monetary policy are not enough.
Macroeconomic stability, including low and stable inflation and the stability of the financial system are vital.
They are necessary.
But they are not sufficient for the future I have in mind for Australia.
I am deeply ambitious for our nation.
Australians are hard workers.
Australians are innovators.
Australians are determined.
That has driven much of our success.
But we have been lucky too, blessed by a resources boom which, matched with hard work, is sustaining much of our growth.
We are the lucky country, but we are so much more than that as well.
I am determined to drive a permanent reshaping of our economy so that our success far outlasts our luck  -  and I believe we are up to it.
A high tech, high skill, clean energy economy that is self-sustaining beyond our reliance on mineral exports.
That's the future I want our children and grandchildren to thrive in.
Such a future is in our hands, and it will be defined by the way we handle the current minerals boom.
Get it wrong, and we falter.
Get it right, and we set the nation up for decades to come.
Mining  -  the opportunities
Friends, the current upsurge in our terms of trade has been described by the Reserve Bank as the biggest resources boom since the 1850s gold rush.
Since 2004, mining investment has increased fivefold.
This year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses:
 * 	something that has never happened before.
One single project  -  the $43 billion Gorgon project  -  is worth about the same as 2 years of output from agriculture.
To use a more domestic analogy:
Five years ago, the money earned from exporting 10,000 tonsof iron ore would buy about 280 dishwashers.
Today it would buy you around 1,400 dishwashers, a 500 per cent increase.
On any measure, we are living though a boom.
And that boom is a good thing.
Mine workers are gaining higher wages.
Suppliers are benefitting.
Superannuation funds are earning more.
And the higher dollar is cutting prices for household goods such as clothes, appliances, TVs and computers.
The boom is good news for Australia and we should celebrate it.
But there are real challenges in managing its effect on the economy.
Just as we made the big decisions to beat the global recession in 2008and 2009, so we need to make the right calls to nurture our economy though the boom and safely beyond.
Mining  -  the challenges
Because mining is especially profitable at the moment, it rewards investors and pays workers well.
Equipment and workers are drawn from other parts of the economy,like a magnet dragging iron filings towards it.
While the boom is good news for Australia, there is a challenge in managing its effect on the economy.
I think of this effect as the patchwork pressures  where some parts of the economy are strained by growth while others risk being left behind.
In mining areas, the boom has lifted housing costs, it forces non-miners to raise wages to keep workers; and it puts pressure on infrastructure like roads, ports and rail.
The mining boom has fuelled a record high for the Australian dollar.
This strong Australian dollar lowers prices for imports  -  which is good.
But is also makes it harder for our exporters to compete.
Mining's hunger for equipment and workers can also raise costs and make it harder for these non-mining sectors to compete, compounding into a double-whammy the effect of the high Australian dollar.
The Minerals Resource Rent Tax will help ensure the proceeds of the mining boom are invested in a stronger economy to benefit the whole community.
Revenue will be used to cut the company tax rate for all companies,to increase superannuation for all workers and to build essential infrastructure across the country.
These policies will strengthen and help share the growth across all parts of the economy.
Skills for the future
But friends, the biggest challenge arising from the boom is the shortage of skills.
After three decades when unemployment was our major problem, we now face shortages of labour  -  a problem unmatched anywhere in the industrialised world.
Since November 2007, we have created more than 715,000 jobs.
Never have so many Australians enjoyed the benefits and dignity of work.
But we need more workers  -  for today and tomorrow.
In the short term, the mining boom is placing huge strains on our labour market, compounded by the demands of flood recovery.
For example, the resources sector will face a potential shortfallof 36,000 tradespersons by 2015.
But the ageing of the population will create even greater pressure over the next 40 years because it will create a yawning demographic deficit.
By 2050 almost one-quarter of this country's population will be over 64; almost double the figure today.
Real per capita GDP growth will slow to an average of 1.5 per cent a year - compared with 1.9 per cent during the past 40 years.
At the same time, Australia's productivity growth has slowed over the past decade, averaging only 1.4 per cent compared to 2.1 per cent in the 1990s. 
It is vital that we unlock all the potential of our labour market:
Both the young people who are the workers of the future.
And the adults of working age whose absence from the labour forceis not only a social tragedy but an economic risk.
Friends,
For young people, our goal is nothing less than the best education system in the world.
Great schools led by great principals and staffed by great teachers.
Universities creating opportunities for all  -  with uncapped publicly funded places to meet the aspirations of students and at the same time, supply the professional skills that industry needs.
A world class market-driven TAFE and vocational training system  -  designed to deliver the expertise and skills to unleash a new wave of innovation in Australian industry.
We also need to drive participation for young people who fall through the cracks because the better their skills, the more likely they are to succeed in life.
That is why we have entered into a compact guaranteeing every young Australian under age 25 a training place if they are not already in full-time education or in work; Learn or Earn.
We are also increasing family support by up to $4,000 a year to encourage teenagers aged 16 to 18 remain in school or TAFE.
In the same way, we have been gradually changing policy settings to increase immediate and long term incentives for adults to participate in the economy.
Last month we introduced the nation's first ever Paid Parental Leave scheme, which will help redress the Australia's relatively low participation rate for women aged 25-44 compared to the OECD average.
We have increased the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent, and raised the annual limit per child from $4300 to $7500.
Along with Child Care Benefit, this means that low income families have around 80 per cent of their child care costs met by the Australian Government, a significant measure to support low income families with young children return to work.
Our incentives also extend to the tax system.
We have delivered significant tax cuts for low to middle income earnersin our first three budgets, including an increase in the effective tax free threshold for low income earners from $11,000 to $16,000, a huge advance in making work pay.
And we intend to do even more to build participation and make work pay.
Friends,we look with particular care and concern on the large number of working-age Australians, possibly as many as two million, who stand outside the full-time labour force, above and beyond those registered as unemployed.
Around 800,000 are in part-time jobs but want to work more.
Another 800,000 are outside the labour market, including discouragedjob seekers.
And there are many thousands of individuals on the Disability Support Pension who may have some capacity to work.
We know that not all of them can work right away.
Many will need re-skilling.
The right mix of incentives.
Help to overcome ill-health or meet family responsibilities.
But we do want them to re-engage with the workforce and gain the benefits that come from having a job: increased income; social engagement and friendship;self-esteem and wellbeing.
That is why this year I will continue to take steps to improve the incentives for such potential workers to rejoin the labour market, while also investing in the intensive support needed to lift their skills and job readiness.
The policy changes are formidable, and we will not lose sight of the need for compassion and understanding of individual circumstances.
But to the maximum extent possible, I want to ensure that every Australian who can work, does work.
I want to ensure that the incentives of work always outweigh the attractions of staying on welfare.
Beyond the boom
Friends, managing the pressures of the boom is vital.
But I believe we can do so much more.
We can create a high participation, high productivity economy, where everyone shares in the benefits of our hard work.
To do this, we need a stable macroeconomy, creating certainty for economic decision making.
We need flexible markets with the right incentives and price signals to maximise the value of our people and capital resources.
We also need strong  capabilities:  skills, infrastructure, research and development, entrepreneurship.
With courage and imagination, we can build a high-skill, high-tech, low-pollution economy that will succeed independent of our mineral wealth.
That is my vision for the nation.
A fundamental reshaping of the Australian economy as profound in scale and ambition as the reforms of the Hawke-Keating government, which opened our economy to the world.
I want to make sure that our nation invests enough of the profits from the mining boom so that the benefits are there for the long term.
That means investing in long lived economic assets and infrastructure.
Preparing for the nation's journey through the 21st century:
Ports, roads and rail to fuel our exports and unblock our cities.
Research infrastructure to nurture the ideas and inventions of tomorrow.
Bringing the transformative possibilities of broadband to every home, school and business in the nation.
And above all, putting a price on carbon - a fundamental structural reform as significant in our own time as the reforms of the Hawke-Keating government a generation ago.
Hawke and Keating floated the dollar.
We will price carbon.
A carbon price will drive another sweeping technological revolution like Information Technology did in the 1980s and 90s.
New technologies bringing new jobs and demanding new skills.
Using the abundant resources of this nation  -  solar, wind, geothermal  -  that currently go to waste.
Manufacturing more and exporting more.
And regaining comparative advantage because the world is always in the market for good ideas.
That's the future I want for our nation: strong; smart; sustainable; grateful for the boom but ready for the time beyond.
Friends, to achieve all these things, we need a strong and sustainable financial position, based on a culture of public and private saving.
Under my plan to increase super contributions from 9 to 12 per cent,our $1.7 trillion pool of super savings will double in 15 years.
I want to make sure we save enough of the profits of the mining boom for the long term.
Putting some of that money into superannuation will do that.
To complement an increase in private savings, we also need to increase public savings and strengthen our budget position.
The truth is that although our economy is strong, our budget position remains compromised by the recklessness of the Howard years.
In the final term of the Howard government, additional revenue contributed $334 billion to the budget surplus over the years from 2004-5 to 2010-11 while new spending decisions and tax cuts reduced the surplus by$314 billion.
Effectively, the Howard government spent the entire additional revenue from the commodity boom Mark One.
Put it another way:
Whenthe economy was growing strongly during the previous boom,real spending growth under the former Coalition government ran at3.7 per cent, almost double our 2 per cent spending cap.
That was the situation we inherited in 2007.
Returning the budget to surplus is thus not a political goal but an economic imperative.
Firstly, to rebuild the structural integrity of our nation's finances.
Secondly, to ensure that the footprint of government does not add to aggregate demand when the economy is running close to full capacity as expected in 2012-13.
In circumstances of strong demand, it is economically prudent to reduce inefficient spending and offset all new outlays.
Even before the floods response, our fiscal consolidation has been the fastest budgetary turnaround since the 1960s.
And in 2011-12, Commonwealth revenue as a share of GDP will be lower than for every single year of the Howard era.
This is a low taxing government.
And a last week's flood response opened a new dimension of fiscal stringency.
I stand by those cuts and by the fiscal and policy rigour which drove them.
It's right to price carbon, the most economically efficient way of reducing pollution and to cut less efficient programs.
We have also proposed a modest one-off levy to help pay the costs of rebuilding as we go: targeted, temporary, transparent.
There is a strong history of levies being used by the Australian Government.
Six were proposed during the course of the Howard years:
A levy on superannuation for high income earners.
Levies to restructure the milk and sugar industries.
A levy to buy back guns in the aftermath of Port Arthur.
A levy to help meet the entitlements of former Ansett staff.
A proposed levy to help the people of East Timor rebuild.
And, of course, Mr Abbott's proposed levy on Australian business to fund his paid parental leave scheme.
If a levy was good enough to pay for Mr Abbott's election promises just last year, how is it not good enough to support rebuilding flood-ravaged regions now?
That is political hypocrisy at its worst.
Friends, the levy I propose is modest and affordable.
The flood victims themselves won't pay a cent.
60 per cent of taxpayers will pay less than a dollar a week.
Someone on $80,000 will pay $2.88 a week - less than a cup of coffee, 10 times less than the tax cuts they've received over the last three years.
With the funds raised from the levy and our budget measures we will help put the Queensland economy fully back in business.
We will fund the high-cost infrastructure that sustains employment and facilitates our exports, the hard infrastructure we own as a community: roads, rail, ports.
By contrast, the donations so generously given by the Australian people will go to individuals and families affected by the floods.
Those donations are tax-deductible.
And every cent will help a family in need.
Just as every cent of our $6 billion recovery package will go to restoring productive  infrastructure damaged by the floods.
Two different streams of money, but one shared purpose  -  to put the flood affected regions back on their feet.
Conclusion
Friends, a high tech, low-emissions economy; skills; productivity; infrastructure; broadband.
I seek these things because they are the future.
And while we must govern for today, we must govern for the futureas well; for the nation we can become.
Yes, the challenges of today and tomorrow can easily leave us yearning for what we remember as a kinder and simpler past.
But I do not believe in romanticising the past, any more than I believe in being afraid of the future.
We best combat fear by taking deliberate steps to shape the future together.
Hard steps on the road of reform.
Big decisions and a big vision for our nation's future.
I am a complete optimist about that future because I firmly believe the best days of our nation are in front of it, not behind it.
Australia is a wonderful country, the greatest country on earth.
We are privileged to live here and we best respect that great privilege by shaping a future of opportunity for all. 


House of Representatives
I move that the House:  acknowledges with great sadness the devastation occasioned by this summer's natural disasters including unprecedented floods, Cyclone Yasi and bushfires; extends its deepest sympathies to the families of those who have lost loved ones; records its profound regret at the impact of this summer's natural disasters on the economic and social well-being of affected communities; records its admiration for the courage shown by so many in the face of these disasters; acknowledges the enormous efforts of Defence personnel, emergency workers, and so many volunteers in responding to these disasters; and pledges the full support of the Australian Parliament and community to assist affected areas to recover and rebuild.
Mr Speaker, yesterday, we commemorated the two year anniversary of the Black Saturday bushfires, which took 173 lives. 
Around Victoria, communities have been coming together, to remember the dead and share the stories of that day of hell and the journey of rebuilding since.  I shared such a moment of coming together on Sunday and had the opportunity to talk to a number of survivors, who still miss those who are lost and who are still healing.
For me, Sunday was a powerful reminder of how hard it is and how long it takes for individuals and communities to recover from devastating natural disasters.
Here today, it's with very great sorrow that I offer words of condolence to Australians who are now facing this hard journey and to assure them they won't travel that hard journey alone  -  we won't let go Mr Speaker, we won't let go.
Mr Speaker this summer will be always be remembered for the force and scale of the natural disasters the nation has endured. 
This summer will always be remembered for the many times we turned to each other and said it's bad, but the worst is behind us now' only to find that there was a new horror ahead.
This summer will always be remembered for the way Queensland suffered  - floods of unprecedented proportions, an inland tsunami so powerful it swept away lives and shattered communities, and the most powerful cyclone the nation has ever seen.
Australia has watched in horror as day after day a new chapter in natural disaster history has been written.
This summer will always be remembered for the way that suffering of already unimaginable and unprecedented proportions in Queensland was joined by suffering in other parts of the nation.
Flooding continues in New South Wales and Victoria, Tasmania, Western Australia and South Australia have not been spared either.
And while so much water has done so much damage and caused so much despair the nation has also being called on to fight fire in our West.
We can talk about what we've lost this summer in terms of cold hard economic facts and, the reality is, we must.
But after the roads are rebuilt, businesses are back to full strength and the people are back in a place they can again call home, those whom we have lost in this tragedy will still be lost.
And that is a cost that can't be measured.
The unprecedented and unexpected severity of the Queensland floods paid no heed to the sanctity of human life.
There are hundreds of Australians mourning the loss of the 35 people who died in the Queensland floods since the 30th November or who wait anxiously on news of the 9 people who remain missing.
And across our nation there are others who mourn.
Those are not just names on a list Mr Speaker.
They are somebody's brother or sister, somebody's parent or grandparent, somebody's child, somebody's friend.
Their deaths have left people behind who now live with an empty, gaping chasm and no insurance payout is going to fill that, no financial assistance payment is going to fill it, no rebuilt house will fill it.
We offer those loved ones our deepest sympathy.
Mr Speaker, together we come together as a Parliament to mourn those who have died, to share our stories of the horror and grief, to describe the devastation.
And we will ultimately rise in our places in silence. And so we should.
Healing great pain requires both coming together as human beings and lonely moments of quiet reflection.
But I urge that this summer when we write its history we should make sure that the history written into the books and into our hearts is more than the history of a time of loss and grief.
We should also remember this summer as a summer of courage.
Mr Speaker I've brought with me today a mud splattered, tattered Australian flag and I want to show it to the House.  It was recovered from the area of Murphy's Creek by the crew of a Defence Force helicopter, and I want to thank Major Scott Summers, Captain Lachlan Thornley, Sergeant Dean O'Cass and Corporal Steven Abbot who gave it to me.
These four men joined by others showed persistence and bravery, they worked alongside people from the Queensland emergency services had flown helicopters through a dark and dangerous night, when waters crashed through the Lockyer Valley, to literally save dozens and dozens of lives. 
Many who flew that night, some of them who had been flying for more than twenty years, said to me it was the worst weather they had ever taken a helicopter up in to.
And yet despite that they continued and they saved lives.
These helicopters continued with search and rescue in the days to come and they found this flag Mr Speaker.
And I was honoured when they gave it to me, it was muddy and it was soaking wet, and they did so because it was a powerful symbol for them: 
 * 	Of what it means to face the elements
 * 	Of what it means to be hurt
 * 	Of what it means to endure
 * 	Of what it means to be Australian.
I spoke to them of courage, it spoke to them of courage.
The courage it takes to keep filling sandbags even when your back is breaking.
The courage it takes to hold your nerve in the dark as a cyclone races around you.
The courage it takes to tell your children to run across the railway line, knowing it's dangerous, knowing they could fall but knowing it's their only hope of getting to safety.
The courage it takes for a young boy, 13 year old Jordan Rice, to say to his rescuer, take my brother first.
And before that brave rescuer could return, Jordan and mum Donna, were taken by the flood; but the legend of Jordan's amazing courage will go on.
 A hero in the purest sense of the word.
And there are other heroes Mr Speaker, like Mark Kempton and his helicopter crew from Emergency Management Queensland, a crew that winched 28 people to safety over a period of two and a half hours.
They should be patting themselves on the back and saying job well done to each other.
Instead, Mark is haunted, he's haunted every human face of this disaster, a woman he rescued who wept uncontrollably as she was pulled into the helicopter.
In a media report Mark said: 
I looked over my shoulder and saw her sitting on the floor of the aircraft and she was just devastated. It was heartbreaking.
What Mark was witnessing was a young, pregnant mother who, just seconds before the chopper had arrived, had had her young child wrenched from her weary arms by the floodwaters.
She finally succumbed to the terrifying power of nature that night.
How do you tell Mark to rejoice in thinking of the people he saved when that young mother can think of nothing except the child she lost?
I say to these heroes, and they are heroes, for every one person you saved there are hundreds, even thousands of people who are not grieving today, people who don't know you but without your skills, your bravery, your willingness to put your life on the line their loved one would not be here today.
Your devotion to your task is humbling.
I pay tribute to every police officer, every emergency services worker, every health worker, every Defence Force member, every local council worker, every community services worker, every one who made such a difference to their fellow Australians this summer.
Mr Speaker, in speaking and remembering the courage of this summer, I also want to record the nation's admiration: 
 * 	For the courage shown by Premier Bligh who hour after hour informed, reassured and provided the leadership the people of Queensland needed;
 * 	For the courage of the local council Mayors who did the same for their own communities;
 * 	For the courage of those who spent long weary days in evacuation centres without complaint  and often with a smile on the face and a quick joke on their lips;
 * 	For those who returned to devastation and found the courage clean up.
Mr Speaker it's been a great privilege over this summer to meet with so many Australians of courage:
 * 	The young girl sitting laughing in an evacuation centre wearing her Hello Kitty pyjamas, the only clothes she had left;
 * 	The small child who told me about her terrifying night on the roof waiting to be rescued;
 * 	The Pastor whose church became an evacuation centre for frail aged Australians;
 * 	The people with tears prickling in their eyes who cleaned up their homes and businesses.
Mr Speaker, across the ages millions of words have been written trying to define courage and we will never reach a satisfactory definition.
But this summer, tens of thousands of Australians found deep within themselves the ability to do something they thought they would never be able to. 
Mr Speaker, that's courage.
This summer will always be remembered for it.
And it will be remembered for the extraordinary display of Australian mateship:
 * 	We pay tribute to the mateship shown by every trained volunteer who flocked to help  -  SES, Red Cross, Lifeline and the list goes on.
 * 	We pay tribute to every Australian who came to help their fellow Australians with a mop and a bucket, a barbecue and a bottle of sauce, a smile and endless goodwill.
 * 	We pay tribute to the businesses and the unions who saw a need and got in and met it.
 * 	We pay tribute to every Australian who has donated to help their fellow Australians in a time of need.
I've travelled around Queensland, in New South Wales and in Victoria, I have been so touched by the stories of bravery, of courage and of mateship that I felt an obligation to honour these wonderful Australian traits
I have sought approval from the Queen to introduce honours for Australians who have gone out of their way to extend the hand of mateship during times of crisis.
Next Australia Day I'm confident we will present our first awards to those who have performed heroic and selfless acts and volunteered their services across Australia in times of crisis.
And we will backdate the awards to include those who reached out to eachother during Black Saturday.
Mr Speaker, we mourn for the lost, we ache for those whose lives have been turned upside down and we won't let go
We will rebuild.
We will not succumb to the misguided notion that once the floodwaters recede, once the debris strewn by the cyclone is removed and the camera crews pack up and the focus of the nation turns to something else, that life somehow magically returns to normal for those who have suffered at the hands of natural disasters.
It does not.
The Queensland community in particular has a long and arduous road of recovery ahead and they will need the rest of Australia's support.
We will work with the Queensland Government, as we are with the Governments of Victoria and New South Wales, to provide a range of assistance measures to individuals, businesses and primary producers who have been hit by these floods. 
These include personal distress and hardship assistance to individuals in the worst affected areas, concessional interest rate loans and freight subsidies to businesses and recovery grants for primary producers and small businesses.
We are providing extra Centrelink support.
We have also increased access to mental health services because we know that the victims of this trauma will need ongoing support for weeks and months to come.
We, as a nation, are facing a long-term task.  We will rebuild.
Mr Speaker, in our many hours of need this summer, Australia has been deeply touched by the support from around the world.
We have received messages of sympathy and offers of assistance and donations from more than 100 countries and international organisations.
From our friends in the United States, in China, in Japan, and the United Arab Emirates, to our close neighbours and regional partners of New Zealand, East Timor, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, Singapore and Samoa. What people should notice about that list is that countries that have so much less than us have still been willing to help.
The outpouring of international support has sent a clear signal, a message to us that we were not alone.
And we thank the international community from the bottom of our hearts.
As our days of crisis have been reported around the world, so has our nation's response. 
The world has marvelled at the way we' ve pulled together.
We should be so proud, so proud that there is something uniquely Australian about the way we go about helping our mates.
It's understated.
It's done with humour and humility.
And it signifies a strength of character that is etched deeply within our nation's DNA.
Character that has ensured that our darkest hours are always followed by our finest hour as we work together to help each other, to not let go, to begin the healing.
Mr Speaker, to the victims of the catastrophes of this summer, our sincere condolences.
We can't replace the precious things that people have lost and we can't replace the lives. We can't replace the door jambs full of pencil marks that recorded a child's height as they grew from toddler to teen.
We cannot replace an elderly lady's letters, written to her by a wartime beau, we can't replace the baby photos that have been lost.
We can't take away the grief from those who mourn any more than we can bring back the loved ones who are gone.
But we can, we can face this together as a nation and we can support those who have lost so much.
We can listen to them and ensure they feel the warm embrace of the Australian community.
We can Mr Speaker and we will, we will hold on to each other as we grieve, as we recover, as we rebuild.
And we will always remember the days of despair and the days of courage we've lived through together this summer.
I commend this motion to the House.  



I acknowledge the first Australians, on whose lands we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I believe that our debates are the stronger for our acknowledgement of country ... for this emerging Australian tradition of respect.
I remember so vividly Matilda House's words, speaking to all of us, when this 43rd Parliament began.  She said:
I expressthe hope of a united, reconciled nation, the oldest living culture joined with the many diverse cultures of a modern successful Australia.
I believe that, for all the democratic differences between us in this place, this is a hope we do all genuinely share.
I also remember so vividly what Kevin Rudd said, speaking for all of us, when the 42nd Parliament began.  He said:
Sorry.
With that one word, Kevin Rudd made wonderful history for Australia. 
As an Australian, as a member of the Government, I was proud to be here that day.
And then Kevin turned his intelligence and determination to Closing the Gap for Indigenous Australians. 
Setting six specific, ambitious targets for our nation to achieve.
Close the gap in life expectancy.
Halve the gap in mortality rates for children under five.
Ensure access to early childhood education.
Halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy.
Halve the gap in Year 12 attainment rates.
Halve the gap in employment outcomes.
And I am proud to be here now.  Taking up the responsibility for the Australian Government in Closing the Gap.
So today, I make the third annual Prime Ministerial Statement to the House on Closing the Gap.  And the Parliament should be in no doubt.  Prime Ministers will be reporting on Closing the Gap for decades to come.
This work will go on.
I do believe that Australians want our Indigenous people to have a better life.  I also understand that many Australians wonder if our country can ever make that happen. 
I feel the force of these two Australian emotions  -  our deep dream of a better life for all, and our deep fear that we can never truly achieve it  -  as I speak to the Parliament today. 
I know our people think of the past, of the great policy movements and the passionate debates, of the money spent and the stubborn persistence of disadvantage, and I know they sometimes wonder ...
... can we really make a difference?
I am an activist and an optimist.  For me, the answer can only be yes. 
The reality of change is never simple, our knowledge is never perfect and action is never easy.  But Closing the Gap has allowed Australia to move beyond anecdote and intuition and instead to act on the best evidence we can get. 
The Closing the Gap goals mean we know what we are trying to achieve: in education, in employment, in health.
The Closing the Gap strategy means we know how we are going to achieve it: improving investment, changing behaviours, working together with respect.
The framework is in place and delivery has begun.
Closing the Gap is the slogan of no party.
That is much of its power.
The community, particularly the Indigenous community, made Closing the Gap a campaign.
This Government has made Closing the Gap our policy.
And in my own work, first as Education Minister and now as Prime Minister, I've come to see ever more power in Closing the Gap as a way of defining, driving and measuring improvements in the lives of Indigenous Australians.
As a way of describing and understanding the Government's plans for the enormously difficult and complex social problems of Indigenous disadvantage.
Because I believe a fair nation creates opportunities for all ...
... I see Closing the Gap as a genuinely important national goal.
That all Australians will have the same opportunities  -  that demography will not be destiny  -  that success will be defined by hard work not postcode.  And that this will be true for any Aussie kid, whether they're from the red centre, Redfern or Rose Bay.
Because I believe in tackling the big challenges in the national interest ...
... I see Closing the Gap as a way ofunderstanding the problems.
It is evidence-based, accountable and transparent.  It tells us what needs to be done first and fastest and builds a methodical approach.  It allows us to build consensus in support of specific progress, instead of debating abstract ideas.  To do what we can, with what we have, where we are.
Because I believe Australians judge Governments on delivery ...
... I see Closing the Gap as a way of working on the solutions.
It is a way of making specific, measurable progress.  It is practical and cumulative.  It gives us new information which means we can invest where investment will make the greatest difference.  Information which means we can be sure that the Government is meeting its responsibilities.
So Closing the Gap is a way of saying that Indigenous people should expect from the Government the same things every Australian expects.
The building blocks all people look to Government to provide.
The necessary conditions of opportunity in life.
And Closing the Gap is a way of saying that Indigenous people should expect of themselves the same things all Australians expect as well.
Because I also believe that with opportunity comes responsibility and individuals only achieve progress though work and effort ...
... so I see Closing the Gap as a call for changes in behaviour. 
A call to every person, to every family, to every community.
To take care of your children.  To take a job when you find one.  To create a safe environment.  To send your kids to school, pay your rent, save up for a home.  To respect good social norms and to respect the law.  And to reach out to other Australians.
If I speak strongly, it is because I have listened to Indigenous people who do these things already, people who speak even more strongly. 
People like Chris Sarra, the inspiring Indigenous educator whose creed high expectations, and whose words stronger, smarter stay with me.
People like Noel Pearson, who pioneered the arguments for social and personal responsibility as a driver of Indigenous opportunity.
To borrow a phrase from President George Bush, we must reject the soft bigotry of low expectations.
It is not only well known Indigenous Australians who are driving behavioural change.
It is the mother in the city who feeds her children and gets them ready for school.
The aunty in the country town who tells the stories to the young.
The father in a remote community who sets an example of strength and gentleness to his sons.
These are the hidden heroes of Indigenous Australia  -  the people who are leading the change more than anyone else.
I am certain that Australia will never Close the Gap without all of us committing to the change.
When this campaign began, the truth is this: the most remote community and the most respected leader, the smallest shop and the biggest corporation, and the Australian Government itself, we all needed to change.
And we needed not to change alone, but to change together.
Saying sorry was vital for so many reasons.
One that I want to reflect on today is the chance it gave us to break the cycle of blame between Australian Governments and Indigenous Australia.
In the worst moments of this cycle, Australian Governments have sometimes seemed to say to Indigenous Australia, let us know when you have got your act together. 
And in the worst moments of this cycle, Indigenous Australia has sometimes seemed to feel, the Australian Government has to invest before our behaviour can begin to change.
Both attitudes are destructive and wrong.  Bad behaviour by individuals is never an excuse for Government failure.  The failures of Government are never an excuse for bad behaviour by individuals.
If Indigenous kids in this nation aren't getting a fair go, we share the responsibility for change. 
I don't mean as Indigenous people, I don't mean as non-Indigenous people.  I mean as adults.
Politicians, bureaucrats, local communities, schools, teachers and parents.  Us. 
All of us and each of us ... we share the task ahead.
I really think we all now see it that way.  In the past three years we have genuinely come together with respect and worked together with shared responsibility and genuinely broken the cycle of blame.
Because Closing the Gap is now more than a public policy.
Closing the Gap is a national goal.
In the same way, I believe recognising the unique and special place of our first peoples in the Australian Constitution can be a wonderful national goal.
An opportunity to recognise, in the founding document of our nationhood, our shared pride in being Australian and our shared pride in Australia's continuing Indigenous culture.
When that happens, it will be a wonderful, uplifting, uniting moment for our nation ... a day of great national pride. 
I look forward to working with the expert panel, with all members of the Parliament, and with all Australians, as we approach that goal together.
But the work can't wait until that day  -  and we won't let it. 
Since 2007, our nation has been working together to Close the Gap: in health, in education and in employment. 
To overcome decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure.  To encourage and support personal responsibility as the foundation for healthy, functional families and communities.
And to build new understanding and respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.  We have done an enormous amount of work together.
First, we've invested in what we call the building blocks. 
Those necessary conditions of opportunity.
Early childhood and schooling, health and healthy homes, safe communities and economic participation, as well as governance and leadership.
Reversing decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure.  Delivering the things all Australians expect.
So we've invested in early childhood ...
Delivering infrastructure, staff and programs in remote communities and town camps.  Making community based preschools more affordable.  Hiring extra full-time teachers to support Indigenous kids.
Last year nearly 15 000 Indigenous adults and children visited one of the 45 Communities for Children services sites to receive assistance with early learning and literacy, parenting and family support and child nutrition. 
10 new child and maternal health services have been approved for funding across Australia.  Two of these services have already commenced in Warburton, Western Australia and Ceduna, South Australia and up to 11,000 Indigenous babies and their mothers will be helped by 2013. 
More than 6000 children and parents meet regularly in 69 supported playgroups operating across Australia.  Supporting children's development and giving parents a hand as well.
We've invested in schooling ...
The Government is building new classrooms, science centres, libraries and resource centres in 29 remote communities across Australia.  These projects are due to be completed this year.
Last year, more than 3500 Indigenous young people who were at risk of not completing Year 12 or an equivalent were personally helped under the Youth Connections program which encourages young people to stay at school, get back to school or take up training and achieve their goals.
More than 5000 students were supported in academies such as the Clontarf Foundation football academies, the Former Origin Greats Queensland academy and other sports-based academies in 2010.
These academies reach out to school students at risk of not completing school.  They teach and promote self-discipline and self esteem, life skills and the importance of education, particularly through close mentoring and participation in sport.
More than half of participants reported improved academic performance and positive changes in attitudes and behaviour.
We've invested in health ...
The Indigenous Chronic Disease Package is training and expanding the Indigenous health workforce and tackling chronic disease risk factors.
This has funded more than 300 new positions in the Indigenous health workforce: outreach workers and health project officers, regional tobacco coordinators and tobacco action workers, healthy lifestyle workers, practice managers and other health professionals.
To tackle petrol sniffing, there are already 108 sites across regional and remote Australia supplying low aromatic Opal fuel.
Eleven new Indigenous communities in the Gulf region of Queensland, East Kimberley in Western Australia and the Top End of the Northern Territory, home to nearly 9000 people, will be getting access to Opal fuel through 39 new retail sites. This begins in 2011 and will be complete by 2013.
Opal fuel has delivered a 70 per cent reduction in petrol sniffing across communities, with improved health outcomes, family function and community safety.
We've invested in healthy homes ...
The Australian Government is making an unprecedented long-term investment to reverse decades of neglect.  Tackling overcrowding and homelessness, poor housing conditions and the severe housing shortage in remote Indigenous communities. 
People need a decent house to cook a healthy meal, to sleep at night, for children to wake up the next day ready for school, for parents to wake up the next day ready to work ... that means the houses have to be built, and we're doing that.
We have listened to communities and are building housing to cater for different sized families  -  houses that cater for singles, young families and the elderly  -  and houses that allow privacy.
Last year 316 new houses and 828 refurbishments were completed. 
New and refurbished dwellings are subject to new tenancy agreements, which help tenants transition to rental arrangements in line with other public housing, and ensure regular repairs and maintenance.
We've invested in safe communities ...
The Australian Government is helping protect Indigenous children from neglect and abuse.
We are helping develop new family support services for families at risk, increasing the number of child protection workers, and strengthening alcohol controls.
The Australian Government has paid for the construction of three permanent police stations in the APY Lands in South Australia.
These began operations late 2009 and early last year, bringing a permanent police presence to those communities for the first time.
66 Australian Federal Police officers have been deployed to the Northern Territory since June 2007.   We've funded 45 extra Northern Territory Police recruits who have graduated since 2009 and commenced their duties within the Northern Territory Police Force in 16 communities from Maningrida to Yuendumu. Another 15 recruits should graduate in April.
And in child protection, new national standards for Out of Home Care, which apply to formal care arrangements including residential care, foster care and kinship care, will ensure children get proper care, no matter where they live. 
We've invested in economic participation ...
Over 16,000 Indigenous Australians started employment and around 12,500 began training in 2010 with support from the Indigenous Employment Program.  As part of the Tailored Assistance element of the program, work began on construction, retail, hospitality and mining projects valued at over $180 million.
Nearly 2 000 Indigenous Australians were supported into employment over the last twelve months through the Community Development Employment Projects program.
Since starting in September 2009, the Australian Indigenous Minority Supplier Council has generated over $4 million in contracts and nearly $3 million in transactions between its members and certified suppliers.
The Council links corporate and government purchasers with certified Indigenous suppliers of goods and services.   Demand is growing, not only for Indigenous workers, but for Indigenous business as well.
And we've invested in governance and leadership ...
The National Congress of Australia's First Peoples provides a central mechanism with which Government, the corporate and community sector can engage and partner on policy design and implementation.
In remote communities, we are supporting community capacity building and leadership initiatives such as engagement workshops, leadership development workshops and community development training.
Closing the Gap demands that the Australian Government meets our responsibility: to overcome decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure.
We are doing this.
Closing the Gap also demands personal responsibility: the foundation for the life of every family and community.
Indigenous people are doing this too.
Closing the Gap means change in people's lives.
And Indigenous people know that when the child starts attending school ... when the drinker stops abusing alcohol ... when the adult takes the job that is there ... then change begins.
And Indigenous people know these decisions are not made by Governments.
They are made by people.
The job of Government, of communities, is to support good decisions.
So when the child goes to school, there is a great teacher ... when the drinker stops, they finda great counsellor ... when the adult takes the job, they have great skills.
That is what we are doing across Australia.
In Fitzroy Crossing ...
The leaders of Fitzroy Crossing and the surrounding communities of the Fitzroy Valley in Western Australia requested alcohol restrictions and these were first imposed in 2007.  Since 2008 the alcohol restrictions have been evaluated and reviewed annually. The reviews are good news.
There is less tolerance for domestic violence and more willingness to report it.
Families are purchasing more food and clothing and parents are taking more care of their own health and wellbeing and that of their children.  Fitzroy Crossing is a quieter and more peaceful town for families to live in and a better place for children to grow up.
In Alice Springs ...
The Australian and Territory Government Alice Springs Transformation Plan is designed to meet very specific local needs.  It is funding work on new roads, curbs and gutters, new power and water infrastructure and street lights.
85 new houses are being built, with 18 new houses already completed and remaining work to be completed this year.  This goes with normal tenancy management arrangements where residents are expected to pay their rent and maintain their homes.
In Alice Springs itself, there is now more accommodation for renal patients and people receiving other medical treatment and extra managed accommodation beds for homeless men. 
Health checks and family assessments are being provided to make sure 300 Indigenous children are ready and able to attend school.  And the successful dog control program has been extended for a further two years.
On Cape York ...
In Queensland, the Cape York Welfare Reform Trial is a partnership between the Queensland and Australian Governments, Cape York regional organisations and the four communities of Aurukun, Coen, Hope Vale and Mossman Gorge.
The trial encourages people to take responsibility for community well-being by improving school attendance and child safety, tackling alcohol and drug abuse, gambling addiction and family violence and improving tenancy management. 
Noel Pearson has driven these reforms on the Cape over many years.  But Cape York is a strong example of the way this Government is working with communities across the country and supporting local design and control.
In Brisbane ...
Chris Sarra's Stronger Smarter Institute at the Queensland University of Technology has delivered transformational change in Indigenous education. 
Chris has also led the Stronger Smarter Learning Communities Project, supported by the Australian Government.  This has brought new resources to drive improvement in schools which our transparency measures show need help.
Giving principals and teachers across Australia the tools to improve performance in their schools. 
Not just the support, but the challenge: to set the highest expectations and for Indigenous students and deliver the best results.
I said earlier, Chris's creed ofhigh expectations, and his words stronger, smarter stay with me.
By very definition, Government cannot deliver personal responsibility.
But modern Government creates many incentives for personal behaviourand has many opportunities to support good decisions.
This is what we are doing now.  It is helping to Close the Gap.
So today the Government releases the third annual report on progress towards our Closing the Gap targets.
At their launch, we knew these targets were specific and ambitious. 
Ambitious, because we chose targets that would be difficult to achieve ... specific, because we chose targets where we'd know if we didn't get there.
The report tells us that we must keep improving investment, keep changing behaviours, keep working together with respect, if we are to meet the targets to Close the Gap.
Here is what we know.
We can be most confident of meeting two of the six targets.
To halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five by 2018.
To ensure access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four years olds in remote communities by 2013.
We should be confident these two targets are on track.
We see improvement in three of the six targets, and with faster improvement over time, we believe these can be reached.
To halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for children by 2018.
To halve the gap for Indigenous students in Year 12 (or equivalent) attainment rates by 2020.
To halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians by 2018.
The final target is the most challenging of all.
Closing the life-expectancy gap within a generation  -  that is, by 2031.
That means the life expectancy of Indigenous men will need to increase by over twenty years and the life expectancy of Indigenous women will need to increase by over sixteen years by 2031. 
This is a thirty-year target.  No one thinks it can be achieved sooner.
Indeed it will be extremely challenging.
  I know we could never say mission accomplished three years into a thirty year process. 
But the message of this report is clear.
Together, we can do this.
We have a plan for progress. 
We do see change for the better.
And we know where we want change to continue.
This is the power of Closing the Gap.
We do not have a plan to do everything.  Such plans rarely succeed.
We do have a plan to meet six targets. 
Together, we can do this.
With this evidence of where we have more work to do comes a responsibility to do more work now.
Closing the Gap is built on measuring improvement.
Measurement needs to improve as well  -  so we always know what works. 
For preschool access we use a new Australian Bureau of Statistics survey.
For literacy and numeracy we use NAPLAN, which is also annual.  It is national data, rich and rigorous.
But our mortality, life expectancy, year 12 attainment and employment targets are based on the Census, which happens every five years. 
So we need other ways to measure improvement between the censuses. 
And the census itself hasn't always reached Indigenous people or identified them well. 
So some targets are particularly difficult to measure today. 
Extra resources for the Australian Bureau of Statistics and for the States are making a difference. 
This year's census will tell us more about Indigenous Australians as a result.  This is an area where more will be done over time.
Today, I met with leaders of the Closing the Gap Coalition here in Parliament House.  Their campaign is approaching its fifth anniversary next month.  They have a lot to be proud of.
The Closing the Gap Coalition have been important advocates for Indigenous health equality ... becoming a united voice on what should happen to improve Indigenous health.  But they emphasised to me that advocacy on the outside is not enough.
The Closing the Gap Coalition, with the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples, is not just arguing for action, but advising on what works where.
This practical effort to ensure services fit the conditions of specific people in specific places  -  to work together to deliver the right investments and the right behaviour changes  -  to translate good policy into real progress  -  is the absolute essence of Closing the Gap.
This is the work which will go on.
Clear goals.
Measured progress.
Focussed on the targets.
Government delivering what all Australians expect.
Indigenous people doing the same.
Together, we can do this.
With passion and perspective.
Determined to deliver. 
All sharing our pride in Australia's Indigenous culture.
All sharing our determination to give everyone a better life.
We can Close the Gap. 



Thank you very, very much and it's a very great privilege to join you here tonight, join you with so many friends around the room.
Now I am going to try and acknowledge my Federal Parliamentary colleagues who are here tonight, but I know even as I say those words I am going to get these acknowledgements wrong, because every time look down at my list of Federal colleagues here tonight I've seen another one or two saunter past, so the room is filled with colleagues from the Federal Parliament.
But the list is something like the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer and long time friend of this union, Wayne Swan, the Assistant Treasurer, Bill Shorten, who has such a special connection to this union, and then other Parliamentary colleagues including Mark Bishop, Stephen Conroy, Yvette D'Ath, Michael Danby, Don Farrell, David Feeney, Michael Forshaw, Bernie Ripoll is here, Mark Dreyfus, Mark Furner, Ed Husic, Joe Ludwig, Deb O'Neill, Graeme Perrett and I think so more that I've managed to miss.
But the fact that so many of us are here from the Federal Parliamentary party should tell you how much we value your work.
And of course we are joined by friends from the union movement, including Ged Kearney and Jeff Lawrence.
Perhaps instead of doing a long list of acknowledgements, it would be easier to say here tonight the people gathered in this room are friends of Bill Ludwig and that would catch every category.
And, of course, friends of Bill Ludwig because Bill Ludwig has been a stalwart of this union, a big man with a big heart, but Bill Ludwig as a Labor leader has always understood that strong unionism and a strong Labor Party go hand in hand, and whilst he has fought for his union he's fought for Labor governments here in the great State of Queensland, and for the whole nation, and tonight I honour his contribution over so many years to the labour movement and to the Labor Party. It is unequalled in my experience in the Labor Party. I'm proud to be here and to call myself a friend of Bill Ludwig.
And Bill, I did want to thank you tonight for letting us have Joe Ludwig in Canberra. He brings your values, your ideals, your understanding of this great State with him to Canberra. He's a very valued member of my team and I thank him, too, for his friendship and support.
And I also want to acknowledge Paul Howes tonight. I want to thank him for his speech a little bit earlier, and I also want to say to Paul thank you for asking me to join you here for Valentine's Day. I'm viewing it as a kind of Valentine's Day date, however you're viewing it, and even though, of course, your wife is here tonight.
But, Paul, I did want to just say a few words which I mean in a spirit of constructive criticism, so if you could take them that way I would be very grateful.
As people know from my time as Minister for Education, I am a stickler for grammar and for English language and its true meaning. I'm therefore very concerned that the title of your recent book should be Confessions of a Faceless Man. I think to have written this title you must have misunderstood the meaning of the word confession, and misunderstood the terminology faceless man.'
If I can explain to you where the word confession' comes from, it comes from a religious practice where one goes and acknowledges error and asks for forgiveness. It is therefore not appropriate to start any text with the words: I confess, I was right'.
And, Paul, I also mean this in the spirit of constructive criticism, but it seems to me it is perhaps hard to describe oneself as a faceless man', having in the past described oneself as a media tart. These things would seem to me to be mutually inconsistent, and can I say to you I think possibly a little earlier in your life you would have needed to have chosen the path of a faceless man. Given you didn't, I think it's probably too late to try and be one now given your face is so well known.
But, Paul, I do mean this in the spirit of constructive criticism, because I'm sure in the future we will see further great works from your pen, and most of the room is living in fear of it.
But, Paul, of course, is a great contemporary leader of this union with its 125 years of proud Labor history, and I want to reflect on some of that proud Labor history and then talk to you about what it means for our future as a nation and for the future of our Labor Government.
I want to set the scene by drawing your attention to words written a long time ago talking about the things of this union's history, and the words are as follows:
The meeting place is at Barcaldine at the end of the camp. Against a tree flying the flag of Freedom under the Southern Cross. The flag is a bit ragged, and no wonder, for it is never taken down. The reading room or recreation hall is a good specimen of bush-building, fitted with seats and tables of rough packing-cases, where the men read and play cards, chess, or draughts. Their lending-library was roughly built at first with bits of old bag and tattered canvas, but a new tent has taken its place. Some 600 books of all sorts are collected here and issued on loan under the authority of the librarian, Old Jim', who may always be found close at hand, unless drawn hence by home affairs', or marching off with his wooden gun for a little drill.
What those words from your union's history should tell us is that it is rooted in this great union and in the Labor movement; to believe in the politics of opportunity; to believe in the politics of social mobility; to believe in the distribution of the benefits of hard work; to believe in what teamwork can bring.
And I know that it is fashionable in the modern age - we see it in newspapers commentary all the time, and sometimes we perhaps indulge this commentary ourselves - but it's fashionable in the modern age to reflect on the labour movement as if it is no longer a movement with a future. It's sometimes fashionable in the modern age to reflect on the Labor Party, and some are driven to conclude that the Labor Party no longer understands its purpose. And sometimes people reflect on Labor Governments in the modern age and wonder how they join with the historic ideals of the labour movement.
I think in all of these reflections we are showing an uncertainty and a timidity that is not justified, and we should not forgive. We should not succumb to this timidity and uncertainty.
I believe the labour movement knows where it is going, and it's got a bold course for the future. I believe that whilst I won't be here and neither will Bill Ludwig, that this union will celebrate another hundred years in the future, and another hundred years beyond that, that it will continue to build a future the way it built over 125 years in the past.
I do not believe we should be uncertain about the future of the labour movement. The labour movement has a strong future as a part of this country; as part of shaping the destinies of working Australians; as part of shaping our prosperous modern economy. That's true today and it will be true for many, many years to come.
And I do not believe that the Labor Party has ever forgotten its purpose. I am crystal clear as Labor Party leader what the purpose of our political party is. The purpose of our political party is to ensure that every Australian, no matter the circumstances of their birth, enjoys opportunity. A fair nation does not unfairly deny a child access to opportunity. This is what we have fought for over all of these long years - opportunity and social mobility - because the trade union movement has been built by working people who have done some amazing and courageous things, fuelled by the ambition and belief that their sons and daughters would live a better life than they have: a more materially prosperous life; a life of greater opportunity.
That's why the manual worker dreams of his son getting an apprenticeship. That's why the tradesperson dreams of his daughter going to university.
Working people believe in opportunity. They want to leave a country for the next generation that is better than the country they inherited from the generation before.
We are fuelled and driven by the politics of opportunity. This is the great Labor purpose, and that great Labor purpose is best fulfilled when we work together as a team. And put simply, that's what unionism is: the simple recognition that by being members of a team together we are strengthened beyond our individual efforts; that every great team is more than the sum of its parts; that therefore a union is actually more than the sum of the individuals within it, because there's a special power that comes when working people combine and pursue goals together.
The purpose of unionism, that sense of teamwork, that mission of coming together to achieve great goals, is part of our Labor history, it's part of our Labor future, it's part of our purpose, it is what defines us as a Labor Party.
So, clearly understanding as Labor leader the historic mission of Labor, the politics of opportunity, the politics of working together, the understanding of the great combinations of working people and what they can achieve, my vision for this Labor Government, despite the circumstances of a minority Parliament, is a very clear one.
We will work together as a political party, with the labour movement, with the broader community, to bring change to our nation, to further opportunity - opportunity for every child, opportunity for every person, driving towards a nation where we can truly say demography is not destiny, and you cannot predict a child's life path by knowing which postcode their parents reside in.
That through this Labor Government we will harness the benefits of economic prosperity, make sure that those benefits persist into the future, that we are a prosperous nation with those benefits to share.
That the purpose of this political party in government is to ensure that as we share those benefits we share them in the form of social services that working people rely on, including health, which is why the struggle for health reform has been so important to me in the days that have just gone by.
And it is not in this political party's DNA, it is not in the DNA of the labour movement, to be afraid of the future. This Labor Party, this labour movement, has been created by people who were prepared to face up to the challenges of the future, and they haven't always been easy.
When this union was formed the challenges of fighting two world wars were still to come. When this union was formed the challenge of the Great Depression was still to come. When this union was formed what we needed to do to modernise our economy and make our nation competitive in a ruthless and cut-throat world was still to come, and people from the Labor Party and labour movement looked inside themselves and found the courage to face those challenges.
We are called on today to face some of the difficult challenges so we can shape our future. They're different challenges than the past; the challenge of climate change and pricing carbon; the challenge of making sure our technology, like the National Broadband Network, keeps this nation in front rather than falling behind, but they are challenges that we are up to and challenges that we will meet working together.
So, friends, if I can leave you with one message tonight, one message in this great gathering of working people from the Australian Worker's Union, a union with so much history combined with so much Labor Party history; if there's one message I want to leave you with it's this:
We will be as bold in our future as we have been in our past.
We will serve the cause of brining opportunity to every Australian.
We will pursue that historic mission of fairness that has created the Labor Party and had it endure all of these years, and we will do it together as we always have, understanding that working together as a team we're unbeatable.
Thank you very much. 



Kia ora tatou katoa
I have come here today to pay tribute to the friendship between our two nations and to offer a very special tribute to the people of New Zealand for your overwhelming support during Australia's summer of hardship.
I'd like to make particular mention of the members of the New Zealand Civil Defence team, who join us here today, and say a very personal thank you for your efforts.
You brought mateship.
You brought comfort.
And your work won't be forgotten.
We, too, will not forget the 29 men who never came home from the Pike River mine.
They live on in our hearts and our memories.
And at a time of hardship and grief, Australia will always be there to help.
Always.
Friends,
This is my first visit to New Zealand as Australian Prime Minister.
I know you've had some tough times lately.
Not only with the tragedy at Greymouth.
But the Canterbury earthquake.
And the after-effects of the global economic downturn.
But I want to say unambiguously that New Zealand is a success story.
And each of you should be very, very proud to be part of that story.
New Zealand has built a modern, competitive economy linked to Asia and open to the world.
An economy with a global reputation in clean energy.
Tourism.
Fine food and wine.
Film and creative industries.
Financial services.
You brought the world to your door with the Lord of the Rings trilogy, and told the story of a vibrant, clean and green New Zealand, a story that many understood for the first time through the wonders of these films.
Friends,
Our countries have so much shared history that there is a sense of the familiar when an Australian steps onto New Zealand soil.
Of course there is the Anzac story, that will never diminish in its power to move and humble us.
Or the incredible story of Australia and New Zealand competing at the 1908 and 1912 Olympics as a unified team.
And there are our shared economic achievements, with the most significant peace-time event in our relationship being the signing of the Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement.
CER very appropriately came into effect on New Year's Day in 1983.
Appropriate because it was a new beginning.
With CER, both our countries began to unroll the protectionist postwar settlement that had kept us so safe for so long.
But the protectionist embrace was a delusion.
The delusion that any small economy can shelter itself from the forces and benefits of change.
We can't.
And we shouldn't.
In a dynamic world, we compete and we fight and we succeed.
There is no other way.
That is why CER is so important.
It is a living agreement'  -  an agreement we continue to enhance and expand.
Australia and New Zealand's successful economic integration has become a model for other countries.
The cross-pollination between our two nations constantly refreshes the ideas, innovation and expertise in our business sectors.
Our closer ties have given us, among other things, a free market in exports and opened up our service markets.
The Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Arrangements  have freed up the movement of goods and professionals.
And both our governments are committed to the Single Economic Market agenda which reduces the regulatory barriers for industry.
The progress of a single economic agenda will forge even greater business cooperation and investment across the Tasman. a perfect example of how we will keep breathing life' into this agreement.
We're also doing what we can to make travel from Australia to New Zealand more like travel among the Australian states: largely borderless.
That's important because at any one time, over half a million Kiwis are living in Australia.
And each year, around one million Australians visit New Zealand.
We need to make their journeys as seamless as possible.
Friends,
CER is a success story in anyone's language.
It has been the springboard for the 8 per cent growth oftwo-way goods trade between Australia and New Zealand since 1983.
Trans-Tasman trade is worth around A$21billion orNZ$27 billion a year.
More Australian businesses export to New Zealand than to any other country.
And New Zealand's top export market is Australia.
This week we'll add another dimension, with the introduction of the CER Investment Protocol which I will sign with Prime Minister Key tomorrow.
This Protocol will further free up investment in each other's economies...
Australia is increasing from $231 million to just over $1 billion the threshold under which the New Zealand investment will not, in nearly all circumstances, require screening.
This puts New Zealand on par with the United States in enjoying the most liberalised access possible to the Australian investment market.
And New Zealand is making a similarly significant change to its threshold  -  from NZ$100 million to nearly NZ$500 million.
I'm also delighted to working with Prime Minister Key, and our eight other partners to bring an expanded Trans Pacific Partnership into being.
Building a free trade zone that includes the United States, Chile, Malaysia and Singapore will be major development.
One of the biggest steps since CER itself.
Prime Minister Key and I will work to make the expanded Partnership a reality by the time of APEC this year.
CER only tells a fraction of the story about the economic relationship between our two countries.
The success of our business partnership is built on cooperation, interdependence, a healthy competitiveness and a deep and abiding mutual respect and trust.
A trust that has been earned over 200 years.
Today, our bilateral agenda remains squarely focused on taking advantage of the fact that we are natural markets and partners for each other.
These reforms stand us in good stead to take advantage of opportunities in the changing global environment.
But complacency is not an option as we face new challenges in a changing global economic environment. 
The global economic recovery remains fragile, with highly uneven growth across different regions and a number of significant vulnerabilities.
Much of the world's activity has been generated by a strong recovery in emerging market economies where capacity is relatively tight.
There are continuing concerns over high levels of public debt in many advanced economies, particularly in Europe.
Inflation is accelerating in emerging market economies, driven partly by rising food and other commodity prices.
And rapid capital flows into emerging markets could be destabilising.
International cooperation is needed to respond effectively to these global challenges, many of which are being addressed through the G20 where Australia is playing a key role.
This work complements efforts underway in other forums including the WTO, the East Asia Summit and APEC, in which Australia and New Zealand are both strong advocates for reform.
New Zealand entered a recession before the GFC and while still facing many challenges, I note that your economy has started to turn the corner. 
It is crucial that both our economies maintain ambitious post-GFC reform agendas to keep productivity and competitiveness high.
When you get economic reform right, you fuel the drivers of sustainable long term economic growth.
Friends,
Australia emerged from the GFC with lower debt, stronger growth and lower deficits than the major developed economies.
Australian banks are among the world's strongest, with the big four AA-rated, the highest ranking available.
We are also uniquely positioned to benefit from one clear consequence of the global recession; the rebalancing of growth towards the Asian region.
Major Asian economies value us because we are strongly competitive in a number of key commodities, we offer security of supply and our public finances are rock solid.
This is confirmed by our excellent sovereign credit ratings
Our extremely low levels of net public debt.
And our mature financial services sector, which boasts assets of almost $4.5 trillion under management.
To put it simply:
-      Conditions for business and investment in Australia are very strong.
Last year the World Bank ranked Australia as one of the most business-friendly economies in the world.
Like the New Zealand Government, my Government is committed to returning our Budget to surplus as a matter of priority.
We are committed to sound fiscal rules that will see this happen by 2012-13  -  a commitment on which I will not waiver.
Of course this summer's unprecedented floods and devastating category 5 cyclone have given rise to obvious economic consequences.
The Reserve Bank of Australia estimates that these events will subtract around half a percentage point from GDP in 2010-11.
Of course the rebuild effort will add to GDP again in time.
In parallel, there will be strong growth in mining investment and high commodity prices.
Indeed there are currently $380 billion worth of mining projects underway or in the pipeline.
We welcome that and we celebrate it.
It is an historic opportunity.
At the same time, we know there must be opportunity beyond the boom, and that means ongoing reform and discipline to position us for the future.
A future based on a high-skill, high-tech, clean energy economy based on skills and innovation.
To take us there, my Government has committed to a broad ranging agenda to boost the productive capacity of the economy.
We are investing in the traditional critical infrastructure of rail, roads and ports and I know a number of Kiwi companies are benefitting from this work including Fulton Hogan and Beca.
We are building the transformative infrastructure of the 21st Century, the National Broadband Network which includes the structural separation of Telstra, itself an outstanding instance of micro-economic reform.
We are delivering a seamless national economy to reduce red tape caused by inter-state barriers.
An ambitious new agenda of training and workforce participation.
Market-driven reforms to bring greater transparency and contestability in health, education and water.
And  -  most significantly of all  -  we seek to follow New Zealand in putting a price on carbon an outcome that will not only allow us to meet our environmental obligations but also drive decades of innovation and investment that will fundamentally redraw the shape of the Australian economy.
To conclude Friends,
In all of these decisions, Australia and New Zealand walk the reform road together.
We have done so for nearly three decades.
And we must continue to do so.
We need to encourage each other in the task of reform because that task is never easy and there are always temptations to pause and turn away.
I have felt those pressures myself, but I have and intend to stand firm against them because any short-term benefit gained by giving way is outweighed by the long-term losses we suffer.
Closer Economic Relations and the reform mentality that made it possible have served us well.
We are island nations to whom nobody owes a living.
If we gain any advantage in the world, it is because we fight for it and we earn it.
There is no other way, except to say this:
We can achieve more together than we can alone.
 A strong New Zealand is good for Australia.
A strong Australia is good for New Zealand.
Let's build a new generation of closer economic relations and face the Asia Pacific Century together. 



Mr Speaker
Prime Minister and members of the Cabinet
Leader of the Opposition and party leaders
Honourable Members
It is truly a privilege to be the first Australian Prime Minister, indeed the first foreign head of government,to address members of the Parliament of New Zealand. 
I accept your welcome to this historic chamber as a profound tribute to the friendship between our nations and our people.
I also acknowledge it has been some time since a full bilateral visit by an Australian Prime Minister and I'm glad to be able to put that to right.
But more than that, I don't want familiarity to slide into forgetfulness.
I therefore announce that Mr Key and I have agreed to restore the pattern of regular Prime Ministerial exchanges that we have had in the past. 
I look forward to hosting Prime Ministerial talks in Australia next year.
And I look forward to coming back to New Zealand in 2013.
Mr Speaker,
It is a great honour to address members of this parliament and through it, the people you represent.
Yours is one of the oldest continuous democratic legislatures in the world.
The first to recognise the right of women to vote.
A leader in reconciliation with its First Peoples.
Among the first parliaments to respond to the challenge of climate change by putting a price on carbon.
New Zealand may be a small nation.
But one with a bold vision of its place in the world.
For Australia, New Zealand is the natural partner in all that we believe and all that we hope for.
As I look around this historic House, the plaques and wreaths commemorating battles from the Boer War to Vietnam are snapshots of the shared and lasting bonds between our two nations.
Our ties were indelibly forged in hardship and mateship, from Gallipoli and the Somme to Tobruk, Korea and beyond.
Our soldiers, as has been said, came from the uttermost ends of the earth.
And wherever Australian and New Zealand blood has been shed, it remains sacred ground.
Sacred because when our young men were sent to far shores, they went not for wealth or gain.
But to defend common values and a treasured way of life.
The freedom to speak and pray and write.
The freedom to elect leaders and stand safe under the rule of law.
The freedom to succeed that drew men like Peter Fraser and Keith Holyoake from the most modest background to the highest office.
These are what ANZAC means.
A story of courage and conviction told and retold in homes and schools, in the pubs and clubs, throughout the length and breadth of both lands.
A story also infused by the freedom from deference and formality that makes Australians and New Zealanders so different from anyone else and yet so very like each other.
But ANZAC is not a legend confined to records or books.
It is a living story.
A story that lives in the courage of Willie Apiata, Mark Donaldson and Ben Roberts-Smith.
The ANZAC spirit will receive a practical expression from next month when our personnel join together in the new Ready Response Force headquarters to be based in Brisbane.
This Force will provide a robust capability to meet contingencies, including humanitarian assistance and disaster relief across the region we love so much.
And, of course, the ANZAC spirit lives on in the most strategically challenging theatre of our times, Afghanistan.
Again, a conflict against those  -  terrorists  -  who threaten our cherished way of life and against whom we must prevail.
Today I stand before this Parliament and pay tribute to the men and women of our armed forces.
The road is hard and the price can be very high.
Just two days ago, I attended the funeral of Corporal Richard Atkinson, the 22nd Australian to be killed in Afghanistan.
I embraced his family and felt, deeply, their immeasurable grief.
New Zealand has not been spared this anguish. 
Not in the past, with the death of Lieutenant Tim O'Donnell, the first member of the New Zealand Defence Force to fall in Afghanistan.
And not today, with the terrible news of another sad loss for New Zealand, the death of Private Mila. 
We grieve for these men and their families as we grieve for our own.
Because the ANZAC story speaks for both our nations.
An imperishable Trans-Tasman bond.
They can never be replaced, our fallen.  But they shall never be forgotten.
Mr Speaker,
In the 1890s, there was a possibility that New Zealand and Australia might formally have joined their destinies to each other.
A relic of that aspiration even remains in our Constitution to this day.
But it was never necessary.
Our founders could not have imagined the extraordinary events that would bring our nations far closer than any words or any laws.
Not forged in meeting rooms by old men wearing suits.
But by young men in trenches wearing slouch hats and lemon squeezers.
That is why I say Australia has many alliances and friendships around the world.
Economic and defence partnerships of every kind.
But New Zealand alone is family. 
When those 29 men never came home from the Pike River mine, we didn't just mourn for the two Australians.
We mourned for them all.
Family.
When Pike River exploded, New Zealand didn't have to ask Australia to send help.
We just did.
And when natural disasters hit Australia this summer, New Zealand didn't need to be asked to lend a hand.
You just did.
And our gratitude is boundless.
Prime Minister,
Your predecessor, Sir John Hall said there were 1200 reasons that separated Australia and New Zealand 
-      the 1200 miles of the Tasman Sea.
The Australia-New Zealand memorial in Canberra tells a very different story.
It is a sculpture unlike any of the other memorials that enshrine my nation's capital.
It is a simple, graceful curve of bronze, representing the handle of a basket used traditionally to collect flax seed.
It embodies the Maori saying that we each hold one handle of the basket.
Shared effort. 
Shared memory.
Shared sacrifice.
Underneath that memorial is etched a poem by the New Zealand poet Jenny Bornholdt.
In it she describes the Tasman not as a barrier, but a bridge:  a bridge of faith.
A faith anchored and bonded in the past.
But also a faith directed resolutely towards the future.
Mr Speaker,
It is true we have done great things in the past.
Remarkable things.
Not just in war but in peace as well.
We took sheltered, insular economies and opened themto the world through the remarkable reforms of the 1980s and 90s.
At the same time we opened our economies to each other creating a degree of integration that is unparalleled throughout the world.
It was the first bilateral trade agreement of its kind in the world.
It remains the gold standard in trade liberalisation.
It was not an easy decision as Robert Muldoon and Malcolm Fraser grappled with the realities of a fast-changing world.
But the Agreement was achieved, and it has served us well.
There was another author of CER who deserves our acknowledgement, a great New Zealand diplomat and politician, Hugh Templeton.
It will be my very special honour this afternoon to investMr Templeton with an Honorary Order of Australia for his pivotal role in establishing the CER
Hugh Templeton's career is the story of the modern New Zealand.
He went to London as a junior diplomat in 1954, representing a nation that, like Australia, relied on primary production, sheltered behind tariff walls and called Great Britain home.
But as the 70s and 80s unfolded, Hugh and his fellow leaders on both sides of the Tasman and both sides of politics knew it was time to change.
Britain had joined with Europe.
Asia's economic miracle was unfolding.
We could not afford to be left behind.
And we were not.
Our leaders found the courage to change, and those changes were hard.
Perhaps even harder on New Zealand than Australia.
But those decisions were right then, and they remain right now.
CER has been an enduring foundation for new ventures such as the Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Arrangement and the Single Economic Market initiative.
Thanks to these agreements, our nations are closer than ever before.
Goods and services flow freely.
Our insolvency and copyright laws have been harmonised, along with competition and financial services policy.
Our citizens can work in their chosen profession in each country thanks to mutual recognition.
Students in each country pay only domestic fees for their education.
Reforms unprecedented in their scope and ambition.
Reforms that are hard.
But reforms that have worked.
Two-way goods trade between our two countries has grown at 8 per cent a year since CER.
Trans-Tasman trade is worth around A$21billion orNZ$27 billion a year.
More Australian businesses export to New Zealand than to any other country.
And New Zealand's top export market is Australia.
Now it's time to write the next chapter as we journey towards a Single Economic Market.
During my visit, I've been pleased to discuss with Prime Minister Key the excellent progress being achieved on the SmartGate project to create borderless travel between our two countries.
A joint study will commence this month to examine how we create a truly domestic-like aviation experience.
In addition, Mr Speaker,
Prime Minister Key and I will today sign the Investment Protocol to CER, a significant milestone for our two countries.
The Protocol will make investment simpler and cheaper, creating employment and opportunity on both sides of the Tasman.
For New Zealand, this agreement provides the most liberalised access to the Australian investment market.
For Australia, it makes CER our most liberal and comprehensive trade agreement.
And as family, that is how it should be.
But friends,
The bridge of faith extends not just to the past, not just to today.
But to the future.
Today, the world changes more in a decade than it used to change in a century.
And we must deepen our resolve to reform and adapt.
We need to embrace the transformative possibilities that will create the high-skill, high-tech economies of the future.
The possibilities opened up by high speed broadband.
Clean energy.
Smart manufacturing.
Creative industries.
World class skills and training.
All underpinned by rigorous fiscal discipline, constant structural reform and an unswerving commitment tofree trade.
In that context, let me be clear that Australia accepts the verdict of the global umpire and will implement the WTO rulings on the importation of New Zealand apples into Australia.
We accept the obligations of free trade, just as we embrace the possibilities of free trade.
Mr Speaker,
For Australia, these possibilities are keenly sharpened in the context of the unprecedented change unfolding in the Asia-Pacific.
China's rise, India's growth and the emergence of Indonesia, are changing the strategic contours of the region.
As the global balance of power shifts to the Asia-Pacific, it will throw up real challenges that will need to be collectively managed.
Challenges associated with the inevitable strategic flux brought by the changes unfolding in the Asia-Pacific. 
And broader challenges brought by globalisation, such as climate change, food security, natural disasters, people smuggling and pandemics. 
But it will also create tremendous opportunities for those brave enough to seize them.
We should not fear this future but embrace it.
Together, we have enduring sources of strength.
The strength we find in each other.
And the strength we find in our people and our history and our values.
If we don't shape the future we want, we may well face a future not of our choosing
And Australia and New Zealand have never been ones to sit on the sidelines of history.
We are both stable, progressive, well-governed countries, respected for our pragmatism and our ideas. 
We have highly mobile and educated populations.
We have competitive and resilient economies. 
And we have highly capable and effective armed forces.
Harnessed in partnership, these will allow us to confront difficulties and grasp opportunities.
This is why our two nations must remain active and engaged:
Reforming our own economies.
Uniting ourselves across the Tasman.
And reaching out together to the world beyond.
Before us we have the prospect of a Trans Pacific Partnership.
Perhaps the greatest economic opportunity for our two nations since CER.
I'm proud to say that New Zealand has led the wayas one of the Trans Pacific Partnership founding partners since 2005.
I was proud to stand with Prime Minister Key, President Obama and our seven other partners in November last year pledging to the make the expanded Partnership a reality by the time of APEC this year.
The Partnership could be a stepping stone to an Asia Pacific Free Trade Area
If we achieve that, we will create a free trade community as significant as the EU or NAFTA.
A zone of trade, investment, jobs as big as the Pacific itself.
To do this, we will need not just our own efforts.
But the commitment and energy of many others, foremost our great friend and ally the United States.
An active, engaged America is a fundamental feature of the international system that underpins our stability, security and prosperity.
Australia, like New Zealand, remains deeply committed to this international system and we will work with key emerging players  -  not least China and India  -  to ensure that it continues to deliver the benefits both our peoples have enjoyed for so long.
Mr Speaker,
We know we can meet the challenges of tomorrow because we've done great things before.
But in the last century, the conflicts and the issues that defined the world were fought out in another hemisphere.
Today they are decided here.
This is the Asia Pacific century, and we are at its heart.
Here under the southern cross, emblazoned on both our flags, we have created two of the most successful societies in the contemporary world.
Two advanced, multicultural democracies, tied by tradition and affection to the old world, but anchored firmly in the new.
This is our time.
A time for optimism.
Because our best days lie ahead.
That is why I come here on this journey of hope.
To celebrate all that is best in us.
And bring closer the future that awaits our grasp.
Drawing together.
Reforming.
Reaching out to the world
And achieving more together than we ever could alone.
Thank you for the privilege of addressing you today.
You honour me.
And you honour my country.
Kia Ora. 



It's a great honour to be here today.
And I warmly acknowledge the Governor-General because it was her predecessor Lord Gowrie who opened this building 70 years ago and she very appropriately stands in his footsteps today.
Lord Gowrie, our longest serving Governor-General, was himself a holder of the Victoria Cross and a soldier of exceptional gallantry.
He opened this building to commemorate one terrible war in the darkest days of another.
In 1964, it was another Governor-General and VC holder, Lord D'Lisle, who opened the original version of this hall, known as VC Corner.
Again, Australia was at war.
A war that Keith Payne and his mates remember all too well.
And, of course, Her Excellency has been the first Governor-General in 40 years to confer the Victoria Cross as yet again, our nation finds itself at arms in the cause of security and freedom.
There could be no-one more appropriate to open this display and I thank Ms Bryce for her words and her presence here today.
She has done this occasion great honour.
Friends,
The vice-regal connection is a sign of continuity and abiding purpose unchanged since the day Lord Gowrie opened this building 70 years ago.
In his opening remarks, Gowrie posed this most enduring of questions: 
When we read the names inscribed on the walls of this memorial ... let us ask ourselves:
what can we do for those who did so much
what can we give to those who gave us all?
His answer  -  the only possible answer  -  was to ensure their sacrifices were not in vain.
We do that by remembering.
The simple gift that every Australian can offer, no matter what their means, no matter what their background.
It is a sobering fact that 95 of the 98 VC winners are no longer with us.
Their deeds are immortal.
But they are not.
Age wearies.
The years take their toll.
And so we must remember.
We remember, foremost, in the shrine of our hearts.
We remember each time we pass a memorial in streets of our suburb and towns.
In the Anzac Day ceremonies held in even the smallest one-teacher school.
When the Last Post echoes and chills our spines.
And  -  above all  -  we remember here at the nation's pre-eminent temple of honour the Australian War Memorial.
John Curtin called this place the sanctuary of Australia's traditions and I am personally committed to ensuring it remains so.
It is here that we come to contemplate the high price of war.
It is here we come also to honour the valour that comes with conflict because it is a remarkable and consistent fact that great battles elicit great courage; when ordinary men find it in themselves to do extraordinary things.
There are no words or symbols that can really honour their courage, but as humans we grasp for tokens that somehow express what we feel.
In a proud tradition, drawn from our British heritage, we in this Commonwealth have used the Victoria Cross and its sister award, the George Cross to express the nation's debt.
They are simple tokens of metal and cloth that express a profound inward reality.
And they deserve the veneration of our people.
From a modest space not much bigger than a broom closet opened by Lord D'Lisle in 1964 the Memorial and its architect have created a worthy home; wrought in lasting materials of stone and bronze that convey dignity and a modest grace.
The location is also eloquent:
Above us stands the Hall of Memory, embodying the unbroken link between courage and sacrifice.
There is another axis too, and that is the axis connecting this memorial to Parliament across the lake.
That too is no accident... because in a democracy, military service is an expression of citizenship.
Of free men and women who love their country and are willing to pay any price to serve it.
The 102,000 who made the supreme sacrifice  -  including Sapper Jamie Larcombe just two days ago.
A mother's son resting above us whose name we will never know.
And the 107 names inscribed in this Hall of Valour, which we dedicate to the nation today.
With gratitude.
With honour.
With everlasting remembrance. 


Great Hall, Parliament House, Canberra
His Excellency, Prime Minister Najib Razak and Madame Rosmah Honourable Ministers,
Honorable Members of Parliament from Malaysia and Australia Senior officials, diplomats and friends, Prime Minister,
Welcome to Australia and welcome to our Parliament.
Your visit to Australia is a milestone in the long friendship between Australia and Malaysia.
It is a visit full of significance for us.
Yours is the third visit by a Malaysian Prime Minister in 30 years.
And it follows in the steps of one Malaysia's greatest son,s the man who more than any other set your nation on the path of modernisation, your late father, who through great suffering, served the Malaysian people until his final days and whose role and legacy you inherit.
Prime Minister Gough Whitlam was proud to welcome Tun Abdul Razak to Canberra in 1975.
As Gough's friend and successor, I very proudly welcome you and I thank you for making this journey: This journey of understanding, dialogue and cooperation.
Your Excellency's visit comes soon after my own visit to Malaysia last year.
I want to thank you for your concern that you were not able meet me at that time, and for taking the time to telephone.
In choosing Malaysia as the first regional country to make a bi-lateral visit as Prime Minister, I wanted to signal just how much we value the relationship with Malaysia.
I wanted to reaffirm also Australia's deep and principled commitment to regional engagement and to all we can achieve together as partners and friends.
Our ties are longstanding and they are strong.
We value our defence history as we stood together against the successive evils of fascism and communism.
We value our education links, going back to the Colombo Plan  -  that have seen 300,000 Malaysian alumni from Australian universities make an important contribution to your nation's development.
We are working together in new and important areas such as public sector reform, superannuation and regulatory reform and we would be very pleased to deepen this partnership.
And, of course, we share a deepening economic relationship, with two-way trade valued at A$14 billion and considerable scope to grow further.
But most importantly, your visit is about the future because the region we share is where the destiny of the 21st century is being written.
Prime Minister,
You are a leader in our region, and a friend.
You are an exemplar in the fight against extremism and upholding the true values of Islam, and I salute your leadership of the Global Movement of the Moderates.
And like us, you share an abiding commitment to the benefits of free trade, which is why our work together on the Trans Pacific Partnership and a prospective Malaysia-Australia Free Trade Agreement is so vitally important.
Prime Minister,
Your visit strengthens further an already strong education relationship.
Both of us have served as reformist Education Ministers for our nations sharing a passionate commitment to the role a great education can play in opening up opportunity for every child and in forming human capital that will be the source of our future growth and wealth.
Given our shared commitment, I know you join me in taking great pride in the fact that 23,000 Malaysians are currently enrolled in Australian education institutions young men and women who will play such an important role in realising your dream of creating a knowledge economy for Malaysia's future.
We are proud to be an international education destination of choice for your nation.
And today's Memorandum of Understanding on Education Cooperation, which we witnessed earlier will extend our sharing of expertise in the development of vocational education and build on the work that you undertook as Education Minister.
How appropriate, then, that Australia's largest university is tomorrow awarding you an Honorary Doctorate.
Monash University was named  after John Monash,was Australia's finest military leader but also a man who valued education very, very deeply.
He had three university degrees, including a law degree from the same faculty I was privileged to graduate from many years later.
And he saw education as the key to a nation's future and the quality of its leadership.
The Australian community finds abiding inspiration in the life and example of John Monash. I'm sure you will too.
Of course, Prime Minister,
The benefits of education extend far beyond our own shores.
Our education cooperation is also benefiting third countries, like Afghanistan where the Malaysia Australia Education Project is skilling  Afghan master teacher trainers.
We think of the children who will benefit.
In some cases, their families have not known peace since these children's grandparents were themselves children.
And now, after decades of conflict and poverty, these children will have the chance of a new life.
Mr Prime Minister,
Our nations have longstanding defence ties, which stretch back to before Malaysia's independence in 1957.
Our personnel have experienced the hardships of Somalia, East Timor, Afghanistan.
And we have done so, not for any material gain, but to assist the cause of security and freedom.
This year we celebrate the 40th year of the Five Power Defence Arrangements, a set of agreements that underline our shared strategic interests and affirm our commitment that Asia will never, we hope, know war again.
The Australian Defence Force continues to utilise and has personnel based at the Royal Malaysian Air Force Base at Butterworth.
The Malaysia Australia Joint Peacekeeping Initiative is building regional peacekeeping capacity in support of mutual regional security objectives.
And we have jointly trained PNG and East Timor forces, with a third workshop being considered this year.
Likewise, in law enforcement, I acknowledge your leadership in combating transnational crime including people smuggling and human trafficking in the region.
I warmly welcome Malaysia's action to criminalise people smuggling, and recognise your strong leadership in disrupting criminal syndicates in the region including the outstanding contribution of Malaysia's law enforcement community.
Of course, we know much more needs to be done to address the issue of irregular people movements that can so often lead to tragic consequences in our region.
Your Excellency,
These developments all lead back to the same point: that our region can best succeed through dialogue and cooperation.
Malaysia has always been at the forefront of dialogue: As a founding member of ASEAN and APEC, a founding member also of the WTO, as a member of the Cairns Group, as the host for the inaugural East Asia Summit in 2005, Malaysia has a proud record of regional leadership.
And I thus look forward to working closely with you to ensure the successful future of the East Asia Summit with the US and Russia set to join shortly.
It is Australia's priority to work with you on developing a substantial political and security agenda for the EAS, in order to strengthen its future role in the region.
We also seek, in partnership, to set a new ambitious agenda for APEC at this year's Summit.
These are only some of the things we plan to do in the future.
 Prime Minister,
Your visit marks a new chapter of a comprehensive partnership. A partnership based on warm and cordial relations between ourselves, between our Ministers, between our civil service, law enforcement and military authorities.
And it is not just the Governments that are making a significant contribution to the relationship.
It is our people ... our greatest strength.
Through the Australia-Malaysia Institute, AsiaLink, Malaysia's Institute of Strategic and International Studies and other institutions our scholars and diplomats, our artists and writers, and our civil society organisations engage in open and thoughtful dialogue.
Our schools are twinning together.
Our young people can now travel and explore each other's cultures on working holiday visas.
And direct Malaysia Airlines flights between Kota Kinabalu and Perth have now made people-to-people links even easier.
Prime Minister,
Just 10 days ago, a courageous and brilliant athlete mastered a very serious injury to win bronze at the World Cycling Championships in Manchester.
His name, of course, is Azizulhasni  Awang.
This young man carried your nation's flag in Beijing and yet he trains with an Australian coach in my home city of Melbourne.
It is a metaphor for everything we seek and everything we hope.
It characterises the relationship our predecessors have built. The relationship we will build even further.  Because, having come so far and achieved so much, there is no limit to what we can do in the future.
A future we will share and shape together.
A future that has come closer because of your visit to our shores this week.
Terima kasih.  Thank you. 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
In particular, thank you to Secretary Clinton, whose career as a woman in public life has been such an emblem of inspiration and courage. 
Hillary, you've been an example to women all over the world.  I want to echo your own words in 2008.
You applied them to others but I believe they apply to you.  Your bravest and most remarkable achievement is what you have made unremarkable ... female leadership.
You've made it unremarkable that women lead.
It is a great good fortune to be here today.
I say that because I do believe that women like Secretary Clinton and I are fortunate. 
While we have worked for the positions we hold, we owe the opportunity to so many women of courage who came before us.
From pioneer women in politics like Susan B Anthony in your country and Jessie Street in mine right down to today. 
And not only in the century since International Women's Day but throughout history. 
Every brave mother who ever raised a strong daughter helped us get here.
Those women worked for more than political rights and they worked for more than the opportunity for women to hold high office. 
Those women worked to improve all aspects of all women's lives.  And we believe today in the same things those women believed in always: in our rights.  Our equality.
Not just the right to vote, but the right to equal work and equal pay, the right to proper services, the right to physical safety.
Perhaps the right of greatest ultimate importance, the right to education. 
I am passionate about education.  I believe deeply in education's transformative power. 
Education is the key to all our opportunities.  It is the great tool for self improvement and social progress.
Whatever else women and girls may encounter in life, a sound foundation of excellent, rigorous education ought to be their entitlement. 
Education is the one thing no one can ever take away from us.
And education takes courage as well.
It always takes moral courage to learn to read. 
For any teacher, any child, it is an adventure.  And reading is an adventure that never ends. 
I saw that courage in the young women whose high school President Obama and I visited yesterday at Wakefield, Virginia... just as I saw that courage in the little girls whose primary school  I visited last week at home in Canberra.
But in too many parts of our world today, girls learning to read need real physical courage as well. 
This is the great symbol of global courage: women's fight for the right to read. 
And I want a world that is safe for the girl who reads.  A world where the girl who reads doesn't need physical courage and neither does her teacher. 
Wherever they are.
In an Indonesian school which provides a basic modern education in that most populous Islamic country where support from the Australian Government is so vital.
In a school in Uruzgan province in Afghanistan, with female literacy of less than one per cent but now with the freedom for girls to learn to read where Australia is providing $36 million over four years through Save the Children to improve education and health for women and children.
So today we remember the courage of women in the last hundred years who worked for all of us to have the rights we share.
We salute the courage of women here today who have worked so hard to make the most of the rights they have.
And we promise to be just as courageous in working for rights for all women and girls tomorrow, here and around the world. 



Mr Speaker.
Mr President Pro Tempore.
Distinguished Members of the Senate and the House.
Distinguished Guests.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
I am the fourth Australian Prime Minister to address you here assembled. 
Like them, I take your invitation as a great honour.  Like them, I accept it on behalf of Australia.
Since 1950, Australian Prime Ministers Robert Menzies, Bob Hawke and John Howard have come here. 
Speaking for all the Australian people through you to all the people of the United States they each came with a simple message.
A message which has been true in war and peace, in hardship and prosperity, in the Cold War and in the new world. 
A message I repeat today. 
Distinguished Members of the Senate and the House ...
You have a true friend down under.
For my parents' generation, the defining image of America was the landing at Normandy. 
Your boys of Point-du-Hoc risking everything to help free the world.
For my own generation, the defining image of America was the landing on the moon. 
My classmates and I were sent home from school to watch the great moment on television.
I'll always remember thinking that day: Americans can do anything.
Americans helped free the world of my parents' generation. 
Americans inspired the world of my own youth. 
I stand here and I see the same brave and free people today.  I believe you can do anything still.
There is a reason the world always looks to America.
Your great dream  -  life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness  -  inspires us all.
Those of you who have spent time with Australians know that we are not given to overstatement. 
By nature we are laconic speakers and by conviction we are realistic thinkers. 
In both our countries, real mates talk straight. 
We mean what we say.
You have an ally in Australia.
An ally for war and peace.
An ally for hardship and prosperity.
An ally for the sixty years past and Australia is an ally for all the years to come.
Geography and history alone could never explain the strength of the commitment between us. 
Rather, our values are shared and our people are friends. 
This is the heart of our alliance. 
This is why in our darkest days we have been glad to see each other's face and hear each other's voice.
Australia's darkest days in the last century followed the fall of Singapore in 1942. 
And you were with us. 
Under attack in the Pacific, we fought together.  Side by side, step by bloody step.
And while it was Australian soldiers at Milne Bay who gave the Allies our first victory on land in the Pacific War, it was American sailors at the Battle of the Coral Sea who destroyed the fear of an invasion of Australia.
Distinguished Members of the Senate and the House Australia does not forget.
The ultimate expression of our alliance, the ANZUS Treaty, was not signed until 1951. 
But it was anticipated a decade earlier. 
In the judgements  -  the clear, frank and accurate judgements  -  of an Australian Prime Minister. 
And in the resolve  -  the extraordinary, immovable resolve  -  of an American President.
In the decades since, we have stuck together.  In every major conflict.  From Korea and Vietnam to the conflicts in the Gulf.
Your darkest days since Pearl Harbour were ten years ago in Washington and New York. 
And we were with you. 
My predecessor John Howard was quite literally with you and he came to this Capitol when you met on September 12 to show you that Australians would be with you again. 
And after fifty years, under a new Prime Minister and a new President, the ANZUS Treaty was invoked. 
Within Australia's democracy, John Howard and I had our differences.  But he was and is an Australian patriot and an American friend, a man who was moved by what he saw here in that terrible September.
When John Howard addressed you in 2002 we were already with you in Afghanistan. 
And we are there with you today.
I want you to know what I have told Australia's Parliament in Canberra - what I told General Petraeus in Kabul - what I told President Obama in the Oval Office this week.
Australia will stand firm with our ally the United States.
Our friends understand this.
Our enemies understand this too.
We must be very realistic about Afghanistan's future. 
Australia firmly supports the international strategy led by President Obama and adopted at Lisbon last year.
Australia is doing our part  -  in Uruzgan province in particular and across the country as a whole.
The Government of Afghanistan must do its part too.  
We know transition will take some years yet. 
We must not transition out only to transition back in.
From my discussions with your country's leaders in Washington, my meetings with our generals in Afghanistan and my time with our troops, this is my conclusion:
I believe we have the right strategy in place, a resolute and courageous commander in General Petraeus, and the resources needed to deliver the strategy.
I am cautiously encouraged by what I have seen.
Corporal Ben Roberts-Smith is Australia's most recent Victoria Cross winner  -  our equivalent of your Medal of Honour. 
Ben is a veteran of five tours of Afghanistan and first went there in 2006.  
When we met recently, his words to me were compelling:
It is not the same country I first went to five years ago.  We are making a difference.
There are hard days ahead.
I flew to your country the day after attending the funeral of a young Australian who served in Afghanistan.  
Sapper Jamie Larcombe was from my home state of South Australia, from a small community with the most perfectly Australian name, Kangaroo Island.
Jamie's life's ambition was to serve his country. 
He was a long way from Kangaroo Island when he made the ultimate sacrifice. 
We will remember. 
I know very many young Americans have served their country and lost their lives in Afghanistan too. 
As a friend we share your grief.
As an ally we share your resolve.
Afghanistan must never again be a safe haven for terrorism.
Just as our security alliance is one for war and peace, our economic partnership is one for hardship and prosperity.
In hard days, we work together.
Our societies share a deep understanding of the human importance of work. 
We believe life is given direction and purpose by work. 
Without work there is corrosive aimlessness.  With the loss of work comes the loss of dignity. 
This is why, in each of our countries, the great goal of all we do in the economy is the same to ensure that everyone who can work does work.
In turn, this is why each of our countries took early and strong action in the face of the greatest threat to the world's economy since the Great Depression. 
And we did not just act locally or individually. 
We worked together when hardship came.
New global realities and the emerging economic weight of countries like China, India and Brazil meant the vital forum for the global response was the leaders of the G20 nations.
My predecessor Kevin Rudd worked hard to ensure this was so.
The world needed a global response to the economic crisis and global leadership was vital. 
Together, the G20 coordinated $5 trillion in fiscal stimulus for the global economy. 
While there has been very real pain, that global response averted true economic disaster.
Economic stimulus has been crucial  -  to limit the worst effects of the downturn.
Economic reform is crucial now  -  to deliver the best hopes for a strong recovery.
Like you, I am a leader in a democracy.
I know reform is never easy. 
But I know reform is right.
The global economic outlook remains fragile and uncertain. 
Global economic imbalances persist and we must address them or risk future instability. 
Your leadership in the G20 is still needed to ensure we make the reforms which will keep the global economy on the path to strong, sustained and balanced growth.
And that is the path to growth in America as well.
We worked hard with you during the global economic crisis to resist protectionist pressures.  This only built on our decades working together to promote free trade in the world.
I know many of you worked hard to achieve the Australia-US Free Trade agreement.
Thank you. 
Our FTA experience shows the benefits of free trade.
And we aim for even larger benefits from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is a great economic opportunity for our two countries and seven of our regional partners.
And we have other opportunities to promote trade and jobs together as well.
I am looking forward to your country hosting the APEC Leaders' meeting later this year.  We will work closely together there.
Australia is also working for an ambitious and balanced conclusion of the WTO Doha Round as soon as possible.
And we look forward to your Congress passing a 2012 Farm Bill that advances free trade rather than distorting it ... and that through free trade, creates jobs.
We know the equation is simple: trade equals jobs.
Our societies share a deep understanding of the human importance of work. 
And our societies share a deep commitment to the value of education.
We understand education's transformative power. 
We know education is the future for every child who learns.
We also know education is the future for our economies.
Our future growth relies on competitiveness and innovation, skills and productivity ... and these in turn rely on the education of our people.
Australia and America are partners in a globalised world, where open societies flourish and competitive economies thrive.
This is why I went to a school in Wakefield, Virginia with President Obama this week.
The President and I not only saw children learning.
We saw the future of your people and the future of your prosperity as well.
Australians are deeply grateful to your Greatest Generation for their mighty deeds.
This week I have seen a new generation of Americans .
I genuinely believe they can be greater still.
Achieving prosperity while sharing its benefits requires far-sighted educational reforms. 
In the same way, achieving growth while caring for our climate requires far-sighted economic reforms.
Breaking the link between economic growth and emissions growth is a difficult challenge for our economies and we can only achieve it by working together.
Our cooperation in key international forums and in research and development is making an important contribution.
We must work together to achieve an historic transition to high technology, high skill, clean energy economies.
Shared values are the basis of our security alliance and shared values are the basis of our economic partnership as well.
Through hard work and education, we can deliver a strong economy and opportunity for all.
Americans are great optimists and Australians will always have a go. 
So, conceived in the Pacific War and born in the Cold War, adapted to the space age and invoked in the face of terror, our indispensable alliance is a friendship for the future. 
It is this year's sixtieth anniversary of the signing of our Treaty that occasions your invitation to me today. 
For that I am grateful.  As I said to President Obama, it is an alliance sixty years young with so much future to share.
And this is a timely opportunity, not so much for reflection on our past, as for discussion of our future.
The bipolar world in which our Alliance was signed has long disappeared.
I am not sad about its passing. 
Hundreds of millions of people have a better life today, democracy and human dignity have spread wide in the world in the last twenty years. 
We have seen this from Eastern Europe to East Asia in recent years and we are seeing the hope of it in the Middle East now.
We understand that nothing is certain. 
There is still much for the people of the Middle East to do and the governments of the world will be called on to help them do it. 
Yet I believe what we are seeing is unchanging realities of human nature finding a new expression and in a new way.
For Australia's part, we will do what we can  -  and work with you  -  to support orderly transitions to democracy. 
To foster human rights and religious freedom within the countries of the Middle East. 
And to secure a lasting peace between them. 
A peace where no nation threatens another, which is why we join you in condemning Iran's nuclear program. 
A peace where Israel is secure, and where Palestinians have a state of their own, which is why we join you in calling on all parties to negotiate in good faith.
Our Alliance was signed sixty years ago in the Cold War and it lives in a new world today.
And momentous as the changes in the Middle East are, I believe it is in the Asia-Pacific where the global order is changing most. 
We admire India's example as a true democracy. 
We never forget Indonesia's transition to create the world's third largest democracy in the world's largest Islamic country. 
And we applaud China's lifting some 500 million people out of poverty. 
The centre of global strategic and economic weight is shifting to this region.
The rise of the Asia-Pacific will define our times. 
Like you, our relationship with China is important and complex.
We encourage China to engage as a good global citizen and we are clear-eyed about where differences do lie.
My guiding principle is that prosperity can be shared. 
We can create wealth together. 
The global economy is not a zero-sum game. 
There is no reason for Chinese prosperity to detract from prosperity in Australia, the
United States or anywhere in the world.
America has always understood this principle of the economy - that everyone can benefit when everyone competes.
And for sixty years your leadership in the Asia-Pacific has showed this.
Your commitment to free trade and investment fuelled the growth. 
Your presence and network of alliances ensured the stability. 
You were indispensable in the Cold War and you are indispensable in the new world too.
So your growing engagement with key countries in the region  -  like Japan, India, South Korea and Indonesia  -  is enormously welcome.
We will work closely with you to strengthen the fabric of these relationships and underpin regional stability.
Strengthening regional institutions so that the countries of the Asia-Pacific increasingly manage the frictions of a growing and changing Asia-Pacific.
This is why your nation's decision to join the East Asia Summit is such good news. 
The Summit brings the leaders of the region's major powers together and has a mandate to deal with the whole range of economic, political and security issues our countries face.
Our relationship is evolving to meet these new challenges: from defence and intelligence to diplomacy and trade.
Australia in the south, with South Korea and Japan to the north, form real Asia-Pacific partnerships with the United States. 
Anchors of regional stability.
An alliance which was strong in the Cold War ... an alliance which is strong in the new world.
In both our countries, true friends stick together. 
Our nations do this, and our people do this as well.
Nothing better tells this truth than the story of two fire fighters.
Many Australians and Americans worked together in the late 1990s to be ready to protect the 2000 Sydney Olympics from possible terrorist attack.
One group of Australians spent two months in New York training and working, including a long time with New York's Fire Department Rescue 1.
They worked hard together and became more than colleagues - they became mates.
So when it was time to go home the Australian commander gave Rescue 1's chief his Australian Army slouch hat .and the chief presented the Australians with a battle scarred fire helmet.
Dated December 1998 and signed by members of the Rescue 1 crew, including Kevin Dowdell
Three years later, Kevin Dowdell was one of the hundreds of New York firefighters killed when the towers came down. 
Kevin led his men in.  His remains were never found.
But that helmet was found ... in Australia.
And Aussie firefighter Rob Frey found Kevin's sons.
James Dowdell is one of New York's bravest, a firefighter like his father before him. 
Patrick Dowdell is wearing his country's uniform in Afghanistan.
Rob came to America to give James the helmet his father signed. 
A precious possession.  A last link to a father lost.
And I give you their story.  A precious possession too.
These two men are here today. Rob, James - good on you.
We are so proud of what you represent, your story says it all about the friendship between Australia and the United States.
Together in the hardest of times. Friends for the future.
When our alliance was signed sixty years ago, the challenges of the space age were still to come.
The challenges of terrorism were still to come.
For sixty years, leaders from Australia and the United States have looked inside themselves and found the courage to face those challenges.
And after sixty years, we do the same today.
To protect our peoples.
To share our prosperity.
To safeguard our future.
For ours is a friendship for the future. 
It has been from its founding and remains so today. 
You have a friend in Australia. 
And you have an ally.
And we know what that means.
In both our countries, true friends stick together ... in both our countries, real mates talk straight. 
So as a friend I urge you only this: be worthy to your own best traditions. 
Be bold.
In 1942, John Curtin  -  my predecessor, my country's great wartime leader  -  looked to America.  I still do. 
This year you have marked the centenary of President Reagan's birth.
He remains a great symbol of American optimism.
The only greater symbol of American optimism is America itself.
The eyes of the world are still upon you. 
Your city on a hill cannot be hidden. 
Your brave and free people have made you the masters of recovery and reinvention. 
As I stand in this cradle of democracy I see a nation that has changed the world and known remarkable days.
I firmly believe you are the same people who amazed me when I was a small girl by landing on the moon. 
On that great day I believed Americans could do anything.
I believe that still.
You can do anything today. 



Friends all
I've always found my American friends so instinctively polite that even when you find me completely indecipherable all you still nod and smile sweetly. 
But among so many friends of Australia I hope I can relax and use my own vowels?
I'm not sure Mark Twain would have approved of my modern Australian accent given his troubles when he visited Australia in the 1890s. 
As he wrote:
Now and then, but this is rare, one hears such words as piper for paper, lydy for lady and tyble for table fall from lips whence one would not expect such pronunciations to come. That mislaid 'y' is rather striking when a person gets enough of it into a short sentence to enable it to show up. In the hotel in Sydney the chambermaid said, one morning:  "The tyble is set, and here is the piper; and if the lydy is ready I'll tell the wyter to bring up the breakfast."
Australia and America are old friends and Americans are extraordinarily polite.  
We're always conscious that we are friends who live a long way away and it is traditional advice to Australians visiting America to assume good will but no knowledge. 
But I know I'm among a friendly and knowledgeable audience tonight.
In Washington earlier today I spoke about the geography we share and the history we have drawn from it. 
The first Europeans to see the great waters we share called it the South Sea.
 We owe to Magellan its naming as the Pacific Ocean.   
And it is a wonderful legacy of Magellan's, because we do seek a pacific friendship, we do dream pacific dreams.
So much of our friendship has been a story of the sea.  American ships have brought friendship to ours and many shores.  Not only Yankees either.
The Confederate ship Shenandoah made a famous visit to Melbourne in January 1865. 
She had found the North Pacific sadly short of combatant warships and she came to Williamstown slip, so her Captain J. I Waddell said, for food, water and repairs. 
Why that required the crew to visit the Ballarat race day and have photos taken with half the town has never been fully explained, but they had a good time. 
And in fact the Shenandoah was so warmly received that they recruited forty two new members of crew in Victoria.
There's a broad historical consensus that this is the only occasion on which an American naval vessel has come to Australia to steal our young men.
Our friendship is not just one for peace, but one for prosperity.
Australians and Americans alike now the equation is simple: 
Trade and investment equals jobs. 
And good jobs equals good lives. 
So we share a partnership for growth.
I know our American friends have been through very tough economic times these last few years. 
We're very conscious that while Australia beat the global recession, our American friends have felt great economic pain. 
Unemployment is a terrible social problem.  And when home ownership is threatened too, the human cost only grows.
There is no country in the world which bounces back better than the United States. 
You are the masters of recovery and reinvention. 
We are optimistic on your behalf.  And as friends of Australia I know you will be keen to hear some good news from us as well.
So I want to remind you about the extraordinary opportunities being created by our mining boom.
The current upsurge in our terms of trade has been described by our Reserve Bank as the biggest resources boom since the 1850s gold rush. 
In seven years, mining investment has increased fivefold.  This year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses:  something that has never happened before.
These are projects with great national reach.  One single plan  -  the $43 billion Gorgon project  -  is worth about the same as 2 years of output from agriculture. 
When I went there last I met a worker on site who lives one block away from my home in Melbourne.  Gavan works on the project on a fly-in, fly-out basis.  
This is like commuting from Portland, Oregon to Houston, Texas. 
Mining is a remarkable force for progress and modernisation in Australia. 
Australia's mining industry employs engineers, computer specialists, logisticians, environmental managers. 
It once employed a young Herbert Hoover.
 Hoover may not have written a love poem to a Kalgoorlie barmaid, though Aussie legend insists that he did. 
But he was instrumental in organising one of the biggest firms in our industry and he never forgot his time in Australia's west ... saying for the rest of his life that even the sight of a camel train made him seasick.
It's a more sophisticated industry today.  Not too many camels.
And on any measure, we are living though a boom.  
Our mining boom is a good thing. 
Our mine workers are gaining higher wages.  Our suppliers are benefitting.  Our superannuation funds are earning more.  And the higher dollar is cutting prices for household goods in Australia too.
It's that equation again: Trade and investment equals jobs. 
And good jobs equal good lives. 
So while we know you have endured tough times, we also know you understand the way ahead, and we are confident America and Australia are on the same road. 
Friends and partners in a globalised world, where open societies flourish and competitive economies thrive. 
A world where the safest course is the boldest one.
Our alliance must always be a friendship for the future.
So tonight I am pleased to announce a $2 million Australian Government contribution to a project to ensure the Australia-United States alliance remains so. 
The 21st Century Australia-United States Alliance Project will be led by the US Studies Centre at the University of Sydney.
It will bring together the best institutions and thinking from Australia and the United States to canvass new thinking on our alliance's future challenges and its future course.
The21st Century Australia-United States Alliance Project will be a partnership of government and business. 
It's important we recognise the role of business in the bonds between Australia and the US.
The Government's contribution will be matched by US corporate partners.  I'm grateful for the first such donation, which has been generously made by the Dow Chemical Company.
Represented here tonight by Andrew Livris, CEO, Chairman and President. 
Thanks Andrew.
We remain friends for the future because our peoples remain friends. 
We're not twins, and I love the differences between us. 
I think the thing Australians and Americans might enjoy most about each other is we amuse each other. 
You do like to laugh at us a bit  -  nothing wrong with that, one of the most famous books about Australians is called They're a Weird Mob  -  and as for us, well I'm a guest, so maybe I should just say we enjoy your sense of humour.
I have always enjoyed travelling here and meeting Americans visiting Australia because what you see is what you get. 
Last year I met Oprah in Melbourne.  Wow.  She's not given to understatement, is she!  And then she goes home and raises much needed funds for the Queensland floods. 
Just magic.  What a wonderful ambassador for America.
And I know our New Zealand friends  -  we think of them as family, in truth  -  have deeply appreciated America's generosity as well.
Our peoples each speak with our own voice, but we share many values.  Above all we know the dignity of every person. 
In the 18th century an American wrote all men are created equal. 
In the 19th century Australians said Jack's as good as his master. 
We each value effort more than status and we each reject the sort of snobbishness and expectations of obsequiousness that infect other societies. 
Our egalitarian societies share that deep determination of the New World: that everyone is worthy of respect ... that a Prime Minister or President is no better than the person who serves her dinner.
And in both our countries, true friends stick together. 
President Kennedy once described Australians as good friends in peace, best of friends in war.   I think he was right and it's a badge we wear proudly. 
We're Australians.  We're here for the hard days.
Here in New York we can never really forget the hardest of days ten years ago. 
John Curtin's words during the Battle of the Coral Sea speak to us still:
As I speak, those who are participating in the engagement are conforming to the sternest discipline and are subjecting themselves with all that they have  -  it may be for many of them the last full measure of their devotion'  -  to accomplish the increased safety and security of this territory.  
In the face of an example of that description, I feel that it is not asking too much that every citizen who today is being defended by these gallant men in that engagement, should regard himself as engaged in the second line of service to Australia ... Men are fighting for Australia today. 
Those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.
Australians and Americans are engaged in Afghanistan tonight.
And those of us not there are working for our countries, each in our own way. 
When Douglas Macarthur first met Curtin in March 1942 he said
Mr Prime Minister, we two, you and I, will see this thing through together.
There will be hard days ahead. 
But Curtin and Macarthur's words also speak to us still. 
They draw us ever forward to the deepest sources of confidence in the future that lie in our national characters.
All friendships need work and ours is no different.
Percy Spender knew this. 
Spender of course was the Australian External Affairs Minister who more than any one Australian can claim credit for the successful negotiations for the ANZUS treaty sixty years ago. 
As an old politician himself, he found a sure fire way to President Truman's heart.
You see when the Washington Post's music critic criticised President Truman's daughter's singing voice in 1950, Truman wrote to the journalist:
I have never met you, but if I do you'll need a new nose and plenty of beefsteak and perhaps a supporter below.
So Spender found the best way to talk to Truman ... was to get him started on how terrible the press is. 
To be fair, you don't need incredible powers of perception to know that any politician's favourite topic of conversation is complaining about journalists,
But Spender opened up a rich vein of friendship with a President who already had fond memories of Aussies from the Great War. 
So while the Second World War experience and the Cold War environment undoubtedly played their part in bringing our countries together as Treaty partners in 1951, the friendship between two politicians played its role.
Thank you for your friendship. 
Not just tonight but in all the work of the Association. 
What you do to bring our countries ever closer together is of incredible value. 
We have so much in common but we can never take each other for granted.
After centuries as friends, decades as allies, days and nights like these are precious still.  We are reminded of our best selves. 
Americans are still optimists, Australians still have a Go  and our future is there for us as long as we are bold. 



	Excellencies.
	Members of the Commonwealth family,
	Friends,
	In particular thank you Sir Mark and Ambassador Charles for co-hosting this event.
	Thank you Ambassador Charles, and Minister Bellingham for your kind remarks.
	I am grateful for the opportunity to acknowledge Commonwealth Day with you here.
	This year's Commonwealth Day celebrations focus on women as agents of change.
	I think this theme is particularly appropriate for Commonwealth Day as the day itself focuses so much on reaching young people through schools.
	There's a marvellous practicality and idealism in the selection of the second Monday in March as Commonwealth Day.
	The ideal of sharing our hopes for a better world with the children of our countries the practicality that this particular day is chosen because it is a day when all our countries' children are in school!
	It is a very Commonwealth approach.
	A billion women and girls live in Commonwealth countries.
	If every one of those girls lived in a safe home, had good food and clean water and could get health care, we would live in a different world.
	Not just because of the difference it would make in their lives but because of the difference they could then make in the lives of their communities and  the world as agents of change.
	I have spent several days of this week here in New York and at the UN in wide ranging discussions with quite a range of people.
	Coming here to mark Commonwealth Day after that range of conversations I am very strongly reminded of the things Commonwealth countries really share.
	We share a distinctive way of doing things internationally.
	Consulting and co-operating, in the common interests of our peoples, and supporting international understanding and world peace.
	Events in the world and the issues we discuss as leaders regularly remind me:
	Not every country in the world shares this way of working.
	So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth partners.
	We also share a distinctive set of concerns internationally.
	International peace and order.  Liberty for individuals.   Deep opposition to racism.  An ever-growing commitment to development.  And addressing climate change.
	So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth friends.
	The nations and peoples of the Commonwealth  -  nations and peoples of six continents and five oceans  -  are enormously diverse.
	Taking in one quarter of the UN's members ... one third of the world's population ... and acting as a voice for some of the smallest countries in the developing world.
	Yet these values we share  -  our distinctive way of doing things in the world and our distinctive set of concerns for the world's people  -  unite us in a way that is truly wonderful.
	Our association of sovereign nations shares a remarkable international friendship.
	COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING 2011
	I'm delighted Australia will be hosting the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in October this year.
	Australia was honoured to be selected as the host nation, in our western city of Perth.
	Our preparations are well advanced and the setting for our meeting could not be more appropriate.
	Perth is a beautiful city.
	Perth overlooks the Indian Ocean and serves as a gateway to the beautiful state of Western Australia.
	It is a vibrant multicultural city, a centre for Australia's burgeoning minerals industry and enjoys rapidly expanding links to Asia, India and Africa, with many Commonwealth countries included.
	A fitting symbol of Australia's engagement in the world.
	As Chair of CHOGM, I want Australia to make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world.  No-one should have a monopoly on global decision-making.
	Australia's history and geography combine to give us a unique perspective: a perspective of both the North and the South.  Ensuring small and medium states have a voice in international decisions is an important priority for CHOGM.
	AUSTRALIA'S APPROACH AT THE UNITED NATIONS
The presence of so many friends from so many countries does give me an opportunity to describe Australia's approach to the challenges the nations of the world face today.
Combining practicality and idealism ... in service of our distinctive way of doing things in the world ... and our distinctive set of concerns for the world's people.
The challenge of international peace and order.  
When ordinary people think of the UN, they often think of peacekeepers  -  blue helmets. 
And increasingly we think of UN peace-builders.  These functions are a crucial benchmark for the UN's success or failure in an increasingly complex world. 
Australia has participated in more than 50 UN and other multilateral missions across the globe, and led several of these in our own region  -  in Timor-Leste, Solomon Islands and on the island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea.  Today we have 3500 troops deployed globally for peace and security operations.
The challenge to foster liberty for individuals.   
Australia has an enduring commitment to the aims and purposes of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
Earlier this year, Australia was examined at the Universal Periodic Review in Geneva and we feel our record is worthy of our democratic aspirations. 
As we have recently been reminded, the desire for human dignity and respect is universal.  Governments forget this at their peril. 
The challenge of racism.  
Australia has a strong human rights record.  But like every country we can do better.   
Our own great challenge lies in closing the gap between Indigenous Australians and our society as a whole.    
In 2008 the Australian Parliament issued what is now simple know as the National Apology to our indigenous people. 
This was an historic and emotional moment in our modern history.
And our work goes on, to close the gap between indigenous people and all Australians.
Global poverty.
The 2000 UN Millennium Summit fundamentally changed the way world leaders saw development. 
We put the Millennium Development Goals at the heart of our development cooperation program. 
Australia has more than doubled our development assistance in the last five years and we are intending to double it again to 2015. 
Climate Change
We played an active and constructive role in the formation of the Cancun Agreements which built on the Copenhagen accord. 
Small island states under threat of climate change and rising oceans know Australia is doing everything possible internationally.
Our Fast Start funding of around $600 million was announced early and almost 80 per cent of it has already been allocated to developing countries. 
This is part of the $1.2 billion we are spending on climate change in developing countries over the next few years.
This is an ambitious agenda, addressing many challenges in many ways. 
I believe this ambition is appropriate.
We are ambitious for the UN and for the countries of the world. 
We hope others will share our ambition too.
I have appreciated the opportunity to present some of these thoughts to you. 
It is against this background that Australia has presented its candidacy for a seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-14.  I believe we have something to contribute. 
Australians are proud of our modern, multicultural people.
We are a global people: one quarter of Australians were born overseas.
And Australians are proud of our enthusiasm, energy and ideas. 
We are straightforward: we do what we say.
We believe in the multilateral system and its capacity to address global problems.
We believe in the ideal of good global citizenship.
We believe we can make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world.
Happy Commonwealth Day! 



Thank you.  In particular I'd like to thank His Excellency the Permanent Observer to the African Union Mr Antnio for hosting this event and His Excellency the Permanent Representative of Mauritius, Mr Meetarbhan for chairing the meeting.
Excellencies.
I would like to thank you for gathering here today. 
It is a privilege to speak with you at a time of momentous challenges and opportunities in Africa. 
Recent and historic events in North Africa serve to demonstrate the central and indispensable role of the United Nations. 
They also serve to demonstrate that regional leadership  -  in this case through the African Union and the Arab League and its members  -  is always necessary to international stability and to respect of human dignity. 
So I warmly acknowledge the actions of the African Union and the League of Arab States for putting their weight behind freedom, human rights, good governance, and helping the transition to more representative and responsive forms of government. 
I am fortunate to serve in government in a peaceful and stable democracy. 
We do sometimes speak of political courage but in truth, what an Australian politician risks is slight. 
That is why I want to very warmly acknowledge both the Permanent Representative of Libya who is here with us this afternoon, HE Mr Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham, and his Deputy HE Ibrahim Dabbashi for the profound courage they have shown by calling for the protection of the Libyan people in these difficult days.
INTRODUCING AUSTRALIA
I am proud of Australia's record at the United Nations.   
For Australia  -  one of the world's five oldest continuous democracies  -  the values of the United Nations Charter are central to how we conduct ourselves on the world stage. 
We strongly support the rules-based international order which the Charter underpins.
The values of the Charter don't only reflect the official stance of the Australian Government. 
They reflect the character of the Australian people.
We believe in sharing.  Australians call this a fair go. 
In practice, it means respecting the vital importance of every person having the means of a dignified life. 
Australia is part of a region where 20 of our 22 closest neighbours are developing countries.  We believe in building partnerships to create development opportunities for the world's poorest and we are part of the global fight to eradicate extreme poverty.
We believe in sticking together. 
Australians call this mateship. 
In practice, it means recognising that many human problems require co-operation. 
Australia is part of a complex, inter-connected world and we know countries cannot succeed alone.  We believe in working together across national boundaries.
And we are optimists and innovators. 
Australians call this having a go. 
In practice, it means forging creative solutions to common challenges. 
Australia does this in the United Nations  -  from developing best practice in peacekeeping doctrine to sharing new ideas for environmentally sustainable consumption and production.
We are a country of energetic, innovative and practical people.
Australia is also a diverse and tolerant society. 
We are one of the world's most multicultural countries, home to people from hundreds of ethnic and language backgrounds and to all the world's religions. 
One in four Australian residents were born overseas. 
In recent years many Africans have made Australia home and now over a quarter of a million Australians can claim African descent.
The Australian continent is home to Indigenous Australians  -  perhaps the oldest continuing cultures in the world. 
And I am proud that the Australian Parliament in 2008 issued a National Apology to Indigenous Australians. 
Like many similar nations we have a long way to go to close the gap in life opportunity between indigenous people and our community as a whole. 
We are the first to admit that. 
But with the Apology my country crossed an historic bridge and there is no going back.
AUSTRALIA'S OVERALL INTERNATIONAL APPROACH
In the United Nations, and in all our international engagement,
Australia works to make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world, who otherwise risk being shut out of the international agenda.
We are unique among the major developed countries, situated as we are between the Indian and Pacific oceans, in a region of developing countries. 
Our history and geography combine to give us a distinctive perspective:  a perspective of both the North and the South. 
We have been committed to the United Nations for all of its sixty five years  -  the United Nations is the first pillar of Australian foreign policy.
Our record of achievement in international peace and security is proud  -  from the deployment of the first international peacekeepers in 1947; to the Cambodian Peace Settlement; to the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons and the recent International Commission on Non-Proliferation and Disarmament; to the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty; and from Cyprus to Timor-Leste to Sudan.
We have worked hard for the Millennium Development Goals, doubling our aid budget over the last five years and intending to double it again to 2015. 
We are giving a new priority globally to the least-developed countries.
Australia is also emphasising sustainable development as a critical challenge.  We are committed to global action on climate change.  
We played an active and constructive role in the formation of the Cancun Agreements which built on the Copenhagen accord. 
Our Fast Start funding of around $600 million was announced early and almost 80 per cent of it has already been allocated to developing countries.  This is part of the $1.2 billion we are spending on climate change in developing countries over the next few years.
We will continue to play a positive, and I hope thoughtful role.  Last month I committed to introduce a carbon price in Australia in July next year. 
I am determined that Australia will not be left behind in the world's transition to a clean energy future.
Climate change is a key theme for Australia's international engagement but our engagement ranges widely.
We believe in an effective and responsive United Nations and we try to show that in our role here.  Australia's own history in the UN is that we do what we say.
We support early reform of the Security Council and the way it works. 
No-one should have a monopoly on global decision-making. 
We have a special commitment to the Indigenous peoples of the world.  We seek to advance the interests of First Peoples in every country.
And we are committed to interfaith and inter-religious dialogue.  People of faith from all the world's religions live together in our multicultural nation. 
We actively participate in interfaith and inter-religious dialogues.  Together with Indonesia we established the first major dialogue in our own region almost a decade ago.
So good citizenship, human development, environmental sustainability and peace and stability remain the decisive elements of our international agenda.
Today I want to reflect particularly on peace and stability. 
It is an area where Australia's record is particularly strong and remains central to our work in the UN.
Many of the countries represented in this room have contributed to peacekeeping.  Many here have taken on enormous burdens in African-led peace operations. 
We understand those responsibilities.
Today more than 3500 Australians are deployed in peace and security operations globally. 
Our commitment to peacekeeping is longstanding, including in Africa.  We have participated in more than fifty UN and other multi-lateral peacekeeping missions. 
We have most recently been called on to lead several in our own region  -  in Timor-Leste, the Solomon Islands and on the island of Bougainville in Papua New Guinea. 
In Africa our involvement goes back to the 1960s through a dozen missions including Republic of Congo, Uganda, Namibia, Mozambique, Somalia, Western Sahara, Ethiopia and Eritrea, Sierra Leone and Rwanda. 
We are active in de-mining activities  -  Australia's first Mine Action Strategy was launched in 2005-06 and since then we have spent over $11 million Australian dollars reducing the threat and impact of mines in Africa.
We are increasing our training for African defence officers in Australian courses. 
We have contributed funding to AMISOM in Somalia.  
And we have been working closely with the African Union on developing guidelines on the Protection of Civilians. 
I applaud the African Union and its members for their continued strengthening of regional prevention and response mechanisms, for the work of the Union's Peace and Security Council and for its intra-regional cooperation efforts. 
We owe it to the troops we send and to the populations they protect to get peacekeeping and peacebuilding right.
AUSTRALIA'S APPROACH TO AFRICA
The same principles that animate Australian society and our work in the United Nations animate our approach to friendship with Africa. 
Respect, co-operation, creativity. 
And as we strengthen our UN engagement, we increase our efforts right across Africa.
We recognise Africa's growing global role and leadership.
Australia is an Indian Ocean country, as well as a Pacific one. 
And when we look across the Indian Ocean, we see a strong and dynamic continent ... a place full of possibility.
Over the last decade six of the world's ten fastest-growing economies were in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Foreign direct investment has increased almost six fold and average real economic growth more than doubled compared to the previous two decades. 
Australians believe Africa's future holds great promise. 
Australian companies know this.  
They have already invested more than US$20 billion in Africa's resource sector  -  with over another US$20 billion currently being assessed as prospective investment.
More than 220 Australian resource companies are engaged in over 600 projects across 42 African countries.  Over 140 new projects were added last year alone.
In fact, Australian companies have more projects in Africa than they do in any other region of the world.
Australian business has led the way, but I would candidly say that the Government itself has not done enough in the past.
So it's right that Australia is expanding our diplomatic presence in Africa.  We have opened a new embassy in Addis Ababa and increased representation in other diplomatic posts. 
Last year we signed a Memorandum of Cooperation with the Commission of the African Union to increase cooperation in trade and investment, peace and security, achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, agriculture and food security, democracy, governance and human rights, and climate change.
From the first, Australian prosperity has been secured through industries which are important to Africa today.  Agriculture and mining, forestry and fisheries account for more than half of Australia's export earnings. 
So we are keen to share the expertise that has brought us prosperity with our African partners and friends.
Let me outline some of our programs in Africa directed at capacity-building and institutional support.
Supporting food security and building capacity in agriculture.
Through projects designed to build research capacity, improve the functioning of rural markets and enhance the resilience of communities most vulnerable to food insecurity.  
Projects consciously aligned with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme endorsed by the African Heads of State in 2003 as the framework to restore agricultural growth in Africa. 
Improving water and sanitation.
Through programs to increase access to clean water and effective sanitation through infrastructure and institutional development.
Supporting maternal and child health.
With initiatives to focus on midwifery training, basic obstetric and newborn care and family planning in eastern Africa.
Sharing mining expertise.
We are sharing our experiences with resource management and building capacity in African mining.  This includes promoting public-private partnerships to share expertise from the mining industry, government, academia and civil society.  This year 60 mining short-course awards are being delivered. 
In addition, at Mining Indaba in Cape Town in 2010, we established an initiative with four universities in West Africa to undertake mining-related research and teaching, including in the geosciences.
Working in the World Trade Organisation Doha Round.
Through our Chairmanship of the Cairns Group of agricultural exporting countries Australia is working actively with Africa to break down protectionist agricultural trade barriers, particularly those in the US and Europe, which deprive countries of development opportunities.
And boosting human resource capacity. 
Targeted, technical assistance to African countries in areas including agriculture, public policy and natural resource management.   
And promoting knowledge, education links and enduring ties between Australia and our friends around the world.
Much to do many opportunities for progress.
 As Africa's influence grows in the world the countries of Africa should be better represented in the councils of the world.
That is why Australia strongly supports Africa's claims for two permanent seats on the UN Security Council and for an equitable proportion of new elected seats.
I appreciate the opportunity to meet you today.
We are ambitious for the UN and the multilateral system. 
Our Australian mission here in New York today introduced me to an African proverb
If you want to go fast  -  go alone. 
If you want to go far  -  go together. 
That is the spirit Australia brings to the United Nations and that is the spirit we hope to bring to the Security Council.
I would like to hear your assessments, perspectives and questions on these challenges. 
And I welcome and strongly encourage a dialogue with you in the future ... starting today. 



It's great to be back in Adelaide.
The city of my childhood.
The city where I received such a great education.
The city where my parents gave me values for a lifetime.
Today we celebrate the legacy of a remarkable Australian, Don Dunstan.
Our nation has never seen a leader like him.
Today many remember Dunstan primarily for being colourful.
But we should also remember him for being courageous and clear-minded.
Dunstan saw our nation not just as it was, but as it could be. Dunstan built a community based on innovation, creativity and ideas.
I was shaped by the Dunstan era and its spirit of principled reform.
Let me assure you, I won't be wearing pink hot pants into parliament any time soon!
But I do profoundly share his belief that we can envision
a better future and embrace the reforms that will help take us there.
Dunstan understood that such leadership involved a choice between two pathways.
Defence of the status quo, based on caution and fear.
And an optimistic faith in the capacity of our people to embrace change.
I hold that optimistic faith to the core of my being.
It is my belief. It is Labor's belief.
Tackling the big challenges and building a nation of opportunity and prosperity for all.
We've done it before.
Postwar migration and the Snowy scheme.
Gough Whitlam's renewal of our social fabric.
Hawke and Keating opening our economy to the world.
Today we must embrace another moment of decision for the future of our nation: a decision to cut carbon pollution and build a clean energy economy for the 21st century.
Neither of the extremes in Australian politics can deliver this reform.
The Coalition has surrendered itself to fear-mongering and denying the power of markets.
The Greens are not a party of government and have no tradition of striking the balance required to deliver major reform.
Like the economic transformation of the 1980s, thisis a reform that can only be handled in the progressive Labor tradition.
We did it in the 1980s with the social wage and industry assistance that eased the path of structural change.
We will do the same this time, with generous assistance for households and support for business to adapt.
In all of this, we draw strength from enduring Labor values:
Protecting jobs  -  always our first commitment.
A sustainable environment for future generations  -  an environment with less carbon pollution.
Reform with equity, looking after those who need a helping hand.
And accepting a scientific world-view in a community of reason.
Friends, the second US President John Adams once famously said that facts are stubborn things.
No opinion poll can change the fact that climate change is real.
It is caused by human activity.
And we must cut carbon pollution.
In a nation rich in fossil fuels, I wish it were not so.
But it is.
Greenhouse gas levels are one-third higher than before the Industrial Revolution, and higher than at any time in the last 800,000 years.
As a result, global temperatures have risen 0.7 degrees celsius over the past century and continue to rise.
The last decade was the world's hottest on record, warmer than the 1990s which were in turn warmer than the 1980s.
In fact, globally 2010 was the equal warmest year on record, tied with 2005 and 1998.
2010 is the thirty-fourth consecutive year with global temperatures above the 20th Century average.
In Australia, average temperatures have risen almost one degree since 1910, and each decade since the 1940s has been warmer than the one before.
That warming is real.
Its consequences are real.
And it will change our lives in real and practical ways.
More extreme bushfire conditions and droughts.
Falling crop yields.
Loss of species.
Increased cyclone intensity.
More days of extreme heat.
Coastal flooding as sea levels rise.
Bleaching of our coral reefs.
And a substantial decline in alpine snow cover.
Indeed, Professor Garnaut's latest report indicates that the need to act is greater than ever.
And the scientific consensus is stronger than ever.
Given these realities, I ask who I'd rather have on my side:
Alan Jones, Piers Akerman and Andrew Bolt.
Or the CSIRO, the Australian Academy of Science, the Bureau of Meteorology, NASA, the US National Atmospheric Administration, and every reputable climate scientist in the world.
It is deeply ironic that as the scientific evidence mounts, the Coalition's position grows more extreme with every passing day.
Mr Abbott doesn't care about climate change because he doesn't believe in climate change.
Yes, he says the right thing to the wider community.
But put him on talkback radio and his true opinion emerges.
It is no wonder that Mr Abbott told his party room not to talk about the science.
Because half the Coalition party room consists of sceptics, deniers and opportunists.
While decent men and women of the small l' liberal tradition like Judi Moylan, Mal Washer and Judith Troeth tear their hair out in frustration watching a hard-won consensus evaporate in a cloud of denial and fear.
Friends, that consensus was the product of long years of deliberation and debate.
The first warning by a senior world leader came from none other than Margaret Thatcher  -  a trained scientist who knew what was at stake.
At the 2ndWorld Climate Change Conference in 1990, Mrs Thatcher warned that:
The danger of global warming is ... real enough for us to make changes and sacrifices, so that we do not live at the expense of future generations.
That conference led to the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992 and Kyoto in 1997 moments of hope, lost to inaction and delay.
There have been some brave attempts at reform alongthe way.
As Environment Minister, Senator Graham Richardson first proposed a climate change response in 1989.
His successor, David Kemp along with Peter Costello, tried again in 2002.
In 2007, Prime Minister Howard accepted the Shergold plan to establish an emissions trading scheme.
Both Labor and the Coalition went to the 2007 election pledging to price carbon.
That consensus has now been destroyed.
And friends, let's set the record straight about the 2010 election.
Yes I did promise that there would be no carbon tax.
I also said to the Australian people that we needed to act on climate change, we needed to price carbon and I wanted to see an emissions trading scheme.
Now, if I'd been leading a majority government I would have been getting on with an emissions trading scheme, just as I promised the Australian people.
As it is, in this minority parliament, the only way I could act to price carbon was by working with other Members of Parliament, or else do nothing.
I had a stark choice: do I act or not act?
I chose to act.
The Government's plan means we start with a fixed carbon price for a temporary transitional period a plan that puts a price on carbon from day one.
We will still have an emissions trading scheme but we will get there by a different route.
Our carbon pricing model will give industry time to adapt in a steady and deliberate manner.
It will generate revenue to assist households and businesses make the transition.
And it will provide a real incentive for firms to reduce their carbon pollution.
The important thing to know is that from 1 July 2012, carbon will be priced in the Australian economy.
The journey of transformation will begin.
Friends, I chose action over inaction because of this simple truth:
If Australia does not adopt a carbon price in 2011, we probably never will.
This is the year of decision.
Action versus inaction.
Acceptance versus denial.
Setting Australia on the path to a high skill, low carbon future.
Or leaving our economy to decay into a rusting industrial museum.
That is the choice we face.
Action will protect jobs.
Inaction will cost jobs.
Tony Abbott will cost this nation jobs.
In his landmark report, Lord Stern noted that while action has its price, but the cost of inaction will be far greater:
The costs of action to the global economy would be roughly 1 percent of GDP, while the costs of inaction could be from 5-20 percent of GDP.
                                                                                                                                                                              [UK Government, Stern Review:
                                                                                                                                                                                                      The Economics of Climate Change, 2006]
As Prime Minister of Australia, I will not trifle with our nation's future.
I will not expose our people to such risks.
We cannot afford to be stranded with an outdated high-emissions economy.
We can't freeze our economy in time, any more than we could lock ourselves behind tariff walls while the world changed outside.
I don't want us to wake up in ten years time lumbered with a high carbon economy when the rest of the world has moved on and then scramble to catch up.
Our nation is well equipped to make the transition.
We have an abundance of natural resources like wind, natural gas, solar and geothermal.
For example, the highest average solar radiation per square metre of any continent in the world.
We have an agile, innovative business sector tempered by three decades of exposure to global competition.
We have a talented workforce ready to embrace the jobsof tomorrow.
As Deputy Prime Minister, I often spoke about the opportunities that will come with a low carbon economy, like my address to the Green Skills Forum in 2009.
It is a conviction I hold even more strongly today as countries like China plunge headlong into new industries like solar energy while we delay and hold back.
Friends, the dignity and value of work lie at the very heart of everything my Government stands for.
That is why climate change is not just a debate among economists and scientists.
Every Australian family has a stake in what we do.
Delay will cost them jobs.
It will cost them jobs through the impacts of a changing climate.
Like the crop failures that will come with longer and harsher droughts.
Or the loss of tourism jobs that will come with the bleaching of our coral reefs.
Inaction will also cost jobs because emission-intensive economies will become uncompetitive in a low carbon world.
In the quest for comparative advantage, investment will flow towards those countries that can offer more output for fewer emissions.
Inaction will cost jobs.
Action will support jobs.
Friends, action on climate change means creating new jobs for the future.
It means saving and transforming existing jobs.
It means re-skilling workers for the future.
We will see new job opportunities in clean energy generation.
Electric and hybrid cars.
Manufacturing clean energy equipment.
Energy efficient construction and retro-fitting existing buildings.
Carbon capture and storage.
Today's workers will find themselves in different industries and different settings.
Welders and steel workers will build and maintain large-scale solar power plants.
Plumbers and electricians will be reskilled to install solar hot water systems and solar panels.
And there will be new jobs too.
Just as in the 1960s, the South Australian community could never imagine the jobs in tourism, fine food and wine, the film industry and the arts that lay just around the corner.
Or back in the 1980s that the ingenuity of markets would create enterprises like Google and Facebook that would change the world.
In a similar way, clean energy will open up opportunities we are only just beginning to imagine.
Those opportunities begin with that simple but momentous decision: Putting a price on carbon.
Friends, a price on carbon is the cheapest way to drive investment and jobs.
A low carbon economy will be more efficient and more productive.
It will change behaviour right across the economy, driving innovation and creativity.
Like the dynamic benefits of tariff reform, a market in carbon will not only cut carbon pollution but make the economy more efficient as a whole.
The countless decisions needed to transform our economy cannot  -  and should not  -  be made by government decree.
They can only be made by individual firms calculating how best to position themselves for a low carbon future.
By contrast, the Coalition wants to pick winners from a central bureaucracy located in Canberra.
More Karl Marx than Adam Smith.
Their direct action approach was a short-term fix cobbled together when Mr Abbott unexpectedly became Opposition Leader.
It is a threadbare piece of policy.
Never intended to be implemented.
Merely a fig-leaf for denial and delay.
No Liberal of consequence can support it.
No economist of standing does support it.
The Coalition's direct action method abandons any commitment to market forces.
It will increase emissions by 17 per cent, not the promised 5 per cent cut.
And it will cause a $30 billion black hole that the Federal Budget could never sustain.
Direct action simply taxes families and puts that money in the hands of polluters, with government rather than markets picking winners.
Malcolm Turnbull nailed the argument when he said:
Having the government pick projects for subsidy is a recipe for fiscal recklessness on a grand scale.
                                                                                                                                   [Hansard, 8 February 2010]
I totally agree.
And it's time Malcolm Turnbull, Joe Hockey and the other climate change believers in the Coalition stood up to be counted.
Or are the Liberals not only no longer the party of the free market.
But no longer a broad church party where MPs are free to express their convictions as well?
Friends, none of this means we have to lead the world, and we have not.
At the same time, we cannot afford to be left behind, yet we are.
While Australia delays, our peers and competitors are on the move.
Thirty-two countries and 10 US states already have emissions trading schemes.
Other economies, including China, Taiwan, Chile and South Korea, and a number of Canadian provinces, are either considering developing their own ETS or already have trial schemes in place.
Carbon taxes are in place in Britain, Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden, the Netherlands and Canada and are under discussion elsewhere, including Japan and South Africa.
China is closing environmentally-damaging, unsafe and economically inefficient small coal-fired generators at the rate of one every one or two weeks and replacing them with larger plants that are economically and environmentally much more efficient.
They are putting up wind turbines at the rate of one every hour.
China has also set its own ambitious target of reducing carbon pollution by 40 to 45 per cent per unit of GDP by 2020.
India is taxing coal to create a revenue stream for clean energy, and from April this year they will have an energy efficiency trading scheme.
In the race to build a clean energy economy, we have given the rest of the world a head start.
We're going to have to work hard if we don't want to be left behind.
Friends, as we make that transition to a low carbon future, we won't leave business and workers and unions to manage on their own.
That is not the Labor way.
In the coming months, you'll hear a lot about the impact a carbon price will have on employment.
Let me say this very clearly:
We will protect Australian jobs at the same time as we create new ones.
The Government understands that some Australian firms compete with overseas industries that won't necessarily incur the same carbon costs as they would here.
I don't want jobs in those industries to go overseas.
And I don't want the emissions that come with those jobs to go overseas either because that would only compound the world's carbon problems.
That's why the Government has committed to helping Australia's trade-exposed emissions-intensive industries as the world transitions to a lower carbon future.
Some people argue that providing assistance removes the incentive for business to reduce their pollution.
I reject that assertion and I reject the lack of importance that this sentiment gives to the importance of protecting Australian jobs.
To take just one example of the way this assistance could work.
If the Government chose to provide that assistance in the form of free permits as some have suggested though this decision has yet to be made, these businesses would then have an opportunity to reduce their carbon emissions, sell their surplus permits, and actually make money.
Friends, just as we assist industry, so too will we assist households.
There is no cost-free way of reducing carbon pollution and I don't resile from that fact.
Even Mr Abbott accepts there will be a pricing impact:
I'm not saying there's cost-free ways to reduce emissions.
                                                                                [MTR, 1 March 2011]
Amid all the misrepresentations, that is a precious grain of truth.
But there is another more important truth to accompany it: under Labor's equitable approach, price rises will be met by fair and generous assistance.
We are still yet to decide on assistance measures, so Mr Abbott's talk of excessive cost impacts is simply absurd.
What is certain is that all funds raised by a carbon price will go to assisting households, helping business transition and programs to tackle climate change.
Not a cent will go to Treasury.
And the biggest share will go to households
We will not allow low and middle income Australia to lose out.
This is how Labor does economic reform.
Make the big decisions.
But carry the nation's families and households with us along the way.
Friends, three weeks ago, I began a process that will equip our nation with a clean energy economy for the future: a price on carbon.
It is a big call.
One of the biggest in the modern era.
A call that will shape the destiny of our nation as greatly as floating the dollar, cutting tariffs or introducing the GST.
This nation-changing reform has been met with a campaign of fear just as Dunstan's groundbreaking reforms were met with fear and misunderstanding, reforms now taken for granted as part of everyday life.
Like those purveyors of fear in the 60s and 70s, Australians of the future will look back on Mr Abbott's campaign with pity and shame.
The pity and shame posterity reserves for leaders who miss the wave of history and misjudge the big calls.
The leaders who create fear and try to stop a confident nation dealing with the challenges of the future.
I will never be such a leader.
Faced with hurdles, I will always find a way through.
Faced with choosing between taking a few knocks or doing what's best for the nation, I will put our nation first every time, no matter what the personal price.
I will always ensure that this nation seizes the opportunities of the future and does not cower in fear.
A low-pollution, clean-energy economy is one of those opportunities.
Lord Stern calls it the most dynamic and creative energy and industrial revolution in our economic history.
Mr Abbott wants us to believe that Australians are incapable of such change.
I don't share his basic lack of faith in the Australian people.
Growing up here in Adelaide, I learnt something better than that.
I learnt to have faith in the creative and optimistic spirit of this nation and its people.
To believe that we are a smart, competent, resilient nation.
A nation that has done great things in the past, and which can do even greater things in the future.
A nation that understands when the soft options are gone, only hard choices remain.
That is why we choose action over inaction.
We will cut carbon pollution.
We will not leave our nation stranded by history.
We will not live at the expense of future generations.
We will get this call right and get this job done:
For our nation.
For our people.
For our future. 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you, Peter, for that very kind introduction.
My Lord Bishop, Reverend Fathers, Irish Consul-General Caitriona Ingoldsby and Deputy Head of Mission Orla Tunney, Tony Burke, Minister for Sustainability and Environment, Senator Michael Forshaw is here with Jan and Senator Ursula Stephens is here with Bob, and I know Johnno Johnson is here - Johnno is an icon.
Federal, state and local government colleagues, and my fellow speakers today  -  Kristina Keneally, Premier of New South Wales, you're a lucky woman, married into Irish-Australian nobility, and there's some Kenneallys here today. They stick, I reckon.
Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition - It's great to see a bloke who loves his job, isn't it. I'll do my best to keep him in it for as long as I can.
I'm glad Tony is here today because I know there was a last-minute flurry when he checked his diary this morning and discovered that this is a green event celebrating a saint, but once he worked out that the saint was named Patrick, not Bob, it was all OK.
Barry O'Farrell, also Leader of the Opposition - I hope you have more fun today than you do Saturday week.
And a special welcome to Frances Fitzgerald, Irish Minister for Education - welcome to Australia!  And congratulations on your election. We know the Irish people and economy have done it really tough in the last years and we look forward to the fresh start your Government is going to offer your people.
I'm very pleased to be here for the Lansdowne Club St Patrick's Day luncheon, especially on your 25th anniversary. 
Congratulations Peter Brennan, the Board of Directors and all of the members on that wonderful milestone.
St Patrick's Day is a great day for the Irish in Australia.
The new exhibition titled Not Just Ned that opens today in Canberra at the National Museum of Australia shows the far-reaching influence of the Irish well beyond the Kelly Gang. The Museum worked with national and international partners to secure the loan of many significant objects for this display.
I'd like to acknowledge the role of the Embassy of Ireland for their efforts in seeing this project become a reality, and to the Lansdowne Club for your support.Congratulations to all who played a part in bringing us this great tribute to Irish-Australian history.
We can't talk about the Irish influence without knowing who they are.
Who are they? English schoolchildren grew up with Arthur Mee's famous children's encyclopaedia in the 1950s.
Mee's answer  -  and I am not making this up, this is a genuine school textbook quote  -  is that there are three Irish types.
There is a very primitive type still to be met with in the West ... the one formerly used in Irish caricatures by unfriendly observers. The forehead is low, the mouth and lower part of the face are large, there is an inclination to a squat figure, and the general effect is that of a survivor form an early period in human history
Now Barry, I just want to say, I think that is deeply unfair.
But Mee goes on:
There is the businessman, chiefly from the north, who carries in his speech and form and features signs of being of a stiffer and less pliant breed, as from Norse, Scottish, or English forefathers.
Any Ulstermen here? Does that sound right? 
And the third type:
Then there is the tall, often blue-eyed, engaging Irishman of easy address and good humoured air, who would wile a bird from a bough by his fluent tongue, ready for adventure anywhere.
The amazing thing - Arthur Mee had never met Tony Burke.
I believe the real legacy of the Irish in Australia is the example - A fair go through education, hard work and respect.
I love the story of the Irish labourer looking for work on a building site. First day in Australia, the foreman, very sceptical, says
            Mick, you don't look like you know a girder from a joist.
Mick, very offended, replies
I most certainly do know my Goethe from my Joyce. Goethe wrote Faust and Joyce wrote Finnegan's Wake!
That to me is the true example of the Irish in Australia - An educated people who knew how to work.
The Irish landed just a few miles east of here. They landed in chains. Yes, they brought a song and a smile and a tear, and drinking, praying, fecklessness - all that malarkey. 
But we know you a bit better than that. We know what really happened. Our Irish worked. And they taught their kids. And I don't see too many chains in the room today.
People have made the point before me - these kinds of Irish people and these kinds of Irish values were how Irish emigration created a kind of Irish empire. Not like the empire that the Romans or the British built, but an empire nevertheless - an empire of song and story; an empire of education.
The Roman Empire's strongholds were its legions. The British Empire's strongholds were its ships. The Irish Empire's strongholds are its schools, the thousands of them in Australia today; St Mary's, St Joseph's, St Edmund's, St Pat's - the strongholds of the Irish empire.
It has been said, somewhat unfairly, that the Irish are the Celts who could swim.
My parents obviously were not swimmers, remaining in Wales until 1966 - and even then making the journey on a boat.
But as a Welsh migrant, I do feel the need to leave you with one rather significant observation about St Patrick; he might have converted the Irish to Christianity; he might be the patron of half our Catholic schools; his feast day might be the day all Irish celebrate their roots; but the historical record is unambiguous - St Patrick was Welsh. We remember the great influence on Australia that the Paddys have had, butlet's not forget it took a Taffy to get the ball rolling!
So today, we join to acknowledge that great Celticsaint, Patrick.
So, congratulations to the Lansdowne Club on your 25th anniversary. Thank you for your all you do for the Irish Australian business community, and thank you for the invitation to join you on this great Irish day.
An Irishman will cry at his brother's wedding and sing at his brother's funeral. No wonder he'll laugh at a Prime Minister's jokes.
No matter how many hours of lunch you still have to go, have a happy St. Pat's Day. 



Thank you! I feel very much at home today. Here among friends. Here among the Labor family. Here among those who hand out at the train stations, stand at the polling booths and stuff the envelopes. Here among so many people who believe in fairness, among so many people who are ready to fight for it.
And I know Kristina will lead that fight for fairness with incredible courage and determination. That's because this election is about fairness for families. Fairness for New South Wales families, families who deserve a government that cares. Families who rely on properly funded public services. Who rely on health and housing, on care for the ageing and the disabled, on teachers and nurses and police. These families need Labor. And these families cannot afford the Liberals. The contrast with our opponents could not be greater. Labor is a party with a practical, positive plan to help. Six days to go, the Liberal policy is still hide and seek. If Mr O'Farrell thought the people of New South Wales would support his policies, then he'd tell us what they are. He won't. Because he knows they are not what families want. My message to the people of New South Wales is simple: Don't give Barry O'Farrell a blank cheque. Don't let Barry O'Farrell do whatever he wants. Friends, last time a Liberal Government could do whatever it wanted we ended up with Work Choices. Pay cuts for working Australians, getting the sack if you looked like you might complain, overtime, penalty rates and public holidays on their way to being things of the past. New South Wales can't afford a Liberal Government in love with Work Choices. New South Wales can't afford a Liberal Government which doesn't support teachers and nurses. New South Wales can't afford a Liberal Government dumping 128,000 extra homes in the West and the South-West. With a blank cheque, Barry O'Farrell will go too far and it will be families that will pay the price. This great state deserves a government that cares. That cares about services and cares about families. That cares about fairness. And this great state deserves a government that understands. That understands the threat of climate change and the need to help families with cost of living pressures. That understands the promise of education to transform a child's life. A government that understands the future. The NSW Liberals will never understand. That's why the NSW Liberals oppose Labor's plans to help families with the rising cost of electricity. That's why the NSW Liberals oppose Labor's plans to help children learn in school.  Remember it was Mr O'Farrell who tried to deny parents in this State the powerful information on My School. All my life, I have believed education is the key to success for individuals and for the nation. Having the world's best education system will mean Australia is able to compete with bigger economies.  Having the world's best education system will also mean Australian is a fairer nation. Whatever else our young people may encounter in life, a sound foundation of excellent, rigorous education ought to be their entitlement.  Today we know that Labor will deliver this in New South Wales. And today we know that the Liberals will not. Labor's education philosophy, boiled down to one word, is: Teach. The Liberals' education philosophy, boiled down to one word, is: Cut. That is the Liberal way, but it is not the Australian way. We believe in a fair go through education. This is what we believe in today and this is what we fight for on Saturday. We will now take a moment to watch a short presentation.  Friends - your Premier is a fighter. She will give nothing away. Your Premier has a vision for the future. She will deliver in education. Your Premier understands families. She will fight for fairness. Please welcome my friend, your Premier, Kristina Keneally. 



Thank you very much and thank you to Dennis for that introduction.
I would like to say about Dennis, that he is a fantastic leader for us in the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. He has served more than one Prime Minister, but he has continuously served the national interest, and I thank him for that.
He is a tough-minded person. He is a person who always keeps Australia's interests at the forefront of his mind. He is also someone I have relied on as I have come to this position, and as you will have seen, undertaken a number of trips, including most recently to the United States.
But clearly when there is a new Prime Minister there is that moment, that first moment when Dennis comes and introduces himself, where he is obviously calculating to himself that this is the moment where he can perhaps most impose his vision of the future on the new prime minister, when the new prime minister's reserves are at the lowest and they are perhaps at their most impressionable.
In my conversation with Dennis at that time, he didn't actually seek to persuade me about anything regarding the future of foreign affairs in this country, but he did seek to persuade me that I was very lucky to have him, because if he wasn't working doing his current job then of course he had a standing offer to be the halfback at the Canberra Raiders.
This is something that I didn't quite believe at the time and I found as Prime Minister a healthy degree of scepticism helps you along the way, but Dennis is a fantastic person to rely on and thank you for being here.
Dennis, I too have struggled with doing the acknowledgments tonight, being well aware that if I was to name everybody individually then I would really have to start at the tables and just work through.
But I will do is I will acknowledge my parliamentary colleagues. The Deputy Prime Minister is here. We have two Parliamentary Secretaries here. Our Parliamentary Secretary for Trade, Justine Elliot, is here, and we are also joined by Parliamentary Secretary, Richard Marles, who works assisting the Minister for Foreign Affairs, most particularly on work related to Pacific Islands. So thank you very much for being here.
Can I acknowledge members of the foreign diplomatic corps in Canberra? Can I acknowledge leaders of the Australian business community? Can I acknowledge leading thinkers from our wonderful ANU and other parts of the academy and the foreign policy community? Can I even acknowledge members of the Canberra press gallery, including Paul Kelly, who I had the opportunity to be grilled by this morning? It's good to see you here.
And I did want to take this opportunity too, to single out one person for special acknowledgement and for thanks. That person is Gordon de Brouwer, he of course is the sherpa for the G20.
One thing I have learned in this job is they don't call them sherpas for nothing. It is a very onerous job but Australia is very well served by his character, his professionalism and his experience and I thank him for that work.
I have had the opportunity tonight to share my meal and some discussion with our Ambassador from Japan. I thank him for his company and I want to take this opportunity to once again convey my condolences to him and to the people of Japan on their devastating recent losses.
Tomorrow the Leader of the Opposition and I will attend with you, sir, to sign your condolence book on behalf of the people of Australia.
But even as we meet here tonight, Australians are seeing on their TV screens the story, the retelling of the stories of some members of our Urban Search and Rescue team who went to Japan to assist the people of Japan during these very dark days.
And whilst of course I haven't seen the television program because it's showing as we are here, I am very confident that what that program will show recorded through the eyes and the experiences of those Australians, is the incredible courage and resilience of the Japanese people in the face of this devastation.
I think we can also remember as we think about that Urban Search and Rescue team, that even as they leave Japan they are donating to the people they have worked alongside, their tents, their generators, their equipment. They wanted to do that in a spirit of friendship, and that I think is really, for all of us, an emblem of what our friendship with Japan means and particularly means for us in these very dark days.
It's my task tonight to reflect and give you a few words on the G20 and how it sits in Australian foreign policy and what we want to achieve at the G20 at the end of this year.
To turn to the first question - how does the G20 sit in the foreign policy of my Government? - can I say to you I am of course committed to an activist and creative foreign policy. It's not the Australian way to stand on the sidelines when we've got something to contribute.
As Prime Minister I view myself as walking in the footsteps of the Labor leaders past. We are internationalist by instinct. We believe in multilateral forums. We've believed that since the days of Doc Evatt and we continue to believe it. We believe as the world has grown ever more connected that the role of multilateral organisations has grown ever more important.
So we continue as an Australian nation to be very strong supporters of the United Nations and we are very strong supporters of effective global and regional institutions.
We believe in that kind of internationalism and that kind of engagement and it's certainly my intention as Prime Minister to continue with what I believe is a great Labor tradition.
The G20 sits firmly within this tradition. It's a body whose membership it reflects the new global economic and political realities. It's a body which can provide collective solutions to global economic challenges, and it's a body for which we want an ambitious agenda.
The G20 membership also reflects the growing dynamism of the region in which we live, just as by instinct as the Labor members and as a Labor Prime Minister we believe in multilateral engagement.
Since the days of Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, we have firmly turned our face towards our region. We know our future lies here. We know the history of the 21st century will be written in the Asia Pacific.
And so our engagement in the G20 we believe reinforces the engagement we have through regional institutions and the membership of the G20 bringing together as it does so many of the important countries of our region - China, Japan, South Korea, Indonesia with its standing outreach to whichever nation is chairing ASEAN at that time - that this is an important forum, the G20, to bring together countries in our region.
It builds of course on top of our engagement in developing regional architecture. We continue to have a strong focus on APEC, and Labor claims a proud tradition in relation to APEC.
We are working in the emerging new architecture of the East Asia Summit and we intend to be activist players in creating a broad agenda for the forthcoming East Asia Summit, and we do participate in forums like the ASEAN Defence Ministers Plus Eight Meeting.
We believe that there is a great deal of scope for agendas which are discussed in these regional forums to be agendas that can link to what is happening in the G20.
To give just one example of that, we believe that the East Asia Summit, as we move towards the end of this year, that there will be the capacity to link the work of the East Asia Summit with the financial stability agenda being dealt with through the G20. We believe that there could be a role to be played by the East Asia Summit in financial stability work in the region which reinforces and reflects the G20 agenda.
So we believe the G20 sitting as it does, having been formed at a leader's level in response to the global financial crisis, is an important global institution for us to be working within a global meeting place for leaders.
We believe it equips our multilateral tradition and we also believe that there can be a synergy between its agendas and the work that we are doing directly within the institutions and bodies of our region.
Now it's impossible to discuss the G20 without acknowledging the remarkable role that Kevin Rudd played in its formation at leader level.
If I can reflect very briefly the words I spoke at the US Congress last week. I said then, the vital forum for the global response was the leaders of the G20 nations.
My predecessor Kevin Rudd worked hard to ensure this was so, and he took his dynamism and energy and ideas into the creation of that first G20 discussion, and his determination and intellect are still serving Australia well as he serves as the nation's Foreign Minister.
Of course Kevin wanted to see the G20 come together at that important time in economic history because he understood that it was uniquely positioned to respond to the global financial crisis, and it has done so. It has done so with the reforms to global financial regulation. It's done so with the reforms to the IMF and the tripling of the IMF's resources. It's done so with the provision of economic stimulus, some $5 trillion in fiscal stimulus around the world. And through the provision of that stimulus, literally tens of millions of jobs were saved.
We know many jobs were lost and other countries have suffered so much more greatly than Australia has, but millions of jobs were saved by that quick, collective action through the G20.
Leaders have put in place an important framework for strong, sustainable and balanced growth to coordinate during those days of crisis, to coordinate during the days of recovery, and we would say to keep coordinating beyond the recovery into stronger and stronger growth.
That means the G20 should, in our view, continue to play a role in ensuring that there is dialogue about sound macroeconomic policies and economic reforms that have the capacity to boost productivity, income, jobs and national wealth.
Now, all of this means that through Australian eyes we see the G20 as a serious strategic opportunity, not just for us but for the global economy. And we believe that there is a shared and collective interest in making sure that the G20 is a genuine force for future growth.
Now, that won't just happen, we are determined to play a role in making it happen.
Can I talk now about where I think the G20 can and should go as we move towards the meeting at the end of this year?
I'd like firstly to talk about trade, not because I believe trade will dominate the agenda of the G20 at the end of the year - I most certainly do not - but I want to talk about trade first because I want to reinforce in this gathering that from the Australian perspective, focusing on trade is an urgent task.
Indeed, what will happen on trade will largely have happened by the time the G20 meets towards the end of this year.
And of course I'm referring to whether or not real progress will have been made in concluding the Doha Round.
And so I wanted to talk about trade first to reinforce the Australian view that at this stage of the global economic recovery, the global economy needs the can of Red Bull that the Doha Round would be to global growth. We believe it would be a great shot in the arm.
Now I'm a realist but I'm also a campaigner and an activist, and I understand how many hurdles lie in the way of concluding the Doha Round. But I also understand that we will not see it concluded unless we raise our voice and press on every opportunity to bring it to conclusion.
At the last G20 meeting, G20 leaders used terminology like end game. There are only so many occasions on which leaders can come together and use such terminology and not succeed.
When I spoke at the G20, I said to the leaders assembled there that whilst we were right to congratulate each other that we had not succumbed to a rising tide of protectionism in the darkest days of the global financial crisis, whilst we were right to congratulate each other on that, those congratulations could well be coming too soon, because I genuinely believe that the greatest and most difficult days in seeing off the potential for rising protectionism are not the days we've lived through, but the days to come.
I actually think as many nations around the world go through a period of sluggish growth, of stubbornly high unemployment rates and of fiscal consolidation, which in the language of people in the streets is the language of cut-back, government cutting back expenditure on things they used to rely on, that it is in those days that domestic pressure for protectionism will be at its most acute.
We are yet to live through those days, but if I am right on that prediction, it gives an even newer urgency to concluding the Doha Round because if we do not conclude it now I fear it will never be concluded.
And I do not believe that we can continue to go to meetings like the G20 full of congratulations that we haven't succumbed to protectionism but not able to take another step forward in freer global trade.
So I did want to go to trade first, not because I expect it to dominate the G20 agenda, but because I do believe it should be a key focus of what we talk to each other about and what business we try and conclude during the course of this year.
When G20 leaders come together, we aren't central bankers, we are leaders of nations. I mean that with all due apology to Glenn. I didn't mean that badly or unkindly - very important to have central bankers. But when we gather together, we are there as national leaders, and our task is to deliver for the people of the countries that have elected us to represent them.
Now, I'd have to say no one hammers that point harder than the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan, who is very outcomes-focused at the G20 and has literally spent hundreds of hours of his life going and speaking with his peers in international forums on these issues. That's hundreds of hours there as well as hundreds of hours in transit.
So I will be carrying the same message to G20 leaders at the end of this year. We need to make sure that through those meetings we are delivering in a practical way for the people that we represent.
Consequently, I believe it is very important that the forthcoming G20, in further considering the global framework for sustained and balanced growth, has a particular focus on jobs and the growth that is necessary to create more jobs.
Now, the reality is in Australia, we do not have the kind of unemployment problem that others have around the world. We have a set of economic challenges we need to manage as growth continues to be fuelled by resources boom, the likes of which we haven't seen since the middle of the 1800s.
So we have challenges to manage. But they are different challenges from nations around the world which are struggling with not enough work for their people. So there needs to be a key focus on jobs. And I believe in focusing on jobs, that needs to be a focus not just for G20 nations talking about jobs for their own people, it needs to be a focus on jobs and employment growth around the world.
It would take a whole other opportunity and address to talk about the events that we are living through in the Middle East and North Africa, and that is not my purpose tonight. But when we reflect on some of those events, for example what has happened in Egypt, of course there are a broad range of causes.
But one of the things that we can clearly identify as a pressing problem is large numbers of young people often with high education levels and with no real prospects of work. This is a problem for individual countries, it is a problem for our global economy, and it should be a key focus of the dialogue at the G20.
To create jobs we need to improve growth. To improve growth we need to deliver economic reform. Australia's got a good economic reform story to tell, a story about focusing on skills, on participation, on continued competition reforms like the structural separation we've succeeded in, in telecommunications, the infrastructure improvement we will bring with the NBN, our drive towards a seamless economy.
So we can tell this story, but we would tell it for its demonstration effect about the benefits of economic reform in spurring growth. And so it will fall to the G20, in my view, to have further dialogue about creating jobs through increased growth, and that requires economic reform and a mix of interventions, including deep structural adjustment and fiscal consolidation for economies represented at the G20.
Whilst domestic economic policies are of course a matter for national governments, we know how interdependent nations are. And so I believe the G20 must continue this economic reform dialogue and the G20 does need to speak confidently and loudly about what its members are doing to ensure growth and to avoid the structural economic fault lines that gave rise to the global financial crisis in the first place and that could give rise to a future crisis if we don't continue to work on improving.
Of course this includes the G20 continuing its focus on improving the efficiency and competitiveness of the global banking system, and I'm very pleased that Australia will be chairing a workshop in the lead-up to the G20 on this new financial landscape. It needs to be a continuing and important part of the G20's work.
Having talked a great deal about the G20's role in driving the reforms that are necessary to secure growth, I do also want to reinforce tonight that through Australian eyes we see a broader role for the G20 than focusing solely on economic matters, as important as those economic matters are. We also believe that the G20 agenda should expand and we should be building on some of the developments that have occurred to date.
Every chair of the G20 puts their own stamp on the agenda. Certainly President Lee did in Seoul by making sure development was on the agenda. And we believe at the forthcoming G20 we can, with that on the agenda as a result of President Lee's work, have the G20 be a catalyst for improving the way in which we go about development.
Of course President Sarkozy has a great deal of ambition for the forthcoming G20 and we believe there is a real role in seeing that ambition harnessed and making sure we drive it to conclusion in a series of areas.
President Sarkozy has certainly flagged job creation as an important part of the G20 which he will chair and lead. But he's also said that he wants to see a focus on food security and we welcome that. We welcome that because of the importance of food security to tackling extreme poverty in our world.
We believe, with our expertise, that we can make a major contribution to this dialogue at the G20. Boosting agricultural productivity is a key part of ensuring food security, and Australia brings a very unique set - unique and deep set of tools to that debate. We are a nation that knows a great deal about productivity in agriculture, and we would be in a position to share that.
We also endorse the need for reform of the Food and Agriculture Organisation as part of this food security discussion. We endorse too the focus of President Sarkozy on stable energy markets, understanding that they're vital to sustaining economic recovery and protecting people against unnecessary rises in the cost of living. So we intend to be a contributor to that discussion at the G20.
We also believe that this G20 can play a role ahead of the 17th Conference of Parties in Durban in December on climate change. We believe in particular the G20 can play a role in developing options on climate change financing for consideration in the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, another important set of discussions to be had at the G20 at the end of this year.
And as a great resource nation, I also believe Australia can make a contribution to an agenda around natural resources security. We have a reputation globally which we fought for hard and which we well deserve as a reliable global supplier. We believe we can make a contribution on the agenda at the G20 on the topic of natural resources security.
So that is a broad agenda to discuss and think through. Of course there will be other elements that come on the agenda. But I did tonight want to touch on those things that are at the forefront of my mind as we work through and prepare for the forthcoming G20.
Can I conclude by saying to you, the G20 has proved its worth. It was vital for stability during the global financial crisis, it was vital as we saw off the worst of the effects of what could have been a global depression.
Now the G20, having come through those days, is a serious strategic opportunity for this country and for the global economy. Seizing that strategic opportunity will require leadership.
That's something I said to President Obama when I recently met him in the United States.
For the G20 to work, leaders must lead. Diplomats, business leaders, academics, commentators, all have their responsibility of course. But national leaders have a special responsibility in a forum for leaders, and that is a responsibility I'm very glad to embrace.
A strong and successful G20 means growth and growth means jobs and jobs mean an opportunity at a good life. I fundamentally believe that. I believe that here, when in our domestic policy I talk about the benefits and dignity of work, I believe it as I attend meetings like the G20.           
And because of that, because growth equals jobs and jobs equal a decent opportunity in life, the G20 matters so much to this government. And that's why Australia will continue to do its part at the G20. We will continue to deliver reform here at home. We will continue to support reform abroad.
Making the G20 a genuine force for future growth is going to require a sustained diplomatic effort and it will be a substantial foreign policy achievement. The Australian Government will lead in many of these discussions and I know that our diplomatic community will do its part.
I also believe that it will take every one of the extraordinary talents that we have here tonight, political and diplomatic, business, academic and media from Australia and around the world, to create and sustain this kind of effort and to achieve the kind of ambition we have for the G20.
We will all need to work together to deliver growth, jobs and better lives for people in this country, people in the G20 and the people of the world. It's a big challenge, but I'm looking forward to working with you on it.
Thank you very much. 



I am deeply honoured to be here today - honoured as a Prime Minister and honoured as an Australian. Our nation has produced few more substantial figures than John Joseph Curtin. Arthur Fadden went so far as to call him one of the greatest Australians ever.
It was said at Curtin's death that:
His memorial stands around us - a free land, a free people. And that is why it is tempting to say that 24 Jarrad Street, Cottesloe should be regarded as a shrine to a great leader. But that is a description that John Curtin would have vehemently rejected. He was an unassuming man, as this modest home shows. For Curtin, his country was his pride, his brother man his cause. And that epitaph speaks as powerfully about the man as his speeches spoke of his vision for our nation. Friends, Paul Keating once said that one of the most important tasksof a leader is to interpret the future to the present, and John Curtin was the master of that skill. He united our country in accepting the short-term sacrifices of war to pave the way for a better future. Curtin spoke plainly to the nation when he said: There can be no going back to the good old days. They were not good days and they have truly become old.
We have to point the way to better days. As a former journalist, he was respected by the Canberra Press Gallery and worked with them to share his un-compromising message with a sometimes reluctant nation - the message that Australia needed fundamental reform in the economy, immigration, education and welfare. Above all, that we had to chart our own direction as an independent nation, looking to new allies and new strategic circumstances. Friends, if Curtin was a great Australian, he was a great West Australian too. That is why in accepting the honour of being a patron for the place, I share that patronage, very fittingly, with the Premier of this State, Mr Barnett. Yes, Curtin was Labor to his core, but his call to shared sacrifice and commitment transcended partisan bonds and resonated in every Australian home and every Australian heart. The presence of Mr Barnett  -  and the fact that this house was magnanimously purchased by two Liberal leaders, John Howard and Richard Court  -  marks how greatly the Curtin legacy is treasured in this State. Curtin was not born here but came here later in life, at age 32, to take up a new job and to marry his beloved Elsie.  He loved his adopted State as his own, and would have taken great delight in its achievements today fulfilling in its confident prosperity his hopes Perhaps because his home and his heart were here in the West he understood in his bones the effort needed to draw this vast country together during the war. Or, as he so eloquently put it: ...during the twilight through which inevitably we have to pass before the dawn can come. John Curtin lived in a time when a Prime Minister could have his home phone number and address listed in the phone book, as he did until his death. A time when a Prime Minister had no security guards and could leave his front door unlocked, so constituents could come and voice their concerns. A very different time indeed. But the lessons that John Curtin taught us, of leadership and integrity and courage in adversity, are just as relevant today. This house is a symbol of John and Elsie Curtin's unwavering commitment to a decent, simple, honest life. A life filled with hardship, and a life lived for others. I hope this place serves as a constant reminder that, despite the lack of worldly trappings, this was home to a just and good man and a very great leader. I congratulate the National Trust of Western Australia and John Curtin's descendents for bringing this project to fruition, presenting an enduring story to a new generation. The Curtin family home is a national treasure by virtue of the family that inhabited it. A simple bungalow that bespeaks the inner grandeur of this man better than any mansion or palace. I proudly declare the refurbished Curtin home officially open and dedicate it to the nation in whose service he lived and for whose future he died. 



Men and women of Australia. Words, adopted from John Curtin, but ever identified with Gough Whitlam. They say so much, to so many.
In a simple phrase which still captures some of the most attractive features of the Whitlam generation:A life of reason, addressing our people as adults;A love of country, expressing a progressive patriotism;A politics of inclusion, that matter of fact assumption that women and their interests matter in our country's politics.And behind all that, a modernising temper. Men and women of Australia; 40 years on there is still something sharply contemporary about that phrase. Gough Whitlam remains one of the most paradoxical and enigmatic living Australians.  I sometimes feel that every Australian's idea of Gough contradicts some other Australian's image of the man. And we can well imagine Gough, like his near-name sake, crying:Do I contradict myself?Very well then I contradict myself,(I am large, I contain multitudes.) Like Walt Whitman, Gough Whitlam will never be contained between his hat and boots. The brawler who threw a glass of water in Hasluck's face. The sophisticate who delighted a visiting Italian President by quoting Dante. The wit who told Francis James you may call me bourgeois, but not decadent. The moderate who moved beyond the old state aid debate. The statesman who turned our face north toward China. The moderniser who changed Labor's organisation and ideas. The pragmatist who swore that only the impotent are pure. A sophisticated and funny man, a fighting Labor leader and Prime Minister, who modernised and moderated and reformed We know Gough in multitudes, and yet we know only one Gough - above all, a restless reformer.   In honouring that spirit of reform, in honouring the multitudes of Gough, tonight I could have chosen dozen of topics as my theme. I could have spoken to you about the way Gough forever changed the way Australia provides health care with Medibank. Or the way he helped create modern Australia by ensuring higher education was for the deserving many not the privileged few  -  an achievement this University embodies. Or of his deep understanding of the aspirations and needs of Australians in our growing suburbs  -  Gough was a Prime Minister who made sewerage a national cause as part of putting the quality of suburban life on the national government's agenda. I could have spoken about these things and so many more lessons we learned from Gough Whitlam. But tonight, standing here in Sydney's West, I want to reflect on what Gough taught us about our political party, our Labor Party. Because in his famous phrase the Party, the platform, the people I believe the restless Whitlam of reform speaks to us still. Between 1966 and 1972, Whitlam did not simply reform the Labor Party's structures, update the Labor Party's platform and gain support in the country at large.Whitlam achieved a vital integration of these elements of reform and in doing so, he did more than make Labor fit to govern again. He fashioned our understanding of ourselves as a party of government. On the one hand he saw that the affairs of the Labor Party could never be an end in themselves.  On the other, he knew that the Labor Party can never be merely a means to parliamentary power. I see the Whitlam period of leadership as one which regenerated the idea of the Labor Party as a vital institution in Australian society. A great force for fairness in our country which must in a very profound and serious way be true to itself, to its best self. Friends, as Gough Whitlam found, reforming our Party, ensuring it could be a party of government and a party of ideas, isn't easy. Whitlam faced scorn and had to fight;to endure the taunts of my own Branch of the Labor Party the newspaper of which carried a banner headline, WHITLAM, with the W and M crossed out so it spelt HITLA;To ensure the parliamentary party played its true role of leadership and reform, rather than being dictated to by the faceless men;To reach out to new constituencies and embrace them in Labor membership and Labor activism.  Here in this great State, following Saturday's election, those who believe in the enduring values of Labor, now face the same challenge that Whitlam faced:to rebuild the Party;to renew the policyto regain the trust of the people of NSW. Friends, if Australian politics has a grand old party, it is ours. Before there was a Parliament of Australia our Party had known great victories and great defeats.  We have done great things. We created the aged pension, brought the Sixth and Seventh Divisions home from the Middle East, dammed the Snowy, modernised the economy, said sorry to our Indigenous peoples. Yet ours is also the Party of 1916 and 1932 and 1955, of 1975 and 1996, and 2011 in New South Wales now joins the roll. Our Party in this State has suffered a shattering, but expected, defeat which must never be forgotten. For Labor in this State, the test is what we do next. Our party has come back from punishing defeats before and it can be done again. Remember how hard it was for those like Gough Whitlam who lived the defeat of 1975 to imagine the victory of 1983. But for NSW Labor coming back from this defeat will require a hard and honest look at some painful and difficult questions. NSW Labor must now confront questions of character and culture as it seeks to rebuild, renew and regain.  This means that NSW Labor must recognise there is no productive purpose in blame shifting and settling scores. Everyone has a theory for what went wrong, and given Labor barely got one in four votes, they might ALL be right. The truth is, when you do as badly as State Labor did last Saturday, there is plenty of blame to share around and plenty of things that went wrong, but the starting point for the analysis of this defeat must be Kristina Kenneally's evocative words in her concession speech when she said of the people of New South Wales: They did not leave us, we left them. Kristina fought a campaign of extraordinary courage and showed remarkable fortitude, and on Saturday night she was right. I congratulate John Robertson on his election as NSW Labor Leader. I would say to him that as he leads the task of rebuilding Labor his most trusted advisers must be the people of NSW themselves. It is with the decent, hard-working people of this State that he must consult. It is their voice he must listen to.  And I believe we can hear their voice loud and clear saying they are sick of the scandals, intolerant of the factionalism, disheartened by the failures to perform. The direct work of rebuilding in this State will necessarily fall on the shoulders of John and his team. But as Prime Minister and Federal Labor Leader, it is my role to define what it means for Labor to be its best self.  To raise my voice and explain the vision of Labor that should govern the Party's response here to this defeat and the Party's response around the nation as we strive to strengthen the Labor Party on following the National Review Report .And I intend to do so tonight.  Strengthening Labor requires us to be crystal clear about our sense of purpose. It is periodically fashionable for there to be outbreaks of existential angst in the Labor Party where the cry goes up we don't know what we stand for'.  Even if Labor isn't raising the cry, media commentators raise it for us with never ending predictions of our imminent demise. Let me say to you tonight, I am deeply intolerant of this bunkum. I am absolutely clear what Labor stands for, what we aspire to achieve, what our culture is and our role as a party of government. The historic mission of our political party is to ensure the fair distribution of opportunity. From the moment of our inception our mission has been to enable the son of the labourer, the daughter of the cleaner, to have access to same the opportunities in life as the son of the millionaire, the daughter of the lawyer. Creating opportunity and enabling social mobility has required different policies in every age. We have moved beyond the days of big government and big welfare, to opportunity through education and inclusion through participation. But at every stage in our history fair access to opportunity has been our historic mission. And we have always acknowledged that access to opportunity comes with obligations to seize that opportunity. To work hard, to set your alarm clocks early, to ensure your children are in school. We are the party of work not welfare, that's why we respect the efforts of the brickie and look with a jaundiced eye at the lifestyle of the socialite. The Labor culture values effort more than status. It prizes the great Australian tradition of informality and rejects the sort of snobbishness and obsequiousness that infect other societies. Labor culture values the strength that comes from working as a team and supports the role of unions in ensuring working people succeed together and that their work is recognised, rewarded and appreciated. This is the best self to which Labor must always be true. This is our continuing culture, born in Barcaldine and Balmain, the culture of mateship and the fair go, hard work and respect, that we have shared from our first days. And we are the party of the future. From our earliest days we have always known that you don't turn back; you can't turn back. There will always be those who say the way ahead for Labor is to go back. They said it to Keating and to Hawke, they said it Whitlam and Chifley and Curtin ... they probably said it to Watson too. We never can. We have always understood that we must be the interpreters of the future to the present and must shape the future so it is one of fairness.  That's why both tackling climate change and rolling out the National Broadband Network, both very modern challenges, are being approached by us in a very Labor way. Take climate change, if we drifted to a future of environmental degradation, it would be those with the least means who suffered the worse consequences. That's why making polluters pay and generously assisting those who need help to adjust is the Labor way. Take the NBN. If we allowed drift, if we didn't seize and shape the future, then the digital divide would exacerbate unfairness as today's poor would become tomorrow's excluded. That's why making sure everyone has access to this new technology is the Labor way. We are a party of opportunity and a party that strives to shape the future. And we are party of ideas and a party of government. To provide quality leadership to our community we have to be in touch with it and understand it. That requires continued outreach and never ending respect. We always, always, always have something to learn from our fellow Australians. And to requires us to reach out and grow our membership. Our members are the future of our Party. We are strengthened by tapping into the boundless idealism and energy of our members and supporters. Our Party must never view itself as some sort of exclusive club. The best people want to be surrounded with the best people.Labor Party members should always be able to challenge us. Being a party of robust debates is a sign of strength, not weakness. There must be a genuine contest of ideas and arguments within the Party. But we must never lose sight of the fact that the only way to turn the ideas that mean so much to us into a reality is to win government. We are a party of government with all the attachment to the political centre and to pragmatic decision making that comes with being a party of government. A party of government and proud of it. We happily leave to the Greens being a party of protest with no tradition of striking the balance required to deliver major reform. Like the economic transformation of the 1980s, these new reforms can only be delivered in the progressive Labor tradition. The differences between Labor and the Greens take many forms but at the bottom of it are two vital ones. The Greens wrongly reject the moral imperative to a strong economy. The Greens have some worthy ideas and many of their supporters sincerely want a better politics in our country. They have good intentions but fail to understand the centrepiece of our big picture - the people Labor strives to represent need work. And the Greens will never embrace Labor's delight at sharing the values of every day Australians, in our cities, suburbs, towns and bush, who day after day do the right thing, leading purposeful and dignified lives, driven by love of family and nation. Meanwhile, the federal conservatives have surrendered themselves to fear mongering and in the carbon debate even deny the power of markets. They have abandoned a 25 year consensus for reform in Australian politics and embraced a populist substance and style quite alien to our political traditions. An extreme leadership powered by an out of touch backbench is now determined on a strategy of opposition for opposition's sake. It is a commonplace to say that that the party of Fraser is unrecognisable today, but in truth, the growing extremism of the Abbott Liberals is such, the party of Howard is disappearing from view.  The government I lead will always be driven by my vision of Labor as our best self. A government for opportunity, for shaping the future, for the many. A government getting on with governing. There are many important recommendations in the National Review Report and we have rightly been called upon to strengthen our party around the nation.At the same time, restoring the true Labor culture to the Branch in New South Wales is vital. Our Party's officials and members have much work to do. But as Prime Minister my higher obligation is to govern well. To rebuild disaster-stricken communities; to share opportunity through the Government's education and participation reforms. To shape the future by pricing carbon, rolling out the NBN, and delivering a better health care system and to see our mission through in Afghanistan. That is what I was elected for and that is what I will do. I've congratulated Barry O'Farrell and the Coalition on their New South Wales election result. We're committed to working cooperatively with the incoming O'Farrell Government to achieve the best results for the people of New South Wales. People rightly expect governments of all persuasions to work together in vital areas such as health, education and infrastructure, to deliver better services and build stronger communities. The people of NSW are demanding progress, not politics. In the same way, if there is one lesson of the Whitlam Government it is this. You can't govern without a strong economy. So having talked about the party and politics, let me talk about jobs and opportunity about the coming Budget. In truth, for many Australians, the election six days ago will matter less than the Budget in six weeks' time.  After difficult years for the economy, we are facing a huge boom  -  the biggest mining boom in 150 years. Since 2004, mining investment has increased five fold. This year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses  -  something that has never happened before. One single project  -  the $43 billion Gorgon gas project  -  is worth about the same as two years of output in agriculture. Or to take a more domestic analogy, five years ago the money earned from exporting 10,000 tonnes of iron ore would buy about 280 dishwashers. Today it would buy you around 1400 dishwashers. On any measure, we are living through a boom and that boom is a good thing. Mine workers earn higher wages, suppliers benefit, superannuation funds earn more and the higher dollar is cutting prices for household goods like clothes, appliances, televisions and computers. The boom is good news for Australia and we should celebrate it. The challenge for the country and for the economy is to manage that boom well  -  to nurture it so that it lasts  -  by investing in productivity while preventing inflationary pressures from running out of control. As we saw in the last years of the Liberal Government, without strict management of the Budget, the economic boom will cause prices and interest rates to spiral out of control. That's because the private sector will employ more people, spend more money, and build more projects  -  and that means unless the government pulls back on spending, we will be chasing the same scarce resources. We all know that strong economies risk inflationary pressures and that's why we have to make the right decisions and not take risks with people's cost of living. In other words, good economic management isn't just good for the economy  -  it's good for the family budget as well. We will keep a tight rein on spending to return the Budget to surplus and keep our economy strong. That's responsible economic management. This budget will be about making the right decisions for the country; the right decisions for families and the right decisions for jobs. I will never risk the economy and people's jobs for the soft political option of putting off hard decisions to next time. We know this because we saw the opposite happen under the Liberal Government.John Howard's Cabinet spent billions of dollars buying votes instead of investing in a more productive economy through things like broadband, health and education. And because the government was spending so much money, without investing in a more productive economy, we saw inflationary pressures spiral out of control. The Liberals ignored 20 warnings from the Reserve Bank about inflation  -  they did nothing and interest rates continued to rise and rise and rise after they had promised they would stay at record lows. I believe a Budget surplus is a key sign of a strong economy. It means we are prepared when the country's luck turns, and we are hit with a crisis like the GFC. And it means we are prepared when individuals' luck turns as well  -  because we have a strong social safety net. So we face a choice. We can take these tough decisions now to bring the budget back to surplus  -  or we can put them off to the nevernever, which will just make these decisions harder and these cuts more severe when the time comes. It's like looking after your health  -  you can see a GP today  -  or you can put it off, and be forced into emergency surgery down the track. A fiscal blowout 10 years down the track would mean radical cuts to key social services  -  like public education, universal health care, and pensions. Around the world, we see Governments facing huge structural deficits which are forced to slash education funding, public services and entitlements. Together, we can take the tough decisions to deliver a Budget surplus in 2012-13 and keep the economy strong. That's what we said we will do and we will do it. Even given the budget pressures which do result from natural disasters at home and overseas. Taking some pain now will ensure that households avoid a lot more pain in the future. There is a strong progressive logic to this approach. When the private sector was in retreat, the government stepped forward to fill the gap  -  it was controversial but it was right. Now that the private sector is charging forward, it's time for the government to pull back on spending. This budget will be about making the right decisions for the country, the right decisions for families and the right decisions for jobs:A Budget to nurture the boom so that it lasts;A Budget to respond to patchwork pressures in the economy;A Budget to make hard decisions now to prevent long-term pain;A Budget to grow jobs and share opportunity a Labor Budget;  Friends, we meet tonight not to honour our past but to address our future, just as Whitlam's Labor was always about the future, not the past. And friends, in New South Wales, our eyes must be on the future. A future in touch with the community. A future of increase party membership and new policy ideas. A future in which I trust John Robertson's team will strive to be known by what it proposes not what it opposes. I am a realist and I know that for NSW Labor the journey of reform ahead will be long and at times painful. But I'm also an optimist: optimistic as I articulate the Labor vision; optimistic as I urge NSW Labor to renew, rebuild and regain.  And above all else, like Gough, I am a complete optimist about the future of our country.  I firmly believe that the best days of our nation are in front of it, not behind it. I understand that the challenges of today and tomorrow can easily leave us yearning for what we remember as a kinder and simpler past age.  But I do not believe in romanticising the past. I do not believe in being afraid of the future.  We best combat fear by taking deliberate steps to shape the future together, a future of opportunity for all. This the Labor way. This is the Australian way. 



Friends, Australia's journey is a story of nation-building against incredible odds, creating a land of fairness and opportunity renowned across the world.
That achievement has not come without a price.
We live in a free country - and in a largely free world - only because the Australian people answered the call when the time of decision came.
From those early colonial engagements in the Sudan and South Africa, through the two most terrible world wars in history and 60 years of peace-keeping and regional conflicts, the Australian defence force has stood the test.
Not only a test of wartime courage.
But a test of character, that has helped define our nation and create the sense of who we are.
We call it the Anzac story  -  and proudly rank it as our nation's most enduring narrative.
It is a big story, with many layers and many interpretations.
It embraces all Australians, new and old. It tells of the defeats as well as the victories.
The times when our nation drew closer together, and the times when we forgot.
It is a big story  -  but it is also a generous story.
A story that is not diminished by the adding of new chapters or the amendment of old mistakes.
That is how we come to see more clearly the role of women in war, for example.
Or the role of those on the home front.
The generosity of the Anzac story has allowed us to look anew at the merit of men like John Simpson and Teddy Sheean.
And it has allowed us to bring overdue thanks to the veterans of Vietnam who were so regrettably treated on their return.
The same spirit brings us here today to acknowledge those from diverse backgrounds whose contribution was obscured by our nation's approach to issues of race and belonging.
Those policies, regrettable as they were, have long since been cast to oblivion.
And now the time has come for restitution and accord.
There are few groups more deserving than Australia's Chinese community.
The first Chinese came here nearly two hundred years ago.
Long before the ships took our young men to Gallipoli, the Chinese had grown deep roots in this land.
When the call of war came, the Chinese stood up to defend this land as their own because it was their own.
Yes, an Anglo-Celtic majority undeniably.
But look through the names on the roll of honour and there are Australians of Chinese heritage. Jewish heritage. Indigenous heritage. Lebanese and Afghan heritage. And so many others.
In fact, two of our very greatest soldiers in the First World War were Billy Sing and Caleb Shang.
Just as one of the most daring and resourceful soldiers of the Second World War was Jack Wong Sue.
And beyond those enlisted, there were many more refused enrolment because of their background, and they served in other capacities here at home such as civil defence or simply offered the silent service of uncomplaining loyalty deep in their hearts, putting aside any sense of dismay or offence.
The ANZAC story is a big story, and it embraces them all.
Friends,
That is why we dedicate this memorial here in Brisbane.
Not to stand outside the ANZAC tradition.
But to place the contribution of the Chinese diaspora community squarely within the ANZAC tradition.
Accepted. Honoured. And valued all the more deeply because while your journey has not always been easy, you never lost faith in the nation.
Today we honour that faith.
Not just in speeches and sentiment, heartfelt as they are.
But in the form of these bursaries, which will tell the story of our Chinese veterans to a new generation and, of course, this beautiful memorial.
I speak for the entire nation when I welcome this memorial and thank Graham Perrett and all who made it possible.
Here in this garden of remembrance, it will tell the Chinese story on great days and on quiet days.
In the bright light of early morning, and in the reflective shadows of a dimming day.
This memorial will invite comment and inquiry.
It will prompt reflection and gratitude from all who admire the simple beauty of Sarah Batchelor's design.
In a few days time, this memorial will be blessed and opened in ceremony and song.
But in truth, it has already been dedicated.
Not by a general or a politician.
But by the sacrifice of those it represents.
Loyal Australians who served their nation, despite its flaws.
Who helped our country become the better place they knew it could be.
And who take their rightful place in the Anzac story, where they have always belonged.
I proudly launch these bursaries, and commend this memorial to the people of Australia. 



Thank you Joe for your kind introduction.
Thank you Gerard and Anne and the Sydney Institute  -  for this unique Sydney opportunity at this unique Sydney venue.
I am delighted to be here tonight among so many of my Sydney friends. 
And Luna Park is a very special place! 
Now, I am just going to deal with this up front. 
Yes, I came in through the front gate tonight. 
Yes, I saw the teeth and the nose. 
I know they say any resemblance to any living person is coincidental and I want to assure you that I'm confident that's true.
While we gather in a place associated with fun, we are here for a serious purpose.
We are here to discuss the actions we need to take today to shape a better and fairer future.
Debating and determining the best steps forward is never easy.
And today's highly contested and partisan political debate and increasingly complex communications context creates special challenges for reforming leadership governing in the centre.
This means the Sydney Institute's empirical style and invitation to a community of reason has never been more important.
So the chance to discuss the issues and ideas that will influence not the next poll or the next panel show but the next decade is a very welcome one indeed.
So let's talk tonight about the long view.
The long term story of the Australian economy is a story of strength.   A story of twenty years of continuous growth.
Growth which has been nurtured by the policy reforms of successive Australian governments, from internationalisation to domestic competition to tax.
Wealth which has been created by the hard work of millions of Australian people, in our cities and suburbs, towns and bush.
And our economy is not just creating wealth, it is creating work as well. 
More than thirty thousand jobs last month, more than 750 000 jobs since Labor took office. 
Today, more Australians are working than ever before, in a period when advanced economies around the world have shed millions of jobs at a terrible human cost. 
This growth in wealth and work has been so continuous in the last twenty years that we could easily lose sight of how different this is from the economy we have been used to in the past.
These are remarkable days.
Over coming years we will live through an historic boom in mining investment, one which is genuinely comparable to the Gold Rush of the 1850s.
The boom is a good thing for Australia now and it is a great opportunity for Australia's future. 
This great opportunity is also a complex economic policy challenge. 
Good decisions now can nurture the boom so that it lasts, while making the most of the boom for our future. 
The Government invested in jobs in the downturn and it was absolutely the right call.  We see the economic and social benefits of this every day.
But as the Treasurer wrote on the weekend:
If we are going to be Keynesians in the downturn, we have to be Keynesians on the way up again.
That means hard decisions lie ahead. 
We are entering a period of record fiscal consolidation.
We will keep a tight rein on spending to return the Budget to surplus.
Fiscal responsibility is something we have long been committed to.   With every spending decision we make, I look from every angle, I hold these up to the light, I ask every question. 
We have put in place cost offsets worth around $85 billion across three years to meet the cost of key reforms.
We have put in place a strict spending cap, which will limit average annual real spending growth to around  of one per cent from 2010-11 to 2013-14.
This has been Labor's approach in four years in office and it is our approach today.
Some have described our commitment to achieving a surplus as a political commitment.
Of course, this is true  -  my commitment to a surplus in 2012-13 was a promise made and it will be honoured.
But this political commitment was given and will be honoured because that's what prudent economic management now demands.
When the private sector was in retreat, the government stepped forward to fill the gap and over coming years as the private sector recovers strongly, it is the right time for the government to step back.
If government doesn't step back when the private sector employs more people, spends more money and builds more projects, we will be chasing the same scarce resources, driving up prices and adding to the inflationary pressures arising from the investment boom.
The time for government to step back is in this Budget.
If we defer these decisions, as the Howard Government did in the middle years of the last decade, we will make the inflationary pressures in our economy worse for millions of Australians.
Our Budget strategy reflects our best assessment of the course of the economy over the coming years.
And by not adding to inflationary pressures it reflects the best way of helping Australians manage cost of living pressures.
So we will be making hard decisions in this Budget: to prevent greater pain in the long term.
Friends, we have a fiscal framework aimed at making the boom last and not adding to the boom's inflationary pressures. 
And we have a policy framework aimed at ensuring all Australians benefit from the opportunities created by the boom.
To appreciate this policy framework, I think it is necessary to appreciate some of the contradictory elements of the economic context.
What I think of as patchwork pressures in our economy, where some parts of the economy are strained by growth while others risk being left behind.
Because mining is especially profitable at the moment, it rewards investors and pays workers well.
Investment, equipment and workers are drawn from other parts of the economy, like a magnet dragging iron filings towards it.
In mining areas, the boom has lifted housing costs, it forces non-miners to raise wages to keep workers and it puts pressure on infrastructure like roads, ports and rail.
The record high for the Australian dollar lowers prices for imports  -  which is good for consumers  -  but it does make it harder for our exporters to compete.
Mining's hunger for equipment and workers can also raise costs and make it harder for these non-mining sectors to compete, compounding the high dollar's effects.
All these pressures require careful management.
So to manage these pressures we have sought to bolster productivity and balance growth:
By improving vital economic infrastructure  -  roads, rail and ports so we better get goods to market and people to work  -  with the NBN providing the most vital infrastructure of the future. 
Connecting regional Australia  -  regions of growth and regions needing more growth  -  to the economic capitals of this country, and the world.
By cutting company tax cut and increasing tax breaks for small businesses, all funded by the mineral resource rent tax, so the most profitable miners increase economic reward and opportunity in other parts of the economy.
By revolutionising our approach to human capital  -  the most important asset for dealing with structural economic shifts  -  with deep integrated reform policies to improve the quality of education in schools today.
By record skills investments and growth and reform of universities.
By developing a new, detailed regional agenda so that we understand each part of the nation and engage its local leadership.
By reviewing the GST carve up in order to marry up the fair go principle which informs federal financial relations with the realities of today's economy and today's reform needs.
By reforming our skilled migration 457 visas to end the rorts and get skilled labour to employers who need it.
Friends, these are economic reforms and responses to deal with the patchwork economy.
But patchwork pressures are not only felt by industry or something to be distilled in a set of statistics.
These patchwork pressures have a human face as well.
I see these faces and hear their voices in my travels across our country.
In Kwinana and in our North West.
Kwinana is a suburban Perth community where unemployment is twice the national average and one in six adults is on income support.
Yet when I last visited the Gorgon project at Karratha in the state's north-west I met a worker on site who lives one block away from my home in Melbourne. 
Gavan works on the project on a fly-in, fly-out basis.  He's a good bloke and a great example of the boom at its best.  A skilled man doing rewarding work.
And of course a young unemployed person in Kwinana is not going to directly compete with Gavan for work.   But if we don't give that young person an entry level job he'll never achieve what Gavan has.
In Cairns and Gladstone.
Cairns in Queensland has twice as many university graduates as Kwinana yet similar unemployment and reliance on income support.  I have been there and met young kids struggling to get a chance or an apprenticeship.
At the same time, Gladstone's employers will tell anyone who will listen they need more skilled labour.
And in New South Wales.
Where large areas of this city's outer west havea double digit unemployment rate, higher than Kwinana or Cairns, nearly two and half times the national average. 
Unemployment levels which approach those the country as a whole endured in the 1982 and 1991 recessions.
These are places where I want opportunity to grow.
And in these and many other places I meet people  -  the people I am thinking of as we develop our policies.
The Salisbury teenager who has drifted from education. 
He could get a job if he got a trade. 
The Blacktown twenty-something who left school at 16.  
He needs to get his foundation skills right  -  to be able to read, write and do maths.
The girl in Woodridge, south of Brisbane, who didn't fit in at school, now she's alone with a baby of her own.
She needs more education and so will her child.
The mature aged man in Dandenong who lost his job and lost his way.
He can't lift and carry like he's twenty but it doesn't mean he never wants to work again.
These are the human faces of the patchwork economy.
The faces of Australians who can work.
I believe the test of our approach is what we see in those Australian faces, what we say to those Australian people.
The old way saw a victim, the old way offered an excuse.
Some today see a problem,  they offer blame.
I see a person, a person who can work.
I offer only opportunity, I ask only responsibility in return.
Give a chance, take a chance. 
It's the only way it can work.
Tonight, I want to explain the crucial links between these Australians, our economic needs and the Government's participation agenda.
Of course the participation challenge did not begin this year and neither did our Government's actions to increase participation.
Incentive to work and opportunity to work more draw together many of the Government's policy reforms. 
This is our record.
Extensive welfare reform. 
Income management, improving school enrolment and attendance, tighter eligibility and smarter employment services for adults with some disability.  Restructured employment services, investing more resources in those with more complex problems. 
Ensuring income support is not a place where people are left and forgotten.
Paid Parental Leave, an increase in the Child Care Rebate and more frequent payment of the rebate as well.
Along with Child Care Benefit, this means that low income families have around 80 per cent of their child care costs met by the Australian Government.
Pledging to increase family support by thousands of dollars a year to encourage teenagers to remain in school or TAFE. 
Our Learn or Earn compact, guaranteeing every young Australian under 25 a training place if they are not already in full-time education or work.
Tax cuts for low to middle income earners, including an increase in the effective tax free threshold for low income earners from $11,000 to $16,000.
Hundreds of thousands of training places, for Australians in and out of the work force.
Under our Language, Literacy and Numeracy Program and the Workplace English Language and Literacy Program we're offering 140,000 places in adult literacy and foundation skills programs for existing workers and job seekers.
The cap on publicly funded university places will be lifted in 2012, stimulating further growth in professional skills and qualifications.
While our record is strong, I know there is more we can do to build participation and make work pay.
Precisely because participation is so high and unemployment is so low, I see a new opportunity to break persistent cycles of social and economic exclusion. 
Our economy needs more workers, many Australians need work and our Labor values impel us to put the two together.
Welfare reform and workforce participation is an area where the facts of our economy, the demands of our society, new progressive policy and core Labor values can truly come together in a virtuous circle.
Friends, believing in the benefits and dignity of work is a deep Labor conviction.
Curtin's creed as the Battle of the Coral Sea raged was simple:
Men are fighting for Australia today. Those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.
Chifley's Light on the Hill took the same straightforward view of Labor's task.  Not as
... putting an extra sixpence into somebody's pocket ...
But to
... give to some father or mother a greater feeling of security for their children ... a feeling that if a depression comes there will be work.
The party I lead is  -  politically, spiritually, even literally  -  the party of work. 
The party of work not welfare, the party of opportunity not exclusion, the party of responsibility not idleness.
That central purpose  -  work for all who seek it  -  stands, after all the transformation in our understanding of the economy in the decades since.  And it stands for the future.
Throughout our history many Governments have faced economic circumstances which forced them to question long-held personal convictions or cherished party platforms.
In this sense, I am fortunate: the boom, the participation challenge and the opportunity to cut long term welfare dependency mean that some of my own firmest political convictions are in fact the most urgent practical necessities of our day.
The values I learnt in my parents' home  -  hard work, a fair go through education, respect  -  find themselves at the centre of Australia's economic debate, in the challenge to cut long term welfare dependency.
As Prime Minister, I see a real chance, driven by the economy, to achieve goals I have always held dear.
I want young people to have a fair go, to have an opportunity in life, never to be held back by economic circumstance or social expectation.
I've worked to ensure this in education. 
Our reforms have been founded on high expectations.
That all children can learn.  
That you don't settle for failure or disguise failure with low expectations. That there is no one who cannot benefit from new skills.
I have fought the prejudice that said some kids can't learn, that they are better off at the back of the room doing busy work and being passed on up to the next grade.  That fight goes on.
And I am extending this campaign of high expectations to welfare as well. 
Our reforms are founded on high expectations.
That everyone who can work should work.
I will fight the prejudice that says some people's lot is drawing a fortnightly cheque, that we shouldn't expect anything more of them and it doesn't matter if they are forgotten by policy makers and the society around them.
The social and economic reality of our country is that there are people who can work who do not.
We know there are 230,000 people who have been unemployed for more than two years.
That there are 250,000 families where no adult has been working for at least one year.
And that the youth unemployment rate is still double the overall unemployment rate.
The Government's approach to this is practical and realistic.
We know that not everyone on a welfare benefit can work.
Some bear disabilities or caring responsibilities that mean paid work is impossible. These Australians deserve our greatest respect and ongoing support.
Others on a benefit can work but not right away. Some need practical help to overcome ill-health or meet family responsibilities. 
Some should take up obligations which may not involve working now but will prepare them for work in the future.
Things as simple as learning to read and write at a higher level.
The right mix of incentives is vital to all.
Relying on welfare to provide opportunity is no longer the right focus for our times. 
Our strong economy gives us a real chance to create opportunity from the cradle to the grave.
The problem of long term welfare dependency has been long discussed but the new realities of our economy create quite a different policy environment from the recovery of the 1990s or the growth of the last decade.
Because we have unprecedented demand for skills and labour, this is possible.
Because the people I am talking about have been bypassed by the economy for so long, this is difficult.
I want to help individuals, families and communities whose worklessness has seen them excluded from society and the economy through decades of economic growth.
Understand  -  the people I am talking about include people whose lives present hard cases.
There will always be an argument to focus on someone else.
But I am firmly convinced that the economic and social policy arguments for getting these people into work are overwhelming.
People whose problems keep them out of work ... and whose problems are made worse by the lack of work.
All of them people who will be better off with work.
In today's economy, inclusion through participation must be our central focus. 
It's not right to leave people on welfare and deny them access to opportunity.
And every Australian should pull his or her own weight.
It's not fair for taxpayers to pay for someone who can support themselves.
There is much the Government has already done.
The Budget will provide another way to extend greater opportunity and to put more responsibility into the system.
And beyond this Budget there will be more to do on the formidable participation policy challenge.  
For instance at the tax forum later this year, the Government will put improving work incentives in our tax and transfer system at the centre of discussion and debate.
Our participation reforms will not only nurture the boom, they will ensure the opportunities the boom creates are felt across our country and for years to come.
We can genuinely entrench a new culture of work and opportunity in families and communities who have been denied this for so long. 
I am determined not to let this chance go by.
Friends, for decades the Sydney Institute has offered a forum for reason and reflection in our national debate. 
This was valuable in the 1980s, I must say it is invaluable now.
Fair comment in a democracy serves our people well. 
But I'm increasingly sceptical of exaggerated and over determined claims about politics and public opinion from any quarter.
Remember when the NBN was going to break us? 
Or the flood levy?  Or health reforms? 
Each of these overhyped claims, each overcome by perseverance and patience.
As with governing progress, so with public opinion: the measure is in the years.
At the same time, in the face of this culture of confrontation, I will not accept a false choice between listening to our people and persisting with reform.
I do have a responsibility to listen carefully to Australians.
Because behind the wall of sound made by the commentators I know Australians do have genuine concerns about politics and government. 
And they always deserve a respectful ear.
But I will not go down a populist path, pursuing short term politics, lacking serious policy convictions, whipping up negativity, following the opinion cycle.
The Australian military scholar David Kilcullen has reminded us that Bernard Fall wrote fifty years ago:
A government that is losing to an insurgency is not being outfought it is being outgoverned.
I find the analogy with modern politics compelling.
Any government which tries to fight an opposition on its own ground of short term media pandering is doomed to policy and political failure.
My approach is quite the contrary.
Consensus and discipline, method and delivery, difficult decisions to meet the big challenges, my honest best judgement and leadership in the national interest.
As an optimist and an activist, I keep my faith that good policy and good politics converge in the long term.
The governing task for 2011 is clear.
To walk the reform road.
To govern well for the long term and to nurture the boom.
To take decisions in the national interest and to deliver for all Australians.
Ensuring a strong economy  -  and opportunity for all. 



Thank you, Chairman Saito, for your kind introduction.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentleman,
I am pleased to be back in Japan for my second visit in just ten months as Australia's Prime Minister.
I return not only to underline the enduring peace and friendship between our two countries and their peoples.
                                           [Article 1 - Basic Treaty of Friendship and Co-operation, 1976]
But to show Australia's full support and confidence at this difficult time.
Yesterday I had the very great honour of an audience with the Emperor and Empress of Japan.
I expressed to Their Majesties how deeply I have been touched by the courage, dignity and unity of the Japanese people.
And I assured Their Majesties that Australia would continue to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Japan and work tirelessly to assist in its recovery.
Japan is Australia's closest partner in Asia.
But it is more than that.
Japan is also a friend  -  a country and people for whom Australians today feel genuine affection and warmth.
Just as Japan and its people were there for Australia as we faced our floods and cyclone, Australia is with you now.
Not simply because Japan is such an important trade and strategic partner.
But because our countries have built up such close and trusted linkages that we can genuinely call each other friends. 
And friends help each other.
That is why Australia moved quickly to help our friends in Japan when the tsunami struck.
The Australian Government donated 10 million Australian dollars to the Japan Red Cross and Pacific Disaster Appeal. 
And this was matched by members of the Australian public and many major Australian corporations, who collectively donated millions more to charities for emergency relief.
The day after the tsunami we were preparing a team of 72 search and rescue specialists, including search dogs.
Within days, this team travelled to Minami Sanriku, where the damage was at its worst, and where I will travel tomorrow to see for myself the devastation they encountered.
There, this team worked side-by-side with Japanese colleagues in the hard task of looking for survivors, or providing some closure for families through locating victims.
The team included specialists who just weeks before had worked alongside Japan's own Search and Rescue team in the rubble of Christchurch, New Zealand.
These specialists came to Japan on board an Australian C-17 aircraft, which subsequently flew round-the-clock missions in support of the recovery effort. 
On 22 March, Australia committed two further C-17 aircraft to support Japan, diverting one of them from the Middle East.
These two aircraft delivered vital pumping equipment from Western Australia to help stabilise the Fukushima nuclear power plant.
So we had Australian aircraft, working with the Japan Self Defence Force, ferrying Japanese supplies, while using US bases in Japan and with the support of the United States.
We talk a lot about trilateral Australia-Japan-US cooperation.
But this was the talk put into action, reflecting the close and enduring relations between our three nations.
Friends, as Prime Minister, I am committed to this most important security relationship.
Japan and Australia are close strategic partners.
We are lively Asia-Pacific democracies committed to the universal values of freedom, human rights and the rule of law.
As active members of the United Nations we share a commitment to the peace, stability and prosperity that derives from a rules-based global order, in our region and across the world.
 We face a number of shared security challenges, which we work closely together to address, such as our work to counter terrorism in South East Asia and against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, not least the DPRK nuclear problem.
Australia's relationship with Japan on security and defence issues has grown to become one of the closest and most important that either of us has.
The historic 2007 Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation provides the foundation for our security cooperation.
Under this Joint Declaration, our Foreign Affairs and Defence ministers meet regularly for 2+2' meetings.
This is the only 2+2' meeting that Japan has with any country other than the United States, and one of only two 2+2' meetings that Australia has in Asia.
The Joint Declaration has given rise to an increasingly active bilateral security agenda.
We have stepped up our participation in joint military exercises with one another.
And over the past year, Australia and Japan have worked closely together on peace-building activities in East Timor, humanitarian assistance in Pakistan, and counter-piracy surveillance in the Gulf of Aden.
Australia is keen to see new opportunities for co-operation.
The implementation of the Australia-Japan Acquisition and Cross Servicing Agreement, now endorsed by the Japanese Diet and the Australian Parliament, will enable mutual logistical support between our respective defence forces.
This Agreement marks the beginning of a new phase of more frequent, practical and ambitious bilateral security cooperation.
It will enable the Australian Defence Force and the Japan Self Defence Force to cooperate more quickly and easily with one another, such as by providing transport, supplies or support while on disaster-recovery or stabilisation operations.
Australia is only the second country after the United States to reach a treaty-level agreement of this type with Japan, and it reflects the importance of defence cooperation for both countries.
We are also working towards concluding an Information Security Agreement, which will help us share and protect classified information, so improving our inter-operability.
In our discussions yesterday, Prime Minister Kan and I agreed that, by the next 2+2' meeting, our Defence Ministers will develop a new vision for defence cooperation between our two countries.
This will be designed to continue the evolution of Australia and Japan as partners in defence and security.
We also agreed to negotiate a new framework agreement on bilateral disaster relief cooperation.
This will improve our mechanisms for bilateral cooperation in the event of another crisis or emergency, either in Japan or Australia or in the region more broadly.
Australia and Japan's economic relationship remains a fundamental plank of our partnership.
Japan is one of Australia's most important economic partners.
The complementary nature of our economies is long-standing, recognised as long ago as 1957, when our bilateral Commerce Agreement was signed.
For decades now, Australia has been a safe, reliable and price-competitive supplier of the energy and raw materials Japan has needed to drive growth and exports.
Japan has also contributed enormously to Australia's own prosperity over the past half-century, both through exports of its manufactures and through its extensive investments in Australia.
Those complementarities are not diminishing.
Indeed, yesterday I also discussed with Prime Minister Kan our shared interests in clean and renewable energy. We agreed to explore closer cooperation in this area.
Our economic relationship is also expanding into new areas such as financial services, infrastructure and education. 
But as the world economic order changes, we need to move quickly if we are to embrace these new opportunities.
We must remain committed to the principles of free trade, which are the very foundation on which our prosperity rests.
That is why I was so encouraged by the Kan Government's commitment to economic and trade policy reforms, as expressed in the Basic Policy on economic partnership agreements, issued last November.
In our discussions yesterday, Prime Minister Kan and I renewed our commitment to concluding a high-quality, comprehensive Free Trade Agreement between Australia and Japan.
Such a Free Trade Agreement would contribute to Japan's economic growth and could help pave the way for a new wave of Japanese integration into the regional and global economies.
A Free Trade Agreement would make us more prosperous.
It would make us more resilient to future shocks.
And it would bring our economies and our people closer together.
Australia understands that Japan's focus right now is on managing the aftermath of the earthquake and tsunami and on the nuclear disaster.
But, I also welcomed Prime Minister Kan's statement yesterday that negotiations on the Free Trade Agreement should resume at the earliest possible date.
Beyond our bilateral ties, Australia and Japan share common views on global challenges.
At the United Nations, we are close partners.
Australia has been a long-standing supporter of Japan's representation across the United Nations system.
We were firm supporters of Japan's election as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Councilin 2008.
We have supported Japanese efforts to reform the Security Council to improve its effectiveness and legitimacy.
And Australia remains one of the most resolute supporters of Japan's rightful aspirations for permanent membership of the Security Council.
On nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, Australia and Japan are jointly leading efforts in support of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, most notably through the work of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
This body, chaired by former Australian Foreign Minister Evans and former Japanese Foreign Minister Kawaguchi, produced a report that revived debate ahead of the May 2010 NPT Review Conference.
This body of work has now evolved into joint Australia-Japan leadership of a cross-regional ministerial grouping that continues to provide impetus to nuclear arms control and non-proliferation.
Closer to home, Australia and Japan share the same vision for a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific.
The Asia Pacific Region is the most economically dynamic in the world.
It is home to the world's three largest economies and accounts for much of global trade and global growth.
The coming decades in the Asia-Pacific will hold for us great opportunities but also great challenges.
Australia approaches these opportunities and challenges with optimism.
Australia has a strong, flexible and open economy, well-positioned to benefit from the dramatic growth rates being seen across Asia.
We have good relations across Asia, an alliance relationship with the United States, and are contributing to the building of a regional community and norms.
We do not take continued regional stability and prosperity for granted.  But we are optimistic in outlook.
Trade  -  across the Pacific and within Asia  -  has driven the region's growth.
So too has foreign investment.
Domestically, Australia and Japan both face challenges in maintaining our competitiveness in an economically dynamic region.
To keep driving this growth we need to continue to bring down barriers to trade and investment, lowering tariffs and tackling behind the border barriers.
And, at home, Australia's own competitiveness in this most competitive of regions must be assured through ongoing and ambitious economic reforms to keep our economy flexible and to raise our productivity.
As one of very few countries in the world to avoid recession during the global financial crisis, the Australian government well understands the need for continuous  reform if economies are to grow and remain competitive.
The resilience of the Australian economy through the crisis was due to 25 years of challenging economic reforms.
But we cannot afford to rest on our laurels.
To ensure our future competitiveness, further reform is necessary.
My Government has now put in place the major building blocks of a productivity agenda based on stability, flexibility and capability to position Australia for the future.
The Kan Government, I know, also has an ambitious economic agenda for Japan, and we welcome it.
Friends, our shared commitment to economic reform shapes our expectations for the wider region and the world.
Through the G20, Australia and Japan are working together to resist protectionism, support balanced and sustainable global growth, and strengthen the integrity of the global financial system.
These measures will have obvious flow-on benefits to the region.
In APEC, we are working together to reduce the barriers to trade, including behind-the-border' barriers.
In doing so, we build on more than 30 years of shared effort to create an economic community in the Asia-Pacific.
It was Japan and Australia who in 1980 convened the meeting which led to the creation of the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council.
Nine years later, we were founding members of APEC.
We are also both strong supporters of a successful conclusion to the Doha Round of trade talks this year. 
A successful Doha Round would be an important boost to the world trading system.
One way or other Doha should conclude in 2011.
Australia is working with Japan to try and get this done.
Friends, regional prosperity cannot be assured through a strong economic framework alone.
It also requires a robust security environment.
As staunch US allies, Japan and Australia are as one in welcoming a continued forward presence of the United States in the Asia-Pacific as an important contribution to regional stability.
Stability and security depend vitally on the integral roleof the United States and on developing the right regional architecture to encourage cooperation on security challenges and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Working bilaterally and trilaterally, including through the Trilateral Strategic Dialogue, we are enhancing our own security and contribute more broadly to the stability of the Asia-Pacific region.
With Japan, we are also helping build and shape regional norms and institutions to ensure the long-term peace, stability and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region.
Australia and Japan are both founding members of the East Asia Summit.
We both welcomed its recent expansion to include the United States and Russia.
With the EAS, we now have an institution with the right membership and mandate to address the full range of security, political and economic issues facing the region.
The Asia-Pacific is a region in strategic flux, where changing power relativities are playing out against the backdrop of historical mistrust and conflict.
It is vital that we build a robust architecture of security and cooperation to guarantee the peace and prosperity of our people in the years ahead.
Yesterday I agreed with Prime Minister Kan to work closely together  -  and with the other members of the East Asia Summit - in managing regional challenges and promoting an inclusive community.
Australia believes it will be important to develop a practical security cooperation agenda in the East Asia Summit, including on issues like maritime security.
We would also like to see more direct links between the EAS and the ASEAN + 8 Defence Ministers meetings.
And a second Finance Ministers meeting under the EAS umbrella will be important, as will continued cooperation in education, including helping student mobility across the region.
Ladies and gentlemen,
We know that peace and prosperity cannot be taken for granted.
They are hard won and easily lost.
Today we reflect with gratitude on the history of reconciliation and understanding that has united our two nations and our two peoples.
We have achieved great things together that once would have seemed unimaginable.
We achieved them because we sought the best in each other, transcending the barriers of distance, culture and history to create something truly remarkable.
In the entry foyer of the Australian Embassy in Tokyo, there are tens of thousands of paper cranes.
These were folded by Japanese school students who have visited Australia on school trips and who wanted to show solidarity with those in Australia who have suffered in the floods.
Likewise, when the earthquake and tsunami struck, Australian students began making paper cranes to show their solidarity with Japan.
They didn't need to be told.
They just starting folding them.
I'm not sure our students are as fast as Japanese students at origami.
But I know they the folded those paper cranes with the deepest and most heartfelt feelings of friendship and empathy.
All Australians share these feelings.
We have the utmost confidence that Japan will recover from this terrible tragedy, scarred but stronger.
And from these difficult days, our remarkable friendship will grow stronger too.
It is a friendship we prize like few others.
A friendship of equals.
A partnership of peoples. 
Strong today.
And even stronger in the future.
A future of security, stability and prosperity that we willbuild together. 



Ladies and Gentlemen
I want to begin by thanking you all for being present tonight.
Each of you who has chosen to be here represents a point of light.
You embody a message of reassurance and hope.
Of fellow-feeling and shared concern.
Tonight I bring the goodwill and best wishes of the entire Australian community.
United as one in support of a great nation and a great people.
Tonight is a moment for reflection.
An occasion that makes us realise how the worst of times can bring out the best in people.
That is something we have seen throughout the Asia-Pacific region these past months, in flood-stricken Australia or earthquake-devastated Christchurch, and then, when disaster struck Japan.
To say that the earthquake and tsunami shocked the world is an understatement.
The scale of damage and loss is still being calculated.
But Prime Minister Kan's assessment that this is the worst crisis facing Japan in 65 years is surely correct.
The test of any nation is not how much it suffers, but how it responds in adversity.
Despite the enormity of this heartbreaking event, the Japanese people have shown amazing grace and resilience.
The Japanese are a people of stoicism and strength.
And in Australia, we watched with admiration as Japanese society drew together in an embrace of compassion and concern the very same concern that Japan showed Australia after the Victorian bushfires and the Queensland floods.
Tonight, we return the favour.
We say again to our Japanese friends, as we said on the day the earthquake and tsunami struck, that you will not face this crisis alone.
And you have not.
Australia was among the first to come to Japan's aid.
Our relationship transcends trade and security ties. 
We have forged lasting human bonds through tourism, migration, sister-city relationships, education exchange and a shared vision for peace and prosperity in our region.  
That is why within 48 hours of the quake, the Australian Government deployed a team of more than 70 search and rescue specialists including search dogs, an officer from my own department, Emergency Management Australia workers and diplomats from our Embassy in Tokyo, to the town that became the face of this disaster, Minami Sanriku, a town that virtually ceased to exist after the tsunami.
The Australian Government also sent a team of Defence personnel and an Australian C-17 aircraft which flew round-the-clock missions in cooperation with the Japanese and US governments.
Two more C-17 aircraft delivered vital pumping equipment to the Fukushima nuclear power plant to bolster efforts to stabilise the reactors.
This meant that at one point, all of Australia's active military heavy airlift capacity was devoted to assisting Japan with the disaster.
These Aussies did an amazing job under the worst of circumstances.
In a parting gesture of friendship, the Aussie Urban Search and Rescue team left their equipment behind to aid in the continued recovery effort.
The Australian Government has also directly contributed humanitarian assistance to Japan, donating 10 million Australian dollars to the Japan Red Cross and Pacific Disaster Appeal and Australians, individuals and companies are sending support to their Japanese friends as well.
The Australian embassy staff in Japan, including those who flew in from around the world to assist have done the most outstanding job in the most demanding and traumatic of circumstances.   I want to acknowledge them and their work tonight and to pay particular tribute to our Ambassador Murray McLean. 
Of course, the Australian community in Japan has also been a source of great support to their new friends and neighbours.
I specifically want to thank Meat and Livestock Australia, represented here by Melanie Brock, for all their work in providing food supplies to displaced people, including to Minami Sanriku, which I will visit tomorrow.
They are also providing the Aussie beef for this evening. 
I thank them and the many other Australians here for being great ambassadors for our country. 
The mutual affinity between Australians and Japanese is at the core of our ties. 
And that means we have a very natural and clear desire to help each other in times of trouble.
This is what I call genuine goodwill and friendship.
Friendship for the tough times as well as the good times.
Friendship that brings us together across cultures and across traditions.
Friends, one of the ways in which Australia and Japan have developed common bonds is through the education links between our two countries. 
I am very pleased to be able to say that Japanese schools have more student exchanges with schools in Australia than with any other country.
Around 72,000 Japanese students visit Australia every year as part of their studies.
And Japanese remains the most widely taught language in Australian schools.
So I can think of no better area than education in which Australia can make a further small but heartfelt contribution to Japan's recovery.
That's why tonight I am pleased to announce a new program to help university students, academics and professionals from those areas most affected by this terrible disaster to spend some time in Australia.
The program will help fund travel, accommodation and tuition costs associated with living and studying in our country.
In doing so, we hope to play a small part in the rebuilding of lives and communities.
Australia also has a long tradition of student exchange with Japan.
Therefore the program will also encourage Australians to come here and study alongside Japanese colleagues from communities hit by the earthquake and tsunami to share the resilience of the Japanese people and to see this beautiful land for themselves.
I am also pleased to announce tonight an ongoing program of 10 Endeavour Scholarships each year for Japan.
These scholarships will support study, research or professional development.
And in their first year, we hope to target these scholarships in particular to students and institutions in earthquake and tsunami-hit areas.
Finally, many Australians who first came to Japan as school students later return to teach English under the Japan Exchange and Teaching or JET program.
Such exchanges help build strong and enduring bonds of friendship and collaboration.
That is why I am pleased to announce tonight that the Australian Government is commencing a feasibility study on a similar exchange so young people from Japan can live in Australia and teach Japanese in our schools:
Another way to demonstrate friendship and understanding.
Friends, the Japanese people have amazed the world with their dignity and courage.
Events like this remind them that they will not face the journey to recovery alone.
I know the generosity displayed here tonight  -  by Australians, Japanese and other friends alike  -  will underscore the message even more firmly.
Through our donations.
Through our thoughts and prayers.
Through our shared resolve.
Australia stands with you:
True partners.
True friends.
Determined to help you recover.
Determined to help you rebuild.
Confident that Japan will rise again  -  even stronger than before.
Thank you.  



It is a great pleasure to be back in Seoul.
I last visited last November to participate in the G20 Leaders' Summit.
The success of that Summit was due in large part to the energetic and creative chairing by the host nation and especially the active role played by His Excellency President Lee Myung-bak.
Looking ahead, I believe historians of your country will see Korea's successful hosting of the G20  -  the world's leading economic forum  -  as a key to understanding Korea's true emergence on to the world stage.
History will record three great steps, the Seoul Olympics in 1988, Korea's admission to the OECD in 1996, and the G20 summit in 2010, three great steps which marked the path to Korea's coming-of-age as a true middle power.
While these events stretch over 25 years, the Australia-Korea relationship stretches back much, much further over 120 years.
Our first steps together were taken in the late 1880s by missionaries from Australia who landed in Busan.
Then we truly walked together in the trenches of the Korean War.
Together, Australians and Koreans gave their lives to defend the young Republic against North Korean aggression. 
More than 17,000 Australian troops served here during the Korean War, with 340 Australians sacrificing their lives.  Of those, 281 remain, resting in Korean soil, at the UN Memorial Cemetery in Busan. 
Tomorrow, I will honour their memory and their sacrifice, at a memorial service commemorating the 60th Anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong.
A recent Australian documentary describes it as a forgotten battle of a forgotten war.
Fought in the days following 23 April 1951, the Battle of Kapyong saw a small force of Australians and other allies defeat an attack by a Chinese division numbering some 10,000 soldiers.
The outcome of this battle helped stop the Chinese spring offensive and proved crucial in preventing a Chinese breakthrough towards Seoul.
The Battle of Kapyong was but one of many fierce engagements in which Australia's soldiers, sailors and airmen fought during the war.
So on Monday, I will attend the ANZAC Day Dawn Service  -  Australia's memorial day  -  at your National War Memorial.
I will also visit the Korean National Cemetery, to commemorate and honour all those Koreans who made the ultimate sacrifice for their country.
And following the Korean War, we walked together still: as natural partners in peace.
Australian raw materials and natural resources helped re-build Korea and drive Korea's industrialisation.
We were partners in one of the most remarkable economic success stories of modern times  -  Korea's growth.
A story which has seen Korea transformed from an aid recipient to an aid donor within a single generation.
Our militaries have walked together and our businesses have walked together.
Today, it is the strong and growing people-to-people ties that define our partnership every day Australians and Koreans walking together still.
35,000 Koreans choose to come to Australia each year to study.
More Koreans come to Australia as young working-holiday makers than from nearly any other country.
There are around 140,000 people of Korean heritage who have chosen to make Australia home, and they make a valuable contribution to our nation.
These steps we take together  -  in study, on visits, through work and by living in each other's countries  -  these steps together are the every day reality of the partnership we share.
Our economic partnership is also tremendously strong.
Korea is now Australia's fourth largest trading partner and third largest export market, from a significantly lower population base than Australia's two bigger export markets. 
Total merchandise trade in 2009-10 amounted to over $23.5 billion.
Australia is a safe, reliable and price-competitive supplier of many of the inputs that Korea has needed to drive its exports of automobiles, ships and electronics goods around the world and in turn to drive its economic growth at home.
As our economic relationship has grown, Korean companies have also prospered in Australia.  Hyundai-Kia, Samsung and LG have become household names.
Australia's liquefied natural gas trade with Korea is an essential part of this story.
This is why I welcome the agreement between Australian energy company Santos and its joint venture partner KOGAS to develop a project in Gladstone, with combined supply agreements worth more than $120 billion. 
It is expected to produce 7.8 million metric tons of LNG a year, and to create 5,000 construction jobs. 
Long-term supply arrangements, like this one, are clearly mutually beneficial.
They have helped Korean companies like POSCO secure access in a strong and growing market to iron ore and coal and, increasingly, to LNG.  And they provide certainty for Australian business.
Our economic relationship is now moving into new areas.
Korea is developing a reputation in Australia for innovation and high technology.  And Australia's increasing sophistication in services is a perfect match for Korea's new technological capabilities.
We have long said that the conclusion of a comprehensive FTA is the next logical step in the further development of our mutually beneficial bilateral relationship.
I am very confident that we can strike a mutually-acceptable agreement.  I will be discussing this with President Lee on Monday.
Australia and Korea are also working closely together to strengthen the global economy.
As trading nations, we are both strong supporters of a successful conclusion to the Doha Round of trade talks this year, seeing it as vital that the world trade agenda not fall backwards.
A successful Doha Round would be an important boost to the world trading system.
One way or other Doha should conclude in 2011.
Australia is working with Korea to try and get this done.
Australia and Korea worked closely together, along with others, to successfully establish the G20 as the premier global forum for economic cooperation.
This was a significant achievement, creating a new architecture to meet the challenges of our changing world.
The G20 saw unprecedented coordination among the world's major economies to arrest the global economic crisis, and then put the global economy back on the road to recovery. 
Australia worked hand-in-hand with Korea last year in its successful hosting of the G20, where significant progress was made.
This included advancing the G20 Framework for strong, balanced and sustainable global.  Simply put, that translates into jobs, more prosperity, and better lives for our peoples.
It also included landmark reforms to strengthen the global financial system against future crises, and historic reform to the IMF to ensure better crisis response mechanisms.
I would particularly like to highlight President Lee's leadership on a development agenda in the G20.
The benefits of the global economy need to be enjoyed by all people.  Wealthy countries must make special efforts to assist those in need. 
I am proud to be working so closely with Korea and other G20 members on this internationally.
Australia and Korea are building on these achievements to make sure that the G20 continues its significant role.
At home, Korea and Australia were two of only three developed countries to avoid dropping into recession during the recent global financial crisis.
Our countries benefited from our commitment to pursuing fundamental economic reforms that drive sustainable growth.
We both understand that the reform road leads to future prosperity.
In Australia, my Government is putting in place the major building blocks of a productivity agenda.
Continued macroeconomic stability and bringing the budget back into surplus.
Boosting productivity through well-targeted, direct investments by the Government in skills, infrastructure and innovation.
Improving workforce participation.  And addressing key long-term challenges such as climate change.
Our two countries share the challenge of building clean low-emissions economies for the future.
President Lee has shown great leadership in this area, driving the global clean growth paradigm and advocating for low carbon approaches to development around the world.
It is an area where Australia and Korea are working closely together.
Through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Through the UN Secretary General's High-Level Panel on Global Sustainability, of which we are both members.
Through Australia's Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute initiative.
And I am pleased to announce tonight that Australia will contribute $10 million to Korea's Global Green Growth Institute, which has been established by the Korean Government to support the development of green growth strategies and policies in developing countries.
Australia will join the Institute as a core partner and will be represented on its board of directors.
Friends.
Australia and Korea walked together during the Korean War.
Since then, Australian and Korean troops have served together on combat and peacekeeping missions in many other places around the world, including Vietnam, Cambodia, the Western Sahara, the Levant, East Timor, Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Today, our countries share a common interest in the peace and stability of the Asia-Pacific, and especially the Korean Peninsula.
Korea was confronted again last year by provocative attacks from North Korea. 
Australia joined with Korea and the international community in condemning the North's unprovoked torpedoing of the ROK corvette Cheonan and the tragic loss of 46 sailors.
I was also deeply concerned by the North's artillery attack on Yeonpyeong Island last November. 
Australia strongly condemned this unprovoked attack.
These incidents followed worrying reports that North Korea was developing a sophisticated uranium enrichment program in defiance of UN Security Council resolutions.
Australia remains committed to the denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula, and will continue to stand alongside Korea in condemning North Korean aggression.
In this spirit, in 2009 Australia and Korea signed a Joint Statement for Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation.
This was Korea's first such bilateral security declaration with a country other than the United States.
It commits us to deepening our cooperation on defence and security matters, on regional as well as bilateral issues.
Given the region's dynamism, our common interests, and our growing inter-dependencies, it makes sense to cooperate to address these challenges.
We are determined to work  -  together with our friends and neighbours such as Korea  -  to help build and ensure the long-term peace, stability and prosperity of the Asia Pacific region.
For example, we are helping shape regional norms and institutions. 
Australia and Korea are both founding members of the East Asia Summit.
With the recent expansion of the EAS, we now have an institution with the right membership and mandate to address the range of security, political and economic issues facing the region.
We will continue to work with Korea to strengthen the role of the EAS in managing regional challenges and promoting an inclusive community.
We are committed to pursuing inclusive regional economic integration through the EAS, where we are discussing consolidation of the six ASEAN+1 Free Trade Agreements.
Genuine trade liberalisation and deeper economic integration across EAS members will benefit all member countries.
Australia and Korea are working together on global challenges such as climate change, clean energy, and the global economic recovery.
And we have consistently demonstrated our willingness to share responsibility for global, as well as regional, security.
Beyond our immediate region, Australia and Korea are both fully engaged in combating terrorism and countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
We are working with the United States and other allies in Afghanistan to prevent Afghanistan from becoming a safe-haven for terrorists. 
Together, we are working to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
And we are building that shared future, through a friendship that has stood the test of time.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and the Republic of Korea.
To celebrate this, our two governments declared that this year would be the Australia-Korea Year of Friendship.
But we see this as a relationship fifty years young rather than fifty years old, forward-looking and vibrant.
Australia and Korea are natural partners.
We are similar-sized economies.
We are both free trading nations, committed to a stable, open and rules-based global trading order. 
Our trade links are intense and highly complementary. 
Australia's strengths in raw materials, energy and services have complemented Korea's strengths in mass production and heavy industry.
We are both committed to a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific, dynamic economically and free from conflict.
We are both alliance partners of the United States, seeing the US presence in Asia as fundamental to regional stability.
We are G20 economies, members of the East Asia Summit, and active participants in APEC. 
As middle powers, we are committed to multilateralism and believe in doing our part to strengthen a rules-based global order.
Like Korea, Australia is seeking election to a non-permanent Security Council seat in coming years. 
Most importantly, we share values.
Our societies are vibrant democracies, with transparent and accountable governments.
Our economies are competitive and dynamic, based on economic reform and productivity growth. 
Our peoples believe in the value of hard work and education.
As natural partners and close friends, I am committed to building Australia's relationship with Korea.
This is a partnership full of promise and potential.
And I look forward to a rich future of Australia-Korea cooperation.



 Australian veterans of the Korean War.
And first in precedence for today veterans of the Battle of Kapyong
Members of the 3rd Battalion, The Royal Australian Regiment, 3 RAR.
Old Faithfuls. Australians who put Duty First.
You, the men of Kapyong, know your story.
I believe it is time more Australians did.
When you first came here, sixty years ago, you came in the ANZAC tradition.
You knew then the commitment Australians make every year.
We will remember them.
That is the commitment I am here to honour today.
Australia does not forget.
This is Kapyong.
This is where, on the 23rd of April 1951, you were preparing to remember the men of Gallipoli.
This is where you gathered wild azaleas to make ANZAC Day wreaths. This is where you planned to share a meal and have a beer or two with the Turkish brigade who were nearby.
Former enemies, now allies, but the celebration was not to be.
Because this is where duty came first.
That night, the Chinese Communist Army launched its spring offensive through the traditional invasion route of the Kapyong Valley.
It was the final attempt to take Seoul.
That night the defining fight for the Australians in the Korean War began. Kapyong, this great fighting withdrawal. This battle that stopped a breakthrough.
That night you fought them.
In the dark. Radios failing, telephone lines cut. Outnumbered.
And through the day and through another night, you fought on.
This is where the battle continued through ANZAC Day 1951.
This is Kapyong.
You came here as heirs to a tradition. 
You brought with you a legacy, left to you by the men of Gallipoli.
Mateship, courage, teamwork, initiative.
You were more than worthy of the tradition you inherited.
You added to it for the heirs you have today.
Training, discipline, professionalism.
You came here as the sons of ANZAC.
You left as the fathers of our professional Army.
And on operations in Afghanistan or East Timor, in training in Australia or overseas, the modern Australian Army is still Kapyong's child.
The US Presidential Citation awarded to 3 RAR spoke of extraordinary heroism and outstanding performance of combat duties in action The Battle Honour Kapyong is now emblazoned on the Regimental Colour of each Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment this is where you won that honour.
Our commitment to Korea was a sign of the future of Australia's security in the new post-war world.
We proved ourselves a reliable and courageous ally.
Among the United Nations with the United States in Asia.
Pillars of Australia's security still.
Australians made great sacrifices in Korea.
From our Navy, Air Force and Army, more than 17,000 Australians served in Korea, many of them here today, veterans of other battles, 340 Australians died, more than 1200 were wounded and 30 became prisoners of war.
I honour 3 RAR and your Canadian, New Zealand, British and US allies and I honour the part you played so South Korea could embrace the democratic freedoms it enjoys today.
A professional Army and a proud nation honour you too.
This is where, sixty years ago, the men of Kapyong prepared to remember the men of Gallipoli.
This is where we remember the men of Kapyong today.



His Excellency Mr Park Sung-choon, Minister for Patriots and Veterans Affairs, and Mrs ParkVeterans of the Korean War, and accompanying family members  -  and I am particularly pleased to see here this evening some of those Korean veterans and family members who fought alongside the Australian forces
Keith Payne, VC, Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie, Chief of Army.
Ambassador and Mrs Gerovich, serving members of 3 RAR, other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
This morning I had the privilege of travelling to the Kapyong battlefield with our veterans to commemorate the 60thanniversary of that decisive battle.
Sacred ground, forever honoured by courage and sacrifice.
After the emotion of today's events, we gather tonight in a spirit of comradeship here in this great city of Seoul, this dynamic, prosperous world city that stands as a lasting monument to freedom.
I'm proud to be here with some of the authors of that freedom.
And I'm prouder still to lead a nation capable of producing such individuals.
Those of us who inherit your legacy can only imagine what it means to have served in war.
To be one of those ordinary Australians called upon to do extraordinary things.
Australians like Ray Parry, who along with three mates defended an outpost against a major attack.
Ray Parry's stand is featured in the Kapyong diorama at the Australian War Memorial and the citation that accompanied his Military Medal praised his brilliant leadership' and determination to hold vital ground' as being directly responsible for thoroughly disorganising the enemy'.
Or the nurses who put their hand up to go to war zones, like Nell Espie who was one of the first women to become a career military nurse and who not only served in Korea, but Malaya and Vietnam as well.
Or prisoner of war Private Robert Parker who, when captured, said that despite being terrified, he put up his hands and smiled at them.
He was listed as missing in action and for seven months his family didn't know where he was.
The thing that kept me going was thinking about getting home one day, he said.
Time and time again when we hear these stories of fortitude and courage, there is a common purpose, which our newest VC holder Ben-Roberts Smith put beautifully when he said:
"Everyone knows that the mastering of fear is the definition of bravery or courage but I feel it's also understanding there's something greater than yourself at risk which is your mates, the other people you're there for."
Mateship has been an overriding theme throughout ANZAC history and the Korean War was no exception.
Stories of men risking their lives for their mates, of great camaraderie, not just within their own ranks but with allied troops, particularly with our ANZAC brothers from New Zealand.
There is a wonderful illustration of how the larrikin spirit spans the Tasman. The story goes that a challenge was laid down between the Aussies and the Kiwis that whenever two of their vehicles passed each other, they had to embark on a water fight.
This had the locals quite puzzled. 
They would watch as the allies' vehicles, driving in opposite directions, would suddenly come to a grinding halt on roads that were jammed with military traffic.
Once stopped, waves of water would be exchanged between the trucks and then they would carry on.
Now, when the water fighting escalated, the lads became quite innovative.
They would empty their vehicle's fire extinguishers and fill them up with water because they made such excellent water pistols.
And there also seems to be another theme associated with the Aussies in Korea, and that is the few comforts that would remind them of home.
Major Ben O'Dowd, commander of A Company of the 3 RAR wrote of the problem of trying to keep bottled beer from freezing in the Korean winter:
 For me it was a matter of cuddling my Fosters overnight in my sleeping bag. A warm beer went well with breakfast washing down my preferred combat ration of Ham and Lima Beans."
Believe it or not, a warm beer sounds preferable to the local moonshine called Wah Rang Brandy that Ben O'Dowd tried his hardest to steer clear of.
Friends, these are the human stories from days of courage and mateship, and of the deep friendship with the Korean people. 
I think the fact that, to this day, the Republic of Korea sponsors foreign veterans to come back here to revisit their battlefields speaks volumes for the esteem in which the Australian troops are held and I pay tribute to the Korean Government and the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans' Affairs for keeping faith over these six long decades.
We are proud to be your guests because we come to honour a great legacy.
And to do what is important: remember.
We remember the 17,000 Australians who served in Korea and the 340 who did not make it home.
We remember those Allied personnel who served and died.
And, of course, we remember the horrendous price paid by the Korean people, military and civilian, in defence of their homeland.
They asked no sacrifice from the UN forces that they were not prepared to make themselves, many times over.
No-one who fought  -  who suffered  -  who died  -  during those 1000 bloody days will ever be forgotten.
Those who served must be remembered because they are part of us; they are the best of us.
The Australian National Korean War Memorial in Canberra is an important part of this contract of remembrance we make as a nation.
I am pleased to announce today that a new interpretative panel will be installed in the Memorial later this year.
This panel will recognise those Australians Missing in Action during the Korean War whose bodies have not been recovered.
Importantly, it will also recognise the service of those Australians who served in Korea after the armistice in 1953 
At the end of the Korean War, Lieutenant General Sir Henry Wells, Commander-In-Chief of British Commonwealth Forces in Korea, issued a Special Order of the Day.
General Wells, a distinguished Australian soldier, issued the Order to mark the end of hostilities but also to summon the Commonwealth forces to continued vigilance during the Armistice period, when great uncertainty remained.
The panel will be added to the memorial before Remembrance Day this year.
I'm also very proud to announce today a special one-off group of ten Kapyong Commemorative Scholarships, under the Australia Awards program.
These will consist of five PhDs and five shorter Executive Awards to enable Korean students to study in Australia to honour this year's anniversary so that, in a small way, the significance of Kapyong will be remembered to a new generation.
They, like us, should never forget.
Friends,
The sun has gone down tonight, and tomorrow dawn will break on this beautiful land.
This land where generations of Korean children have grown up in security.
Hard-fought and hard-won.
Tomorrow we commemorate ANZAC Day and I know it will be as special for you as it will be for me.



We gather here in silence, here in this great free city of Seoul. Here today, as the guests of our friends, the people of the Republic of Korea, we acknowledge the men and women of this nation who have so valiantly served their country.
We offer these words we mean so deeply. 
Yet on ANZAC Day, only our silence truly speaks for us.
From our war memorial in Canberra to our war graves at Gallipoli, silent Australians gather together to fulfil our great national covenant: in the morning, we will remember them.
In our silence today we remember those we have lost.
Over 100,000 Australians have died for us in war, from before the first ANZAC Day to the attack which took the life of Sapper Jamie Larcombe in Afghanistan this year - each of them one of us; each of them lost to us now; each in essence an ordinary Australian who we asked to do an extraordinary thing.
Lance Corporal Leonard Keysor was one of Australia's 98 Victoria Cross recipients.
A clerk before enlisting, he fought in the battle of Lone Pine in August 1915. Leonard caught Turkish bombs mid-flight before lobbing them back into the Turkish trenches. 
This was extraordinary.
Corporal Ben Roberts-Smith single-handedly assaulted two Taliban machine gun positions to enable his mates to continue with their operation. A typically reluctant hero and a humble man, Ben had been prepared to give his life for his country.
This was extraordinary.
Yesterday, I was honoured to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong and spend time with another group of Australians and New Zealanders who did extraordinary things.
As the sun rose on 25 April 1951 their job at the battle of Kapyong was nearly done.  
Today, they return, silent.
On this ANZAC Day we particularly honour 3RAR and their Canadian, New Zealand, British and US comrades.  
Many of those veterans are here today.
Your presence here along with many other veterans of the Korean War makes this a special ANZAC Day indeed.
On a day when Australians are a people who remember, we remember the Australians who serve our country with courage and distinction in uniform overseas, the men and women of our Defence Force, Australians who are so much a part of our nation's story and soul that their hat itself is a great symbol of who we are, and the badge of shining swords they wear on it we call the Rising Sun.
This ANZAC Day I say to every member of our Defence Force:
I know that the Australians who came before you and served our nation in uniform in the past are proud of you. I know that because I am here with them today. You are their worthy successors.
On this day we remember also the Australians who come home, their lives changed forever.
We remember every family who mourns the loss of a loved one.
We remember the ordinary Australians who we ask to do extraordinary things.
We remember the Australians who died for us, the original ANZACs - young men of a young nation who forged a legend of courage and mateship on the Gallipoli Peninsula.
We remember the many who came after them. 
And, in particular, here today, the Australians who took their final breath on Korean soil 60 years ago. 
Australians do remember them. Australians will remember them.
We remember them with our silence.
Lest we forget.



AUSTRALIA AND CHINA
Thank you for your welcome.
I am delighted to be here in Beijing and to address this forum.
I am here as the leader of an economically vibrant nation whose current and future prosperity is bound up with China's.
China is one of Australia's most important relationships.
Tonight I want to underline my commitment to strengthening that relationship and to explain how I see it developing.
China's emergence as a leading nation of the 21st century is, of course, an extraordinary achievement. 
Not only are hundreds of millions of Chinese being lifted out of poverty, but China's contribution to global growth is huge.
While China's transformation has been taking place in the years since 1978, Australia has become a confident middle power, actively engaged in our region and delivering long term economic growth for our people.
Australia's role as a stable, reliable and high quality supplier of energy and mineral resources to China is the bedrock of a comprehensive economic partnership.
Australia's resources support China's ongoing development.
China's growth contributes directly to Australia's prosperity.
As our economies have developed, so too have our bilateral ties and our shared interests.   
And as our economies and our peoples become more interconnected, so the challenges we face grow more complex.
Those challenges include continuing with market-based reform that will make our businesses competitive and underpin future economic growth.
They also include institutional, social and environmental reforms to make growth sustainable by meeting social needs, protecting our environment and developing the skills and capabilities of our people, and they include cooperation to sustain the global recovery and maintain the stability and security that have allowed this region to prosper.
A prosperous China, fully engaged in the region, is good for Australia, the region and the world.
My argument today is that we can be positive about our relationship and that we should be ambitious for its future.
Australia's national interests demand this.
Of course, our two Governments will not agree on every issue. 
One area of difference is human rights.
Where there are differences we will be clear and robust about them. 
We do so in the context of what has become a comprehensive and constructive relationship between our two nations; a relationship grounded in a clear understanding of each other and our interests, and which is strengthened by hard work and deepened by mutual respect.
Approached this way, we can build on our remarkable progress to date. I am here to say that I am personally committed to doing just this.
A COMPREHENSIVE PARTNERSHIP
Australia's modern relationship with China, built on decades of hard work, began in the 1970s with the re-opening of diplomatic relations by my predecessor Gough Whitlam
This was a pioneering moment.
At that time, the value of our annual two-way trade was less than 100 million Australian dollars.
There were no students or tourists from the People's Republic of China in Australia.
Few saw clearly enough into the future to predict how dramatically China would change.
Together, we have both come a very long way since then.
Today, China is Australia's largest export market and import source.  
Last year, total two-way trade exceeded A$100 billion for the first time  -  a sixfold increase in the past ten years.
One quarter of all Australian exports come to China - one quarter.
Australia, in turn, is China's seventh-largest trading partner.
Recent analysis by the Australia-China Business Council shows that Australian trade with China generated income equivalent to more than $10,000 per Australian household last year.
Energy and minerals trade continues to grow, increasingly with the involvement of Chinese companies.
Just last week, Origin Energy and Conoco Philips signed a 20-year LNG export agreement with Sinopec worth an estimated $90 billion. 
In another recent example, Baosteel has been contracted to supply a 400 kilometre pipeline to the CNOOC/BG Group Coal Seam Gas plant in Queensland.
Of course, the economic relationship extends far beyond resources and minerals.
China has just become Australia's largest services export market, led by education and tourism.
2010 saw more than 167,000 enrolments by Chinese students in Australia. 12 years ago that number was just 9,000, and according to Tourism Australia there were nearly 450,000 arrivals from China in Australia last year.
Collaboration is now extending across science, finance, education, commerce and culture, between institutions in all sectors.
Australia-China bilateral engagement has grown to include every issue of mutual interest to our two countries.
Australia is committed to advancing the comprehensive, constructive and cooperative relationship between our countries, as set out in our 2009 Joint Statement.
In both countries, this is being led at the highest political levels. I was pleased to meet both Vice-President Xi on his recent visit to Australia and Executive Vice-Premier Li on their recent visits to Australia, and here in Beijing this week I have met with Premier Wen and renewed acquaintance with Vice Premier Li. We originally met on my first visit to China. I look forward to meeting President Hu again tomorrow.
A COMMITMENT TO ECONOMIC REFORM
Our economies may be becoming more complex and interconnected, but the reason for their growth is simple.
It flows from the economic reforms, sometimes difficult, that both our countries have undertaken.
China's decision to turn outwards and pursue market-based growth was a fundamental change in direction: an act of visionary leadership that has produced a transformative surge of national development.
That growth is now extending to the central and western provinces of China, including huge investment in infrastructure, services and economic development.  
China's export industries have fuelled its growth, and many of those industries are also moving rapidly up the value chain into innovative, high-value products and services.
This transition is driven in part by the Chinese Government's investment in research and development.
Australia, too, has walked the reform road, albeit from a very different starting point. 
Successive governments have deregulated the Australian economy, cut tariffs, floated the Australian dollar, privatised government-owned enterprises and opened our doors to foreign investment.
Reform can be difficult and unpopular, but in our country these changes have paved the way for two decades of economic growth.
ACHIEVING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
Now both our countries face the challenges of future growth with confidence.
Australia stands in a position of economic strength.
As we look forward, we continue to walk the reform road.
Like China, we emerged from the Global Financial Crisis without dropping into recession.
This performance is explained by several factors. China's continued demand for our exports is one. Another is our effective use of economic stimulus. A third is our history of reform, which has created strong institutional foundations in our banking, financial and regulatory systems.
As a result, we have low public debt, a substantial investment pipeline, strong job creation and GDP growth prospects, stable prices and a rewarding environment for investors. 
But we know that further reform is required to achieve truly sustainable growth that benefits all of our people.
Of course, the same is true of China.
Rapid growth is a great achievement, but it brings with it new challenges.
As it goes through this great transition, China needs new infrastructure and new services to meet the needs of a changing population.
It must continue strengthening key institutions to maintain and underpin commerce, civil society and effective public administration.
Improving health, retirement, education and other services present a major challenge for both our nations, even though even though the scale and nature of the challenge is very different.
Our growth strategies should also be squarely focused on creating jobs and improving living standards.
In Australia we are pursuing reforms designed to boost productivity, lift the skills of Australians, raise workforce participation, and develop infrastructure, including a National Broadband Network that will underpin the innovation economy. 
We are also tackling climate change by introducing a carbon price and moving towards emissions trading.
Finally, we are undertaking fundamental reforms of education to lift the quality of education at all levels from early childhood to postgraduate education. Education is a driver of economic performance and the agent of opportunity. It is central to our economic future.
China and Australia come from different points, but our shared interest in this agenda for sustainable growth is increasingly obvious.
In this context we welcome China's ambitious economic strategy, as proposed in the 12th Five-Year Plan, for balanced and sustainable growth.
We support practical steps identified in the plan to rebalance the Chinese economy towards becoming more reliant on domestic sources of growth.
It also emphasises the quality of growth, as Premier Wen said to the National People's Congress in March this year, by focusing on an economy increasingly geared to the production of energy-efficient, high technology products, by focusing on social welfare, environmentally sustainable growth and reducing income inequality, and by increasing education spending and government supported research and development funding.
This is an ambitious plan and, of course, it will require sustained effort to implement. 
REFORM PRIORITIES 
Against this backdrop I want outline three particular priorities for our economic relationship: investment, trade and clean energy. 
First, investment.
Chinese investment is welcome in Australia, as is shown by the steady stream of proposals approved by our Foreign Investment Review Board.
As with investment from other countries, inward investment proposals are subject to consistent rules which serve our national interest.
Australia has 72 major resource projects at an advanced stage of development, worth around $130 billion. Many involve Chinese companies, and Australia seeks more investment opportunities offshore, including in China.
A more open investment environment should be supported by streamlined and consistent administrative processes. A clear, reliable legal and regulatory regime would be a major benefit that would provide a further boost to our economic partnership.
HIGH QUALITY TRADE AGREEMENT
Second, we should continue to pursue two-way trade.
Free trade means jobs and growth.
Concluding a high quality Free Trade Agreement would deepen our relationship further and create long term benefit.
Progress in five years of our negotiations so far has been slow.
We need to do better.
An FTA would complement our work for regional trade liberalisation in the multilateral system. 
I also encourage China to continue playing a constructive role in efforts to conclude the Doha Round. 
Multilateral trade liberalisation is one of the most important opportunities we have for shared global growth. 
Even where they are significant, we should not allow individual differences between nations to obstruct the potential for shared progress. 
If we cannot achieve full success in the round then we need to maximise what we can, particularly for the poorest countries. In this circumstance we must all take care to safeguard the world trading system.
CLEAN ENERGY FUTURE
Third, we have a shared interest in a clean energy future. 
Climate change is a persistent and long-term challenge to the world.
It is imperative that we decouple economic growth from emissions growth.
In Australia we see great opportunities in a clean, innovative, low pollution economy.
To drive change, the Government is determined to put a price on carbon from July 1 next year.
The 12th Five-Year Plan demonstrates China's commitment to energy efficiency, environmental conservation and tackling carbon emissions. 
It sets targets to reduce the emissions intensity of GDP growth and reduce water, soil and air pollutants. The Plan also refers specifically to carbon trading in China.
These are welcome developments, even though they will be challenging to implement and represent only part of the change that will be needed to significantly reduce China's impact on climate change over the coming decades.
Our bilateral cooperation on climate change and clean energy is progressing well.
We recently welcomed Vice-Chairman Xie of the National Development and Reform Commission to our Ministerial Climate Change Dialogue in Australia. The successful dialogue identified new areas for potential collaboration such as power transmission and renewable energy.
Scientific collaboration between Australia and China has already generated advances in areas ranging from medical research, disaster management, biodiversity, water conservation, to food security, wireless communications and new alloys for manufacturing.
In recognition of the depth, breadth and value of this relationship, today Premier Wen and I witnessed an agreement through which the Australian and Chinese Governments will each contribute $9 million over three years to an Australia-China Science and Research Fund.
SHARED GLOBAL AND REGIONAL CHALLENGES
I have spoken to you of common challenges and shared interests.
Those interests are at stake in cooperation to sustain the global economic recovery and in efforts to maintain the peace and stability that have allowed this region to prosper.
China, now more than ever, is an active participant in global and regional architecture, helping shape it and in turn being influenced by it.
As China's role in the world grows, so its role in supporting the international system will grow. 
We should expect no less. 
Australia welcomes and strongly encourages China's positive international engagement.
There is no better example of how Australia and China are working together on shared interests than in our cooperation in the G20 for strong, balanced and sustainable global economic recovery.
Establishment of the G20 as the premier global economic forum itself reflects the growing weight of China in the world, along with other emerging economies such as India and Brazil.
Australia strongly supported the G20 replacing the G8 as the global driver for resolution of the Global Financial Crisis, just as we played a leading role in reforming the IMF to give countries like China a larger say in our global financial architecture.
The G20 acted resolutely to arrest the crisis and trigger recovery, through $5 trillion worth of coordinated fiscal stimulus and historic reform to strengthen the international financial sector.
Australia is now working closely with China in the G20 to ensure global economic recovery and strong job growth into the future.
China's economic rebalancing outlined in its 12th 5 Year Plan is precisely the sort of action G20 economies have committed to, for strong and balanced global growth.  As are Australia's economic reforms.
This is a central part of the G20's agenda this year, to ensure that the world's major economies are pursuing economic policies that together lift, not just shift global growth.
That means more jobs, more opportunities: better lives.
Among other things, we are also working closely with China on continued reforms to strengthen the global financial system, to address energy and food price volatility and on a development agenda to ensure the G20 helps our most in need.
I look forward to working closely with China in the G20.
Just as we are engaged globally, Australia and China are increasingly working together in our region.
We both have strong and enduring interests in a stable, secure and prosperous region.
Ours is the fastest growing region in the world. It is also home to some of the world's most dangerous flashpoints.
I have just come from the Republic of Korea.
I took the opportunity to visit the Demilitarised Zone and was forcefully reminded of the security challenges in our region. To stand nose-to-nose with a North Korean border guard, with only a pane of glass in between, is a sobering experience.
So too is the idea of a conference table that literally straddles a demarcation line  -  one half in North Korea, one half in South Korea.
North Korea's strengthening nuclear program and developing long-range missile systems are a threat to regional stability and security. So are the unprovoked recent attacks on the Republic of Korea.
As the host of the six-party talks to address the problems of North Korea's nuclear program, China is an essential part of the solution we need.
We share an interest with all our partners in making sure that North Korea does not destabilise the security and prosperity of our wider region.
I would like to work more closely with China on common challenges like this one, and I encourage China to bring its influence to bear on North Korea.
Security on the peninsula can only come through dialogue, and for dialogue to be meaningful we all know that North Korea must create the right conditions: commit to de-nuclearise.
This is in the interests of all countries in the region, and globally.
Friends, pursuit of shared interests is often done through a framework to make sure that this is done in the best way possible.
That is why Australia is committed to building stronger institutions in our region for mutual benefit. 
We are all familiar with our successful regional cooperation on trade liberalisation and economic integration through APEC.
Australia is also working with China in the East Asia Summit, a leader-level process that involves all the major powers of the region and which has a mandate to pursue the broad spectrum of our growing interests: political, economic and security.
As of this year, the East Asia Summit includes the United States and Russia as members. This is an historic development.
We now have a regional institution comprising all the key players of the region.
Now we need to work together to strengthen the East Asia Summit's agenda. 
We need to continue to build habits of cooperation across our region, where differences can be sensibly managed on the basis of mutual trust.
The East Asia Summit has already developed an agenda from economic and education cooperation, to security and environmental cooperation  -  including on climate change.
This can be strengthened for our common good.
For example, last week I visited an area devastated by the destruction of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan. 
It was a merciless and savage natural disaster. 
Countries around the world did not wait to be asked.  They reached out to help Japan.  Australia did.  I know China did too.
In Minami-Sanriku, I stood on the broken ground of a lost town.
I met families still living in evacuation centres, their entire world defined by strips of cardboard marking their allotted space.
I felt the same for them as I did for those suffering great loss and grief from Australia's own summer of lethal natural disasters.
And I felt a responsibility to make sure we are ready with the best responses possible to major natural disasters in our region.
This is something we can do in the East Asia Summit.
An example of where together we become much more than the sum of our parts.
And the East Asia Summit can play a practical role in addressing other regional challenges, such as maritime security.
BUILDING LINKS BETWEEN OUR PEOPLE
At the heart of our relationship, are people.
The friendships and bonds between our peoples will ultimately define what we become; what we mean to each other.
And there are no stronger ties than those provided by education.
China is our largest source of overseas students. 
More and more Australians are also studying in, or about China, including through the 11 Confucius institutes now across our country.
These exchanges bring perspective, understanding and friendship, for Australians to appreciate China's ancient and remarkable civilisation, and its extraordinary achievements in recent years, and for people from China to appreciate modern Australia's dynamism and multicultural outlook  -  including the fact that after English, Chinese is the most-spoken language.
Education is a shaper of character and a driver of opportunity in the modern world.  I am passionate about strengthening my country's commitment to educational excellence.
Partnership with China in that endeavour is a precious part of our relationship.
Tomorrow at a meeting of Australia-China alumni, I will preside over the establishment of a Chair of Australian Studies in China at the University of Peking - a first for this world-class university, supported by BHP Billiton, one of our great Australian companies.
I am also pleased to announce that Monash University, in collaboration with Southeast University, is establishing a joint research institute in the Suzhou Industrial Park. This exciting collaboration will enhance the research performance of both universities, building academic talent and engaging with industry.
And in another significant development, the University of Sydney is establishing a China Studies Centre, bringing together the wide array of research disciplines at the University with extensive engagement with China.
Tourism also reinforces our people-to-people links with China, now our fastest growing market.
There were more than 470,000 Chinese arrivals last year - more than from the United Kingdom.
To reinforce this positive trend, we have taken a further step towards broadening the range of tourism options available for Chinese people to travel to Australia.
Through our people, so too our cultures will thrive, not just in our understanding of one another but in our influences on one another.
That is why Australia has been so proud this year to showcase our culture across China through the year long Year of Australian Culture in China, Imagine Australia', and why we eagerly anticipate handing over the baton for the Year of Chinese Culture in Australia, which begins soon.
CONCLUSION: A POSITIVE SUM GAME
Friends, last month I spoke to the United States Congress about shared interests and common challenges.
I argued my guiding principle: that prosperity can be shared. 
The global economy is not a zero-sum game. 
There is no reason for Chinese prosperity to detract from prosperity in Australia, the United States or anywhere in the world.
There is no doubt that we are all living through a period of profound change.
The Global Financial Crisis showed how close we can come to collective disaster.
There is no major challenge that can be solved by one country alone. The North Korean situation is a clear demonstration of this reality. 
As our partnership with China grows, so does our interdependence.  
That is the nature of the world today and it brings great benefits as well as new challenges, and as we undertake that work, we build relationships which reinforce the potential for our economic life to be a positive sum game, for nations and their citizens.
What I mean by that is shared prosperity creates benefit for all of us. But more than just generating choice and opportunity through wealth, by working together successfully on clearly defined challenges we can also generate trust and mutual understanding.
These are precious goods in today's global environment. They are crucial to successful economic exchange, to social development and to international relations.
I look forward to working with you and many others to realise the potential we see before us.
Thank you very much. 



Thank you very much for that introduction and can I say I'm very much looking forward to the panel discussion which will follow my opening remarks, and can I acknowledge my panellists, of course Paul Kelly who will be moderating the discussion, Kerry, Gail and Steven and I will do our best to shed some light on contemporary circumstances, but before we get there I've got the opportunity to speak to you about the Government's view following the Budget last week.
I and my colleagues, including Penny Wong, the Minister for Finance, who is with us today, came to the task of framing the Government's budget at a time of transition, a time of transition where we believe global economic might is transitioning from west to east. This is not a temporary phenomenon, though of course it has been on display during the global financial crisis, but it is the movement of our times. The history of this century will be written in the Asia-Pacific.
Second, it's a time of transition for our domestic economy, as we transition from sluggish growth following the global financial crisis, to facing capacity constraints as a huge resources boom comes to our nation, with literally billions and billions of dollars of investments in the pipeline  -  hundreds of billions of dollars.
Now, the fact that we're talking about a movement from sluggish growth to rapid growth, in and of itself, should be cause for congratulations, because so many countries around the world haven't experienced growth of any dimension in recent days.
We came out of the global financial crisis strong. We came out strong largely by working together - the Australian Government working with Australian businesses to preserve Australian jobs. We engaged in the right measures to protect employment whilst the world confronted the biggest global economic shock since the Great Depression, and now we move from that period in our domestic economy, to one where we will be looking at record terms of trade driving growth.
We know that this growth will be driven at different rates in different places. It's what I refer to as the patchwork economy', and we understood that challenge of difference from community to community as we put the budget together.
The third transition that confronted us as we put this budget together was the transition in energy usage that our economy needs to make. We need to decouple economic growth from emissions growth - that is part of what we have to do to make sure that we have prosperity in the future.
And there was a fourth major transition also confronting us as we framed this budget: that is, the continued transition in technology, particularly in information technology, which confronts our nation and confronts our world. Increasingly economic success is defined by seconds  -  the seconds in which you can get information  -  and there's no prizes for coming second, and so our technology revolution in this country had to continue.
So, days of global transition, days of domestic transition, days of energy transition, days of technology transition. These were all in our minds as we framed the Budget announced on Tuesday night.
We're also confronting the impacts of natural disasters, not only here in our own country, but around the world. We've lived through a dreadful summer and I continue as Prime Minister to confront the Australians who still rebuilding their lives from that dreadful summer, most recently last Friday I was in country Victoria, meeting with people who had been flooded three times.
So, those tales of human misery have joined together to have a profound economic impact. So, as we put this Budget together we knew we were confronting circumstances that had written three quarters of a per cent off GDP; that was going to knock eight and three quarter billion dollars off the budget bottom line.
So, a challenging set of circumstances in which to deliver a budget that would stand the test of time and matter as we shaped our future, but I came to this task and the team I lead came to this task determined not only to confront these transitions but to shape that future.
We do not believe in allowing the future to be shaped by forces unleashed in our world and our economy. We believe that we have a responsibility as a Government to lead and to actively shape our future, and so we brought a spirit of can-do to these circumstances and you see the outcome of that spirit in the Budget document.
We decided to engaged in a transition of our own, a fiscal transition. The biggest fiscal consolidation this nation has been in 44 years, a rapid consolidation to a budget surplus in 2012-13, exactly as promised, because that is what our economy will require as we move to stronger and stronger growth and near capacity constraints.
That did require the making of tough choices and we didn't shy away from any of them. Inevitably that will cause some short-term commentary and we've seen some of that on display, but ensuring that we were not, as a Government, adding to the inflationary pressures which will be in our economy as a result of it coming to full capacity was the key driver in our fiscal choices in this Budget - the right thing to do by the nation and we're ensuring that it's getting done.
We also determined in this Budget to meet a resources boom with an opportunity boom, to make sure that across our nation Australians have the benefit of the opportunities that this resources boom could bring. That's why at the centre of this Budget you've seen participation and skills measures. I am very determined as Prime Minister that we harness this record period of economic growth to make a long-term difference to disadvantage in this country and to the opportunity of Australians in their own lives.
I determined most particularly that you would see participation measures at the heart of this Budget, because it is not satisfactory to me that I can meet with business leaders day after day and hear them talk about skills shortage and I can visit communities on the same day that continue to have double-digit youth unemployment rates and continue to be home to people who lead lives of quiet disadvantage outside society's mainstream.
So, we determined to meet a resources boom with an opportunities boom, with new participation measures for our young Australians, so it is very clear to them from the earliest of days that you must be learning or earning, there is no third choice of taking yourself outside the labour market and into what will be a life of disadvantage as a result.
That we could step up during this phase of economic growth, to offering more opportunities for people with disabilities, many of whom want to work, but who have not been extended an opportunity; that we could use this phase of economic growth to make a difference to the very long-term unemployed; that we could use it to make a difference to the participation rate of Australian women in work; and consequently we determined to engage in reforms for women who had been left behind by earlier welfare-to-work measures, particularly mums of teenage children.
And we determined to send a message, as well as make a saving, by the abolition for younger women of the dependent spouse tax offset. In the modern age, of course, we expect adults of capacity to work, and we sent a message, too, by bringing forward the low-income tax offset, so some of our most low-income workers could see, pay packet to pay packet, the benefits of their work.
And whilst the mental health package has rightly been reported as a health measure to meet the needs of Australians today, the health care needs that so many Australians have, the mental health measure itself is a participation measure  -  ensuring that we do not allow mental illness to take Australians, particularly young Australians, beyond the reach of the benefits and dignity of work.So, we determined to meet a resources boom with an opportunities boom by getting more Australians into work. We also determined that we needed to make sure that Australians had the benefit of new skills and new opportunities for training. That's important for people as they step up to work, but it's also important if we are, within our businesses and industries, to harness the best of this phase of growth.
People are crying out for skilled workers and we can in part assist with that by making sure that Australians have the opportunities to get the skills they need. That's why I'm very proud that there is a $3 billion training packages at the heart of this Budget.
We are using this money to make a difference to training now, but also to use $1.7 billion to drive long-term reform.
We want industry at the heart of our skills system. I think many Australians worry when they hear the language of training places, because they worry that too much training is done with too little outcome - people who don't complete or people who don't get a job having completed - which is why putting industry right at the centre of our training system is so important.
Industry and businesses know what the skills are that they need, and if we can partner with you in generating those skills then they will have immediate economic benefits for the business as well as for the individual who has gained those skills.
So, we've determined to grow the number of places where we partner with industry by 130,000. We are also intending to modernise apprenticeships, providing more efficient ways of people getting the technical and trades skills they need and making sure more of our young people finish that apprenticeship, because an apprenticeship ticket is the equivalent of a great start in life.
As structural reforms in vocational education and training will stand alongside the human capital reforms I have driven in early childhood education, in school education and in university education and you will see in this reform agenda we revisit some familiar themes.
We will work with the States, but we will require better performance. We will require that training is better matched to future jobs growth; that TAFE is revitalised and students can build the links they need for broader learning for life and also for new opportunities if they chose to move into other parts of tertiary education.
Our $1.75 billion will drive an ambitious reform agenda. I will require transparency and we will reward the training changes that make a difference to completion. I want to make sure that our training effort is geared to the needs to our economy now, and that's what the $3 billion is all about.
This structural reform will be led by industry demand and that is necessary if we are better to align our training system with the needs of our economy.
This Budget, too, is driven by a better understanding of place. An opportunity boom requires us to understand that this phase of economic growth and economic development is not going to change every community in the same way.
I've been to communities in this country desperate to see growth, desperate to see more workers join their community, because jobs are literally going begging and people need them done.
I've been to communities in this country that are suffering the burdens of congestion, where the only way of getting a job is to jump in a car and to drive for a long period of time to reach somewhere where you can work.
Now we need to bring an understanding of place and the differential impacts of this phase of growth in our economy to the way that government works. We know the resources boom, driving as it is a high Australian dollar, is having a set of effects on tourism, on international education and on manufacturing that we need to understand.
Those effects are experienced by industry, but they are experienced by Australians with a sense of place, where they are in their communities, which is why measures in this Budget are more finely calibrated to have a sense of place than budgets in the past.
For example, our focus on regional visas for new skilled migrants, our focus on enterprise migration agreements, which will enable proponents of major projects with capital expenditure of more than $2 billion and peak workforce for more than 1,500 to have a purpose-specific migration plan. These reforms are important to that sense for place and differential impact in our economy.
So, the budget in one word, or in one sentence, in a story for you, is about getting back in the black. It's about making sure that more Australians experience the benefits of the resources boom. It's about making sure we do the things we need to do to keep our economy strong.
We will pursue the reforms at the heart of this Budget in tandem with our other long-term and profoundly economy-changing reforms  -  particularly our reform to price carbon.
We all know that we need to break the nexus between economic growth and emissions growth, and despite all of the huff and puff one would see in the daily media, in fact cutting our emissions by 5 per cent by 2020 is a bipartisan objective.
So, the only question we're asking ourselves, really, is what's the best way to get it done, what's the most efficient way to get it done: using a market-based mechanism or using excessive regulation? Well, I'm in the cart for the market-based mechanism and that's the reform that we will drive and deliver from 1 July next year.
And we will continue to drive our reform in the information technology revolution, the National Broadband Network, because it, in and of itself, will unleash a new wave of economic productivity. When I meet with the business community people understand  -  understand in their bones  -  the profound benefits of the National Broadband Network and we are determined to bring this technology to Australians right around the country.
As we move to the discussion phase of this event, I want to conclude by talking to you about the partnership that I believe exists between the Government I lead and the business community. It's a partnership that's been tested. It was tested during the days of the global financial crisis. It wasn't easy to work together under all of that pressure to maintain Australians in work, but we got that done and I thank you for it.
Now we have an opportunity for some new partnerships; some new partnerships as we move to this phase of economic growth; some new partnerships in providing opportunity to Australians. At the core of our participation measures are a number of programs to involve the business community in extending opportunity to Australians.
We want people to have a chance. That requires them to take an opportunity when it comes their way, it requires them to show responsibility when that opportunity comes their way, but it also requires someone to give them a chance and we will be asking you to work with us in offering a chance to some people who have been left behind, some people who have been left behind and are long-term unemployed, some people who have been left behind on the disability support pension, people who could use an opportunity if given an opportunity  -  I'll be asking you to do just that and hopefully we can work together to make sure that we extend the benefits of opportunity more widely to Australians than they've been extended before.
As we move into the conversation stage of today, I do want to conclude by reinforcing the need to for reform conversations. As Prime Minister, I lead a Government committed to reform and we, day after day, work as consultatively as we can to put together those reforms. Ultimately we will lead, and we have done, by the budget, having collected views across the business community and beyond as to how the budget should be shaped.
But reform leadership requires not just the Government to be out there as a proponent of the reform conversation. It requires all elements of our community to be in the reform conversation. We are a nation, I believe, with not a day to waste, not a day to waste in some of the more frivolous conversations that beset our national life. We need to make sure we are having a deep reform conversation about the changes our nation needs now, as we move into this history-making period of economic growth.
So, my challenge to you, to the nation more generally, is to be in that reform conversation. There are inevitably many issues that are intriguing in the moment, but we've got to look beyond those issues that are intriguing in the moment and work through those things that are truly momentous together.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much
I'd like to acknowledge my Parliamentary colleague, the Minister who has driven this project, Stephen Conroy. Can I also acknowledge Tony Windsor, we spent yesterday in Tamworth and knew that we were coming to another great day here today in Armidale.
Can I also say thank you very much to Deborah for having us in her school and thank you to all of the girls, from PLC who have joined us for this event.
On the way here in the car I was joking with Tony Windsor about my school days and during my high school days my mother thought that it was very important that I should learn to type. She came to the conclusion that a girl could always get a job if she could type, and so she got me over a number of school holidays to learn to touch type on an Olivetti Manual. Now, I think reflecting on that we can see a few things from that story.
Number one - I've come a long way since those days that I was learning to type.
Number two - people's perceptions of roles for women in our society have changed a fair bit from the days that my mother concluded the best way you could ensure that a girl could get a job was to make sure she could type.
And third - I think we can conclude that technology's come a long way too, from the days of the Olivetti Manual, and I was joking with Tony in the car that when I told that story at a school, about learning to type on a manual typewriter, a young boy in the audience helpfully added I saw one of them once in a museum'. Thank you for that.
We're here to celebrate moving on from the Olivetti Manual typewriter, and we're here to celebrate it in a very great place, in this community of Armidale, and can I say thank you to the community for the enthusiasm and passion that you've brought to this project, to the roll out of the NBN. It's been made possible because of the great leadership by the local council, thank you for that; great leadership in the local university, thank you very much for that, too; and that support of our State government colleagues, thank you for their support.
Now, the NBN is the greatest infrastructure project in this nation's history. No better place for it to start on mainland Australia than here. Of course, this is a city, the city of Armidale that prides itself on being a city with energy, vision, opportunity as its mantra. Armidale says about itself that it wants to be clean and green, vibrant, dynamic, innovative, professional, accessible and globally linked. Now, that's a great aspiration for this city; it's a great aspiration for regional areas; and it's our aspiration for regions around the country.
We want to allow regions to build more diverse economies. We want to attract new families to live in great places like this one. We want to give young people the chance to build a future right here, rather than feeling that they need to move to a big city, and nothing is more important to achieving that vision of the future than the NBN.
This is a transformative infrastructure for our nation's future. It stands to radically change the way we live, the way we work, the way we study, especially in rural and regional Australia, which has been so often forced to put up with second best - but no more.
The NBN will connect regional communities with the best medical experts through e-health; it will connect regional communities with the arts and creative industries; it will enable people to work at home and create businesses where they live; it will equip firms to compete on the world stage no matter where they are; and it has the potential to transform every school and every campus, connecting them like never before.
Today we are going to witness a demonstration of the NBN's capabilities. Students from two regional communities - one in Tasmania, and right here - will be connected and we will see them perform together in a joined up choir in real time. Now if we can see that today, imagine what else can be done across this network  -  joint lesions, sharing teaching resources, excursions without ever leaving the classroom. The possibilities are absolutely endless and truly global.
Friends, the NBN rollout here in Armidale has gone from start to finish in just 10 months, with 105 kilometres of fibre optic cable laid, connecting almost 3,000 premises, making the NBN available to every school in Armidale - government and non-government alike - and joining up university and TAFE students, to bring the opportunities of further education to Australians, no matter where they live.
Later today, after this very important event, I will be announcing funding for a new education trial as part of our digital regions initiative, involving the University of New England and the New England Institute of TAFE. The trial will use the power of this technology to provide state-of-the-art virtual interactive training rooms, laboratories and a community learning capability.
This is education in our century, in the 21st Century. It's education that overcomes the tyranny of time and distance that has so often held regional Australia back. The trial will unlock the same possibilities that we are going to see here at PLC.
Today there will be an art lesson, which will show exactly what the NBN can do. In the past teachers could old show paintings from the pages of a book or on a slide  -  today you will pay a virtual visit to a great gallery, like the Tate in London, or the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and the feel will be as if you were really there.
And unlike the old copper-based internet service, slow connections will be a thing of the past. Multiply that experience millions of times over, in workplaces, schools, TAFEs, universities, homes and that's the NBN.
Today's connection ceremony is the beginning of a great journey for our nation. By decade's end, the whole of Australia will be connected by superfast broadband. The decades-long monopoly of Telstra will be broken, allowing all telcos to compete freely and fairly, and a new era of communications will arrive, with devices and applications we are only beginning to experience and to understand.
I have only one response to the critics of the NBN  -  come here to Armidale. The NBN is real, it's here, and we will not stop until the last cable is laid and the last home connected.
I very proudly launch the NBN at its first site in mainland Australia. A great day for Armidale, a great day for Australia. The future begins here and it begins today.
Thank you very much.



I see many state and Federal colleagues here today, far too many to name.

And I see so many familiar faces too. Old friends, old colleagues ... old mates.

So many good Labor people I've worked with over the years ... so many good Labor people who I know so well.
As Prime Minister I go to many rooms where I feel welcome.

But it is very special to come back to a room where I feel so much at home.


I know Victorian Labor gathers in this room in 2011 with renewed determination and great resolve.

Yes in Government, there were mistakes and there are regrets  no party is perfect and ultimately the people's verdict is always right.

Yet we all know that your reflection can begin with modest satisfaction  a sincere self-esteem  in a job well done.

500 new or rebuilt schools. Trade schools. Regional Rail. Casey Hospital, the Austin, the new Royal Children's and the Women's.

A sound budget, a strong economy, opportunity in the regions, growth in jobs.

After three terms in office, you can be proud.

The record is clear and the legacy is strong.

Steve Bracks and John Brumby led Victorian Labor well.

And under their leadership, Labor governed Victoria well.

For eleven years, this was Labor as it should always be: always a party of Government and a party of ideas.

I am proud of Labor's record in Victoria and you should be too.

And as you look forward, you can be confident as well.

Daniel Andrews will lead Victorian Labor with determination and fight.

And Victorian Labor will be ready to govern in 2014.



In Canberra, Labor is in a different phase.

This is our year of decision and delivery.

Yet in your renewed determination and in our decisions and delivery we are each driven by the same progressive principles of Labor  these great things we share, these things which brought us all to rooms like this in the first place:

The people we are, the people we represent, the things we believe in.

Australian Labor: a party with history and a party of the future.

All Australians: speaking for the great mass of the people still.

A strong economy and opportunity for all: sharing and sticking together so the fair go is always fully paid for.


Friends, I saw my predecessor John Howard say a strange thing a few days ago.

He said that I should not have called our Budget a Labor Budget, because I should have been speaking to all Australians.

I thought this was very telling, because it betrayed the conservative failure to understand Labor's governing purpose:

A Labor Budget is a Budget for all Australians.

In our plans to spread the opportunities of the mining boom, in our plans to get more Australians into jobs, in our decisions to get the Budget back in the black, we have been driven by this great goal:

Opportunity for all.

Not entrenched privilege for the few.

Australia's economy needs more Australian workers and many Australians need work.

Our Labor values and our belief in spreading opportunity impel us to put the two together.

When I think about this Labor Budget I think about a community venture I visited a fortnight ago.

On the Thursday before the Budget I went to a Communities for Children service run by the Benevolent Society and UnitingCare Burnside in Ambarvale in Sydney.

Co-located on site is the Yummy Cafe run by the YWCA. The Cafe is an innovative, award-winning hub in the community which provides a safe, child-friendly space and nutritious food.

Young mums meet there to join in study groups with free accredited courses and access to child care while they are studying through the Happy Young Parents Program.

I met teen mums who are studying their certificate three in child care services and some of the girls I spoke to are already planning to go on to get their diploma in early childhood education and care.

These girls are seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, doing one of the hardest things in the world and too often doing it on their own.

But they're not on their own at Ambarvale.

It's a program which is breaking what could be generational cycles of disadvantage passed on from mother to child.

It's a place where economic participation is creating social inclusion, where new skills and new work are creating a new life.

Most important, the young women I met are helping themselves.

Setting the alarm clock early, doing the hard thing, getting up and going every day, when the morning's cold, when they're tired, when bub is grizzling.

And through that effort finding a life of purpose and friendship and warmth and fun as well.

These young women will be joining footy tipping comps and going to work Christmas parties, their children are having baby-cinos and making little childcare buddies.

It's the kind of life we expect for ourselves and I can assure you, these young women have the same expectations as every Australian.

They won't be patronised or told they're not up to it  and if they have their way, they certainly won't be left behind.

At Ambarvale, I saw hope, I saw opportunity, I saw young women learning and working and supporting each other, setting goals for themselves and for their kids.

This is where Labor thinking has to be today.

The old way saw these young women as victims, the old way offered an excuse.

Some today see these young women as problems,they offer blame.

At Ambarvale, I just saw people - people who can work, people who can seize opportunity.

I left there really proud of those young women and really proud that our Labor Budget will help more young women like them.

The conservatives can never truly comprehend this about us.

But the response from people who work with disadvantaged Australians shows me that many good people understand our plans, do know that we are acting from our highest principles.

I thought the words of Tony Nicholson of the Brotherhood of St Laurence following the Budget were powerful:

The Budget has taken the initial steps of establishing a new welfare morality for our nation which is long overdue ...
... the most disadvantaged in our community have modest mainstream aspirations and ... they won't shy from increased obligations in welfare if they are matched with more and better assistance.
This is the test of the new welfare morality ... It's a test that the welfare initiatives in the Budget pass ... most will relish the additional support.

Tony wasn't alone.

A new welfare morality, a Budget for all Australians - a Labor Budget.

A Budget in which I wanted to deliver, based on the values that drove me to politics, on my passion to create opportunity for all Australians.

It is a passion I learned from my parents and our family's experience  and a passion that was fuelled by my experience of the Labor tradition  those around me and those who have gone before me who have fought for fairness and opportunity in our country's future.

Belief in the benefits and dignity of work is the universal Labor conviction.

Andrew Fisher said it in 1910:

Isn't the typical labourer the typical Australian? I think he is. The future of Australia depends upon him. Whom else can you choose as typical? Not the idler.

Curtin's creed as the Battle of the Coral Sea raged was simple:

Men are fighting for Australia today. Those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.

In 1948 Ben Chifley's creed was simple too:

Self-respect is born in people who have the opportunity to work ... and that benefits the community of which they are members.

Your party, our party, the party I lead, is  politically, spiritually, even literally  the party of work.

Our Budget includes many sound Labor measures.

$2.2 billion for mental health. 130 000 new training places and apprenticeships.

The parents of hundreds of thousands of teenagers with over $4000 a year extra in family tax benefit.

Millions of low-income workers with more in their regular pay packet through the reforms to the Low-Income Tax Offset.

But if the Budget has a face, the young women and the babies who I saw at Ambarvale are it.


Friends, we are the party of work, and we are the party of political courage.

This Labor Party, this labour movement, was created by people who were prepared to face up to the challenges of the future and they haven't been easy.

When this Party was formed the challenges of fighting two world wars were still to come.

When this Party was formed the challenge of the Great Depression was still to come.

When this Party was formed what we needed to do to modernize our economy and be competitive in the world was still to come.

And people from the Labor Party and people in the labour movement looked inside themselves and found the courage to face those challenges.

Now we must summon that courage again and tackle climate change.

We must summon that courage again and win the fight to price carbon.

We know climate change is real.

We know we must cut carbon pollution.

We know the cheapest, most efficient way to do that is to make big polluters pay.

And we know that when big polluters pay that every cent of that money can be used to help families, protect jobs and fund programs to tackle climate change.

Friends, it's been said before now but it's never been truer than of the fight to price carbon:

This isn't a fight between right and left.

It's a fight between right and wrong.

Conservative Governments around the world are acting responsibly.

The United Kingdom is not only committed to retaining a domestic carbon price and remaining in the European emissions trading scheme, it has this week announced deeper cuts in carbon emissions.

New Zealand's emissions trading scheme began in July 2008 and last year its Government further expanded the scheme.

Like me, Prime Ministers Cameron and Key understand that we must act to protect our environment and secure a strong clean energy future for our economy.

Our opponents' campaign sets the future of our great country against the ambitions of one political elite.

There is a reason they are begging for an election in 2011.

And it is not because they think they can win in 2013.

It is because they know that in 2012, this mindlessly negative campaign will be exposed before every Australian.

When Australia has a carbon price, when households are generously assisted, when jobs continue to grow.

When the sun rises in the east, cows keep giving milk, chickens still lay eggs.

Our opponents know their campaign of fear will be exposed as a sham and then they will face the judgement of the Australian people in 2013.

Friends, we are fighting to price carbon, to tackle climate change and to build a clean energy economy which is prepared and strong.

But we are fighting for something else as well.

We are fighting to show that our nation hasn't lost the ability to reform, to take the decisions reason compels us to take today to build a better future.

Friends, many of us follow American politics with interest and think of the United States as a friend for Australia and a force for good in the world.

Yet we are still often struck by the differences between us.

We are confused by their health care debates  why can't they follow our Labor example with Medicare we say.

We share their trauma when a congresswoman is shot and we are grateful that here, politicians do not live in fear.

We are amazed that more than two years into his term, President Obama is still being challenged on his place of birth and we say to each other  only in America.

But friends, while I am confident we will continue to be a safe nation proud of the health care system Labor designed for our country, I believe a more Americanised political style of debate has come to this country.

Tony Abbott has said of himself that he is John Howard and Browyn Bishop's political love child.

Heaven knows that's bad enough but the truth is he is acting more like the love child of Sarah Palin and Donald Trump.

So let me reply to his increasingly hysterical fear campaign with President Obama's words to his nation when answering the hysteria about his birth certificate.

We do not have time for this kind of silliness.

We don't have time for the politicians and shock jocks who deny the scientific conclusions of NASA and the CSIRO.

We don't have time for made-up figures and shameless fear-mongering.

We don't have time to waste on a debate that lacks facts and reason.

Our national efforts and energies need to be focussed.

We are a nation determined to keep our economy strong while spreading the opportunities our strong economy gives us.

We are a nation at war and determined to prevail in Afghanistan.

We are a nation determined to do our bit to tackle climate change and urgently needing to make a start to build the clean energy economy of the future.

We are a nation that emits more carbon pollution per person than any other developed nation on earth.

We live on a planet that's warming dangerously.

We don't have time for fear mongering.

Our national ethos is to have a go.

And together we will tackle climate change, price carbon, provide assistance to families and protect jobs.


Friends, we have brought down a responsible Budget to create jobs and spread Opportunity.

A Labor Budget for all Australians.

We have embarked on a policy program to deliver a carbon price and a clean energy economy.

A Labor reform for all Australians.

And now every Australian progressive  everyone who wants Government to make brave decisions for the future of the country and persist in the face of populist opposition  has a campaign to be part of and a policy to support.

We didn't sign up to these things because they are easy.

But it is not in the DNA of this political party, it is not in the DNA of this labour movement, it is not in the DNA of this country we love, to be afraid of the future.

We are called on today to face difficult challenges again.

They require us to be simultaneously a party of government and a party of ideas.

A party committed to methodical, disciplined progress and a party which reaches out to the wider community, seeking new ways to represent and to serve the interests of every Australian.
Friends, as our world keeps changing, so we have a responsibility to renew ourselves and our organisation, constantly focusing on the needs of the Australians who we are here to serve.

But what mustn't change  what doesn't change  is our courage.

We will be as bold in our future as we have been in our past.

We will serve the cause of bringing opportunity to every Australian.

We will pursue the historic mission of fairness that has created the Labor Party and for which we have endured all of these long years.

We will meet the challenges of the future.



Thanks for that introduction Peter.
It's a tribute to the significance of Minerals Week on the political calendar that so many Parliamentarians are here with you tonight.
Led by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, my friend Wayne Swan; joined by my ministerial colleagues Martin Ferguson, Greg Combet, Gary Gray, Brendan O'Connor and Warren Snowdon and Senators Nick Sherry and Mark Arbib; with parliamentary secretaries David Bradbury, Mark Dreyfus, Richard Marles and Senator Ursula Stephens; as well as Chief Government Whip Joel Fitzgibbon, Sharon Bird, Sharon Grierson, Chris Hayes, Amanda Rishworth, Andrew Leigh,  Shayne Neumann, Deb O'Neill, Sid Sidebottom, Senator Mark Bishop, Senator Trish Crossin, Senator Steve Hutchins and Senator Glenn Sterle.
I know Mr Abbott addressed you at lunchtime today, and the Opposition is represented tonight by other members and Senators as well, and that the Greens Member for Melbourne and the Independent Member for Kennedy are here as well.
So, miners, members, friends, fellow Australians all: welcome back to Canberra for Minerals Week 2011.
Minerals Week has been bringing the industry and government together for decades and will continue to do so in future.
I know you've been hard at work today and that you've got a full program tomorrow with the Council meeting and AGM discussions with Ministers and others.
We come to this Minerals Week working off a shared understanding of what is happening in our economy and in your industry, Not just the scale of investment, the biggest boom since they panned for gold in Bathurst and Ballarat, but the pace of change, with investment eight times what it was six years ago, on levels which we all considered a boom at the time, now accounting for well over half of the country's export earnings, up from a third a decade ago.
The truth is I spend much of my time as Prime Minister explaining to people who aren't here tonight just why the boom is a good thing for all Australians, and why nurturing the boom is central to the Government's economic strategy.
Whether I'm talking to investors in China and the United States, or talking to teenagers in suburban high schools, I'm always emphasising the opportunities your industry is creating, opportunities for return on capital, opportunities for a lifetime of work.
My message to Australia and the world is consistent: the investment boom is good news and we celebrate it.
But you knew that.
What I really want you to take away tonight is an understanding of just how central your industry is to the Government's economic agenda.
First of all, nurturing the mining investment boom is central to the Government's budget strategy and overall economic policy.
This year the Treasurer has delivered a tough Budget which will see us back in the black in 2012-13.
We're offsetting new spending, we're banking upward revisions in revenue, we're limiting spending growth overall, we're making significant savings. There's a reason for all this: above all else, to leave room for the mining sector to grow.
While we have short-term weakness from the natural disasters and an economy recovering from the global financial crisis, our medium term prospects are very strong.
I think it's widely acknowledged that fiscal policy was too loose during mining boom Mark I. Throughout 2007 we saw the economic outcomes of dumping cash into a capacity-constrained economy, and that's a mistake this Government won't make.
As investment hits top gear in the years ahead, we don't want the government and private sector chasing the same resources.
These decisions do call for some courage and we've shown it. In a choice between getting the policy right and cheap populism, I'll go for the right policy every time.
We'll continue on the reform road, hold to responsible fiscal policy and make the right investments, to nurture the boom for the future of the Australian economy.
Secondly, while there's no quiet years in a business as big as mining or in a task as complex as governing Australia, I do believe that as Government and industry come together in Canberra this week there's more business on the table than ever before, issues vital to your industry, issues vital to the country, and they include difficult issues that we've been discussing at great length: putting a price on carbon and introducing a minerals resource rent tax.
On carbon, the best way to describe our fundamental approach is this: as a responsible national Government, we have to manage a long-term national risk - climate change.
You know all the arguments but I just make that point.
You're all leaders in industry, responsible leaders, you all manage risk every day. If there's anything that keeps leaders awake at night, it's that responsibility.
In this sense Government is no different and all of us who care about the future of our nation must work together as Australians to fulfil this fundamental responsibility of leadership, to manage risk for our nation.
In developing our plan, I know there are some in industry, including some here tonight, who have expressed support for a system like that adopted in the European Union.
My own judgement is that while the overseas experience provides some useful insights I see a number of elements which would not be in Australia's national interest.
Schemes which exclude substantial sectors of the real economy simply shift the first-round cost on to a smaller number of players, with a greater cost to the national economy over time.
Our overall approach is to achieve the lowest-cost, most efficient emissions reductions, to set incentives for the most productive investment possible.
So, as you all know, we're working through the process for developing the carbon price now.
The final Garnaut Review will be followed this month by the Productivity Commission review of international shadow carbon prices and the Treasury modelling of the impacts of a carbon price on the Australian economy.
We intend to announce the details of the carbon price in the middle of the year, to introduce the legislation to the Parliament in September and we're working for passage by the end of the year with the price to commence 1 July 2012.
Friends, the Government is doing all this because we believe that Australia needs to act now.
No question, it's not easy.
We respect that this requires industry to make a transition, and I know that in the face of the challenge there are some who resort to scepticism or argue for inaction or delay.
I have to say, in my life, I don't remember many difficult things which got easier the longer I left them, and in an economy like ours, there is never an easy time to make a big change, whether that's tariff reform or tax reform or pricing carbon.
I also know there's been discussion this week of the status of a global agreement to reduce emissions. What's clear is that with or without global agreement, our competitor economies are acting.
The Government's approach is not that Australia should lead the world in environmental policy  -  it is that Australia should not be left behind in economic transition.
If we can't act now to manage this risk - after decades of growth; with an economy which is fundamentally strong and has a solid pipeline of investment; after a long debate which at significant points had bipartisan agreement  -  I don't know when we can.
Just as I think we can share an understanding of the need for risk management on climate change, on profit-based taxation, I do believe we share a fundamental approach.
Profit-based taxation, rather than royalties, is the better approach to generating public value from natural resources.
Royalties don't support growth in the sector. They make it more difficult for new investment to get up and they remain high when conditions are tough, and because they are imposed from the first tonne that is dug up royalties are much less supportive of growth and of small ventures.
So, I will continue to push back on states that push up royalties. The recent decisions in the Western Australian budget frankly only demonstrate the weaknesses of a royalties system, because when a state like WA hikes their royalties, it is the many small and start-up ventures who pay the price.
By contrast, the minerals resource rent tax will not apply at all for smaller miners, those with profits under $50 million, and miners with low profitability, for example those setting up a project with high upfront costs.
By design, the MRRT recognises different businesses processes and the different profitability of mines and will only tax profits after deductions for investment and operating costs.
How we move to profit-based taxation is obviously the key.
The Government has accepted the recommendations of the Policy Transition Group and the initial public consultation on the draft MRRT legislation will begin in the next few weeks, and we'll be introducing the MRRT legislation towards the end of the year.
I put these two issues together, carbon and resource rents, not just because they've been issues where you have real interests at stake and where you haven't always been happy with our approach  -  though I do respect that.
I ask the Deputy Prime Minister and I ask ministers of the calibre of Greg and Martin to deal with the hard issues, not the easy things, and these are among them.
The reason I put carbon and resource rents together as issues to discuss is because while you're all here, I need to say this: I sincerely appreciate the way the industry is approaching our discussions. I can honestly say, every day I've been Prime Minister, I've seen respect and good faith on both sides of both these issues.
We're having a serious discussion that respects the facts.
That's vital for the national interest: we need an evidence-based, empirical public debate, not just to deliver these difficult reforms but to keep public policy on the reform road for the future.
And as well as respecting the facts in the discussion, I think industry and Government have respected our word.
Where we've made agreements, they've stuck, and in turn, this has allowed us to get to grips with the remaining matters.
We've seen this on the carbon price mechanism, where we have been engaging in detailed design work since February and you've worked hard with us.
We've seen this on the MRRT where the Policy Transition Group has done enormous work to get us to this point.
The Government won't pat ourselves on the back for consulting: it's what we should always do, it's the mark of a mature and methodical policy process, and we know industry has stayed at the table and been seriously engaged.
I know it's exhaustive  -  business roundtables, working groups, policy transition groups. I also know it's worth it.
The Government is also building partnerships with industry to strengthen the economy and create opportunity.
To build infrastructure, $400 million for the Regional Infrastructure Fund.
An Infrastructure Investment Incentive to attract up to $25 billion of private and superannuation investment by protecting the value of early stage losses and giving greater certainty that early-stage losses can be claimed.
To extend education and employment to indigenous Australians. This is an area where industry and government are partners in the drive to extend opportunity to indigenous Australia.
Developing a successful Indigenous employment model in the Pilbara that can be replicated in other regions  -  funding thousands of commencements into training and employment  -  forming specific partnerships from Gove to Gladstone.
Just today I joined with Rio Tinto and discussed the good work they're doing  -  one example among many in the industry.
To train Australians and make the best of skilled migration. Training our young people to work in industries like yours is not just nurturing the Australian boom, it is extending Australian opportunity as well.
Here I see a real chance, driven by the economy, to work with you to achieve goals we share  -  goals I have always held dear: for our young people to have a fair go, to have an opportunity in life.
That's exactly what's in our Budget:
 * 	An industry-demand-driven National Workforce Development Fund that will deliver 130,000 new training places over four years.
 * 	A national mentoring program to help 40,000 apprentices finish training.
 * 	Accelerating apprenticeships so people progress as they acquire the right skills.
 * 	Ambitious reforms of the vocational education and training system.
 * 	16,000 skilled migration places to the regions, Regional Migration Agreements, Enterprise Migration Agreements for large resource projects in return for a financial contribution to train Australians for the future.
And we're pleased that these have been well received.
Your own Council recognising the the Budget makes ... important contributions in tackling emerging capacity constraints.
The Mines and Metals Association praising Enterprise Migration Agreements for the sector as a huge step in the right direction.
I won't argue with that.
Friends, I also want to acknowledge the part the industry is playing rebuilding Queensland after the devastating natural disasters of this year.
The sector contributed over $18 million to the Queensland disaster relief appeal.
In those terrible days, we saw mining companies using their helicopters used to ferry evacuees, providing transportable buildings for medical practices  -  even funding the refurbishment of a senior citizens home.
It's been almost literally all hands to the pump' dewatering mines, so it's good news for the industry, the state and the country that the vast majority of damaged coal mines have now returned to operation.
And you have borne a burden as well, and the drop in our gross domestic product reported today reflects the substantial costs to many of you of losses arising from the damage and disruption this summer.
The Government is doing our bit, providing $5.7 billion to help Queensland  -  the vast majority to repair damage to essential infrastructure.
Over 70% of damaged roads and 90% of damaged rail lines restored and recovery and reconstruction is well underway.
There is much work still to do, but we'll see the task through together.
It's no accident that last Friday while many of you were preparing for this week in Canberra I was up in Moranbah at a great event organised by Women in Mining and Resources Queensland.
There I spoke to some really inspirational Australians - geologists, engineers, a female mine manager - and we talked about what it must have been like to be one of the first woman to turn up at a mine site; the first woman to climb into the cab of one of those huge trucks; and we talked about the opportunities that flow from the mining industry to these hard working women.
Or that next week I'll be in Yirrkala in Arnhem Land to celebrate the signing of the agreement between traditional owners of the Gove peninsula and Rio Tinto which secures the operation of bauxite mining and alumina refining at Gove for four decades to come, and we'll talk about the opportunities that flow from the mining industry to Aboriginal traditional owners, surrounding communities and the Nhulunbuy community.
Your industry is so important to my daily work because you've become so important to the opportunities that all Australians seek.
I think about it this way: We are a country once described as the world's first suburban nation, where home ownership is seriously referred to as the national dream, and this year, Australian industry will invest more money into mining than the whole country invests in building new houses.
So we're together in Canberra tonight at a time when mining's never been more important to our country's future, when Government and industry have never had more to discuss: some shared fundamentals; yes, some big differences to work through; yes, real respect and good faith working through them; a boom to nurture; infrastructure to build; Australians to train; big risks to manage; big transitions to make; big opportunities to seize.
It's a good time for activists and a good time for optimists, and there's plenty of both in the room tonight in industry and in government: optimists who share a vision of a better future; activists who share a determination to build it; Australians who'll share a good night together. 



I warmly acknowledge: The Hon. Robert McClelland, Federal Attorney General
Mr John Robertson, NSW Leader of the Opposition The Honourable Andrew Constance - NSW Minister for Ageing, and Minister for Disability Services and other representatives from State and Local Government I honour Consul-General Benedetto Latteri and his diplomatic colleagues, who so proudly represent the nation that achieved its unity and freedom 150 years ago. I acknowledge those Australians of Italian descent in public life who are so emblematic of this community and its success:Senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, representing the Federal Leader of the Opposition;The Hon. Victor Dominello  -  NSW Minister for Citizenship and Communities, representing Premier O'Farrell;Mr John Sidoti  -  State Member for Drummoyne;Mr Charles Casuscelli  -  State Member for Strathfield Each of you are proud Italian-Australians who have brought great honour on your families and on this community. I pay tribute to Lorenzo Fazzini, Andrea Comastri and the team from Co.As.It. and the other wonderful groups who do so much to support the Italian community and promote Italian culture.You presence is a reminder that this event is not only a gathering of friendship and goodwill. We have work to do  -  raising funds for a much-needed dementia helpline, and I know everyone will respond with appropriate generosity. Finally I want to acknowledge Frank Coletta, such a familiar face on Sydney television and so generously acting as our Master of Ceremonies tonight. In acknowledging all these high achieving individuals, I honour an entire community who came to a great nation and made it even greater - Abundant proof that the sacrifices of those who travelled to this country bearing high hopes did not hold those hopes in vain. This is therefore a night to celebrate journeys: Italy's journey of nationhood over a century and a half; The journey of individuals and families across the seas to a new land; and
Australia's own journey to maturity as a nation at ease with itself and with the world. Friends, I'm from a migrant family and I know what it's like to sit around the kitchen table and weigh the arguments for emigration: whether to sacrifice the company of family and friends, leave behind the graves of loved ones, abandon ancient places and timeless rituals, and to travel to a new country, often just on the strength of a few brochures and photographs. Doing so when travel was costly and time-consuming and there was no guarantee you would ever be able to return. Thousands of Italians made that momentous decision. They braved the unknown, but they also came with hope - hope that this new land would repay their courage, repaid with opportunity and the chance to prove yourself, free of the old limitations of class and social distinction. Friends, Six decades later, we can affirm tonight that those hopes were realised  -  and were realised in abundance. They were right to have faith in this new land. But if Australia was a land of opportunity, it only came at a price. Years of backbreaking labour in places like the Snowy or the cane fields, working two or three jobs, sometimes facing misunderstanding and discrimination. But in spite of these difficulties, you held fast and saw Australia as it could be. Not just a nation that absorbed migrants, but a nation that would also be changed by them. That is why we must always regard immigration as a source of strength. Because it renewed and enriched our nation at its core, precisely at the time when the world was opening up and our old insular habits could no longer be sustained. In any case, Australia had always been diverse. There were Jews on the First Fleet  -  and one Italian. Our founding father, Arthur Phillip, was half German. The Chinese came here in the 1820s. Afghans and Lebanese followed throughout the 19th century. Diversity is as old as the nation itself. In the 1970s, we simply gave these things a name  -  multiculturalism  -  and came to see them as the benefit they always were. How else was it that in 1861 the citizens of Melbourne banded together and purchased a gift to mark Italy's Unification. It was, appropriately, a sword of honour, presented to Garibaldi, costing the handsome sum of 358 pounds. The Australian community, at the start of its own democratic journey, understood the significance of what had happened in Italy. After centuries of division and occupation, Italy had resolved to become united and to become free. It is that historic decision we celebrate tonight - 150 years of nationhood that enabled Italy to rediscover its place in the global community, paving the way for the prosperous, innovative country that stands as a force for good in a changing world. Friends, Italy has give many great gifts to the world: her culture, her food, her sense of style - but the greatest gift of Italy has been her people. Around 60 million people outside Italy claim Italian heritage. And for this gift, Australia will always give thanks. So friends, tonight we remember the places where our journeys began. And we honour this place where all our journeys have found their completeness and their end.
The place amid all the world where we can be safe and grow old and hand on a better future. Our land. Our home. Our sanctuary. Australia 



Friends.
We meet here, your country.
We meet here, on Australian soil, our country.
And we come together in this place, at this time, to celebrate a moment uniquely yours, uniquely Australian.
We celebrate an agreement between the traditional owners of this land and a mining giant.
We celebrate jobs and investment for the region.
We celebrate the long-term projects and investments which will benefit the indigenous community living in north-east Arnhem Land.
We celebrate the new leases for community use of buildings and the new lots at Nhulunbuy for traditional owner-funded construction projects, for medical facilities, shops and housing. 
We celebrate thecontracting opportunities for traditional owner entities and employment opportunities for Yolngu people across the region.
This is an agreement to be proud of because it heralds a better future which will be built together.
And today I am proud to be here with you.
Here with the traditional owners of this land and those who seek to develop its bounty.
Here with people who willsharethe benefits for better lives and better futures.
Here with Bakamumu Marika, a senior traditional owner of the Yirrkala community and a descendant of Roy Marika, champion of the 1963 bark petition.
Here with Galarrwuy Yunupingu, who has reminded the nation that when the first mining agreement was signed in Eastern Arnhem Land:
This tall, thin welfare man climbed on the 44-gallon drum and announced our future to us. 
Our shared future is no longer something for a Protector of Aborigines or a Prime Minister of Australia to announce.
Our shared future must be shaped by us together.
In making your agreement you did not submitto a distant decision at a cabinet table or in a board room.
Instead you came together, as people who shared a goal.
By negotiating honestly, you have delivered local opportunity and ensured strong governance.
Opportunity and responsibility hand in hand, side by side.
You teach us all lessons of great meaning.
That opportunity grows through being prepared to reach out to each other.
That moving from reaching out to reaching agreement requires hard work and understanding.
That our true goals will lie beyond our reach unless we show each other respect.
For as human beings we have spiritual as well as material needs.
Respect is the visible sign of the invisible imaginings we share.
An agreement struck between a mining company and traditional owners, a bark petition addressed from one Australian people to the nation as a whole, an act to constitute the Commonwealth of Australia.
I believe that in the coming years our nation can shape a shared future in which weco-operate to end the disadvantage in the lives of our people and mark that co-operation in the life of our nation with a spirit of respect. 
A spirit of respect that understands that as the first Australians learned to live on this land they also learned to imagine themselves in it, to draw it, to sing it, to dance it, to remember it. 
To learn its law.
And that the generations of Australians who followed, drawn here through centuries from all over the world, learned not just to live here but to imagine themselves here as well in pictures and poems and stories and song. 
And in law.
Over time respect grew and urged us on.
To the 1967 Referendum which demonstrated our faith in the equal human dignity of all.
To land rights and native title which demonstrated our knowledge of the fact of dispossession in our law of land.
To the National Apology which demonstrated our sorrow for the history of post-contact mistreatment.
And now it urges us on to shape a future of opportunity and responsibility together.
It urges us on to mark our respect for each other: from our daily personal dealings, to the design of national policy, to recognition in our constitution.
Recognising the unique and special place of the first Australians in the Australian Constitution can be a wonderful national goal.
An opportunity to recognise, in the founding document of our nationhood, our shared pride in being Australian and our shared pride in Australia's continuing Indigenous culture.
While before every step our democratic debates have been real and robust and in every sense Australian ... after every step our national consensus has been strengthened.
These are not steps anyone would now unmake.
So when that happens, when the first Australians take their place in the first document of all Australians, it will be an uplifting, uniting moment for our nation a day of great national pride, a day of shared respect. 
As we share this day of celebration, we look towards that day.
And we dedicate ourselves to a journey of shared effort to better lives, to achieve reconciliation, to show respect.
We are the custodians of the land we share ... of the values we cherish ... of the children who rely on us.
We are the oldest living culture joined with the many diverse cultures ofour Australia.
We are Welsh-born women and Arnhem-born men.
Australians. 
Us. 



It's a great pleasure to welcome you to the nation's capital to share in this important Forum.
As CEOs of global companies, you are acutely aware of the opportunities and pressures facing Australia's economy at this remarkable time.
Most of your firms operate in the non-mining sector and so approach the current climate with varying degrees of optimism.
But I want to make this very clear:
Our economy is strong.
Strong investment  -  low unemployment  -  low inflation  -  low debt.
But we are never complacent.
We understand the pressures you face from international competitors.
The impact of a high currency.
The closing of the skills gap with Asia.
The continuous need for greater productivity, innovation and efficiency.
All of this occurring against the backdrop of historic economic change for this nation.
Friends, Australia is witnessing a deep and lasting structural change in our nation's economic fortunes.
We find ourselves located strategically at the right place and at the right time in world history, with the centre of gravity in the global economy shifting emphatically to our region.
As a result, terms of trade stand at their highest sustained  level in 140 years.
Per capita GDP in Australia is 10 per cent higher than Germany; 14 per cent higher than the UK and 17 per cent higher than Japan.
Treasury projects GDP growth rising to four per cent in 2011-12, with strong jobs growth over the next two years.
Opportunities in the Asian century
Friends, the rise of Asia is transforming our economy.
One quarter of our exports make their way to China alone, potentially rising to half by 2015.
This is good for Australia because it brings three distinct sets of opportunities:
Direct benefits from mining itself
 * 	Wider benefits from the spread of mining wealth
 * 	And opportunities as the Asian middle class expands.
The benefits of mining are obvious, such as higher wages, dividends, superannuation savings and spending on equipment and services.
Mining-related opportunities are also widespread.
Mining uplifts a whole range of sectors including construction and engineering, transport and logistics, financial and legal services, training and work safety.
Opportunities that many of your firms are well placed to exploit.
Of course, high terms of trade place strong upward pressure on our currency  -  that is undeniable.
These differential patterns of growth  -  which I call the patchwork economy  -  cannot be underestimated.
Our trade exposed sectors face real pressures.
And as CEOs heading the Australian operation of multinational firms, I know you want to deliver strong returns to head office, grow exports and gain scarce capital.
But the idea of hollowing out because of the high dollar needs to be carefully assessed.
For a start, a higher dollar eases pressure on domestic inflation.
It provides cheaper goods for those firms who rely on imported components.
And the inflow of export income washes right through our economy, creating many more opportunities here on shore.
Output from the services sector alone is projected to increase by about 35 per cent by 2020.
Great opportunities still exist for investors in areas such as:
 * 	Banking, finance and legal services.
 * 	Infrastructure.
 * 	Clean energy.
 * 	Carbon markets.
 * 	Creative industries, especially in the area of NBN content, video games and mobile phone applications.
 * 	And areas of discretionary spending such as personal services and domestic tourism.
There will also be big opportunities in health and aged care as the population ages and medical science advances.
With growing prosperity, our consumption of all these goods and services will rapidly increase.
But opportunities aren't just confined to the non-traded sector.
We can remain competitive in the export market.
Friends, with the weight of global activity shifting rapidly to our region, the Asian middle class will soon equal the size of the middle class in the rest of the world combined.
For Australia, that means strong demand for our commodities and the challenge of finding new opportunities for high-end services and manufactures.
We will need a renewed focus on innovation, on building stronger regional partnerships in education, science and research, and positioning Australian as a global R&amp;D centre.
Moreover we must support the development of firm capabilities that enable businesses to move up the value chain and compete effectively in these markets.
Our economic position will depend on the education and skills of our workforce and managers and continued productivity improvement.
Creating success
Friends, meeting the challenges of the Asian Century forms the heart of the Government's policy agenda.
We know the mining boom will place strain on those firms exposed to currency fluctuations.
Create skills shortages and cost pressures.
Lead to different growth patterns across industries and regions. But structural change is nothing new in any economy; it is a constant throughout history.
Australia has successfully managed shifts on this scale before, and we can do it again.
Macro-economic settings
First and foremost, we must get the macro-economic settings right.
That means getting the Budget back into surplus in 2012-13 so government is not competing with the private sector for the same resources.
That's why we're delivering the fastest fiscal consolidation on record  -  3.8 per cent of GDP over the next two years.
It also means fiscal and monetary policy are pulling the same direction, unlike the period between 2004 and 2007 when unchecked public spending fuelled inflation.
We will not make the same mistake.
I'm also pleased to see that Australia is embracing a culture of saving as households and business rebuild their balance sheets.
Household savings rose to 11.5 per cent of income in the March quarter, a level not seen since the mid 1980s.
This is a good thing because it means the next phase of growth will rest on firmer foundations.
We don't need another boom marked by excessive credit card debt, unsustainable housing prices and overreliance on home loan equity redraws.
We need solid growth grounded in prudence and commonsense.
Finally  -  and importantly  -  we are earmarking proceeds from the mining boom to boost savings and cut taxes.
With support from the mining tax, the Government will lift the superannuation guarantee from 9 to 12 per cent.                       
This will help raise superannuation savings by $500 billion by 2035.
We will also bring down the company tax rate to 29 per cent, to help those businesses not in the mining boomfast lane.
Building capacity
In building capacity for the years ahead, nothing is more important than skills.
That's why in last month's Federal Budget, we invested more than $3 billion in building the skills the economy needs.
At its heart is our new $558 million National Workforce Development Fund, which will deliver 130,000 new training places for which industry can bid to respond to the news needs of your workforces.
This comes on top of our doubling of school funding since 2007, a 20 per cent increase in university undergraduate places and a doubling of post-graduate places.
I understand that our economy needs more workers as well as more skills.
The Government's participation reforms are carefully designed to meet this need.
From phasing out the Dependent Spouse Tax Offset, beginning with partners under 40, to extending Earn or Learn requirements to 21 year olds.
Targeted wage subsidies  -  encouraging employers to hire those who have not worked for more than two years.
Strict new work tests for the Disability Support Pension alongside allowing more hours to be worked before payments are suspended.
Plus participation plans for teen parents, new requirements for jobless families, extending income management and developing new place-based programs to support local and regional employment.
I see a real opportunity here, to meet the demands of our strong economy and to include all Australians in the opportunities created by that economic strength.
At the same time, skilled migration also remains an option where domestic labour supply falls short.
The Government has consciously weighted the immigration program towards skills.
That is why we have recently provided 16,000 skilled migration places to the regions.
And enabled streamlined Enterprise Migration Agreements for large resource projects.
We will do our best to ensure the next phase of growth is not constrained by a lack of skills or workers.
Just as Government changes the way we do business in skills and immigration, so the Government is also strongly committed to helping firms change the way they do business through genuine R&amp;D.
In a tight budget, we will see more taxpayer investment in the innovation system than ever before.
In fact our innovation spend of $9.5 billion a year represents a 43 per cent increase on the best efforts of the previous government.
Our commitment to Commercialisation Australia will more than double in 2011-12 to $60 million.
It is a mark of our resolve to remake our economy, and our society, through innovation.
Likewise, we recognise the cost of doing business in a federal system  -  and we want to make it easier.
We have achieved landmark reforms like a single system for regulating occupational health and safety.
Around half of our Seamless National Economy deregulation reforms are completed or close to completion.
We've also streamlined the nation's 23 different transport regulatory authorities into just three.
Real reforms that will save time  -  save money  -  and cut red tape.
Friends, we can't be a productive nation without also building our infrastructure capacity.
The Australian Government is making record infrastructure investments in ports, roads and rail  -  $36 billion over six years.
We have also announced a new Infrastructure Investment Incentive to  encourage up to $25 billion of private and superannuation investment.
The Incentive will support investment in National Priority projects by exempting them from the Continuity of Ownership Test and the Same Business Test, and providing uplift at the government bond rate.
Most importantly of all, we are delivering the greatest infrastructure project in the nation's history  -  the NBN  -  that will radically change the way we live, work and study.
Driving productivity, fostering competition among telcos and lowering business costs.
The last phase of the boom saw lower productivity because of infrastructure constraints and skills shortages.
We will not make the same mistake.
Trade and investment
Likewise, we remain committed to the principles and practice of free trade.
Australia will continue to push for a decent outcome in the Doha Round.
And we will continue to pursue high quality bilateral free trade deals with nations such as Japan, Korea, and China, so long as they support the multilateral system.
Australia also remains a globally competitive location open to overseas investment.
We were ranked third on the 2011 Index of Economic Freedom behind Singapore and Hong Kong. 
At the end of March 2011, the total stock of foreign investment in Australia was over $2 trillion.
Since November 2007, the Government has approved around 2000 foreign investment business proposals worth over $500 billion.
Over 99 per cent of these were approved, and approved without any conditions.
Only one proposal has been rejected in 10 years.
Foreign investment applications will always be assessed on a non-discriminatory, case-by-case basis.
We are also committed to building Australia as a financial services hub in Asia.
We are actively pursuing a framework that will allow for the introduction of competition in Australia's equity markets, including the entry of foreign operators.
And we are currently working to develop a Funds Management Passport to support the cross-border marketing of funds across the Asian region. 
Australia's investment door remains well and truly open.
Labour market reform
Friends, I want to say a word about labour market reform.
Our Fair Work reforms have made huge changes to the way Australian companies do business:
We have replaced State-based industrial tribunals with a one-stop-shop for the private sector workforce and rolled 4000 awards and instruments into just 122 modern awards.
Most importantly, we have put enterprise bargaining back at the centre of industrial relations, where it should be.
We have consciously promoted enterprise rather than individual negotiation because it is in workplaces that inefficiencies can be addressed and new ideas embraced.
And let's be clear about the results.
The evidence is clear that wage pressures are not leaking from high wage industries like resources into other areas of economy.
The Labour Price Index rose by 3.8 per cent over the year to March 2011, unchanged from the average annual level over the last five years.
Enterprise bargaining is working as it should to ensure that the wages paid by firms and sectors reflect their unique needs.
At the same time days lost to industrial disputes continue to fall.      
Pricing carbon
But friends, alongside all these policies stands the profound challenge of shifting our nation to a low pollution, clean energy economy.
This is one of the greatest reforms of our history and one of the greatest reforms for our future.
Two weeks ago, Professor Ross Garnaut released his final report on climate change.
13 of Australia's most prominent economists described a carbon price as a necessary and desirable structural reform of the Australian economy.
With our abundance of renewables and our skilled workforce, Australia is well equipped to make the transition.
A carbon price will drive innovation to find better, less polluting ways of producing energy, goods and services.
In fact, Treasury modelling shows a carbon price will see gas-fired electricity generation expand by between 150 and 300 per cent by 2050.
Treasury's modelling shows the non-hydro renewable energy sector is projected to be six times bigger than it is today.
In short, dirty energy will become more expensive and clean energy cheaper under a carbon price.
The opportunity for some of the firms represented here today will be enormous.
Navigating the new paradigm'
Friends, I know there some in the international business community who wonder if there ever will be a carbon price.
They are rightly concerned about the fractious state of Australian politics at the present moment.
So let me conclude with some observations.
These are certainly unusual times.
Yes we operate in the circumstance of a minority government.
But we remain committed to driving an ambitious policy agenda.
Despite all the doubts, our agreement with the Greens and Independents is working  -  and is working well.
Of the 112 Bills presented to Parliament since last September, all 112 have passed, including the Flood Levy Bill, loudly decried by our opponents and now sitting quietly on the statute books.
Not only has all our legislation passed.
Every amendment not supported by the government has failed.
In other words, a 100 per cent success rate in the Parliament.
The other key issue is the scope of our reform agenda, the most comprehensive since the Hawke-Keating era.
That our agenda is so full reflects our vision for the nation and the lost decade inherited from our predecessors.
It is necessarily broad and ambitious.
Friends, I spoke before Christmas about 2011 being the year of decision and delivery for our agenda, and I meant it.
This is a year of hard policy grind.
But a year that will ultimately pay rich dividends for our nation and its people.
The year of decision and delivery is now very close to paying off:
Our landmark health agreement was signed at COAG in February and the final details are now being worked out.
The NBN legislation has all passed, the Telstra agreement is close to signing, and fibre roll-out is underway.
The Murray Darling Basin plan is being worked through methodically, with genuine consultation designed to deliver a balanced policy outcome.
Our changes to superannuation and financial services are in the final stages of consultation and fine-tuning.
Our plan to break the people-smuggling business model through a regional processing system is likewise in its final stages of negotiation.
The architecture of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax has been agreed and the first draft legislation is now out for public comment.
And, of course, our carbon package  -  including assistance to industry and households  -  will be released soon.
We are substantially closer to completion on all these policy issues.
Reforms that all represent major structural reforms for Australia's future.
Reforms being purchased through the deliberate expenditure of political capital in the nation's long-term interest.
This is not the time for turning or trepidation.
We are on track.
On track to ensure that the year of decision and delivery will end with success.
In a dynamic and competitive world, we can afford nothing less.
Conclusion
Friends, I hold this confidence because Australia has done great things in the past and we can do great things again.
We are entering an age of opportunity.
An era of growth where the risks are greatly outweighed by the benefits, provided we get the big calls right.
Our settings are right.
Our policies are right.
It's time to hold our nerve.
Walk boldly on the road of reform.
Build a more productive Australia.
And meet the Asian Century with courage and confidence. 



It's terrific to address the National Business Leaders' Forum on Sustainable Development this evening in Canberra.
This isn't a political event but you all know that the issues you've been so dedicated to for so long are now at the absolute centre of national debate. 
It's a time that calls for courage, but it's an exciting time as well.
The fact that your forum is now in its twelfth year is testament to your work over many years to find better, more innovative and more sustainable ways to do business.
And your forum theme Business Leadership in the New Global Innovation Economy: the race is on' rightly reflects the urgency of sustainable innovation  -  an open trading economy like Australia's cannot afford to be left behind in the world.
I know that your program today has been focused on discussion about how the advent of the low carbon economy will impact your business.
I hope you are all buoyed by the very real steps now being taken towards the development of more sustainable and cleaner energy sources.
And I hope you share my sense of excitement about the new era Australia is about to embark on as changes in the global environment open up exciting opportunities for our nation.
Australia is perfectly placed to make our way with confidence into the 21st century.
We have a strong economic record and robust institutions.
We emerged from the global recession with stronger employment growth, lower debt and lower deficits than all of the major advanced economies.
Yes, the summer of natural disasters here and overseas hurt our economy in the first quarter of this year, but the outlook is for solid growth in coming years.
These strong credentials, coupled with our geographic position, make us a place of opportunity for business and investment as the re-emergence of Asia's economic power heralds a new phase of prosperity for our nation.
And just as we see opportunity in the transition in the global economy from west to east  -  so we see opportunity in the transition in the global economy to low carbon growth.
89 countries responsible for more than 80 per cent of global emissions pledged to reduce or limit their emissions under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Our close neighbour New Zealand, a coalition of US states and 31 European countries already have emissions trading schemes in place.
Australia is among 20 major emitters which need to work together if we are to successfully tackle climate change.
More than half of these countries contribute similar levels of emissions as Australia does to the global whole, countries like the United Kingdom, France, the Republic of Korea and South Africa.
I am determined to ensure Australia and Australians are not left behind.
As you are all keenly aware, only a market-based solution can provide long-term investment and consumer confidence.
A market-based solution means a price on carbon.
A price on carbon is the most efficient means of achieving our bipartisan emissions target and our nation is well equipped to make the transition.
And a price on carbon will encourage businesses to invest in energy efficiency and clean energy and those businesses and industries that are preparing for the advent of the pricing framework now will be best placed to take advantage of the impending clean energy economy.
Investments in a clean energy future will improve our chances of competing in the global clean energy economy of tomorrow.
The Australian Government is committed to helping industry to realise future opportunities and enabling firms to harness their comparative advantage.
My Government has committed to returning every cent raised from carbon pricing to assist households, to help businesses make the transition to a low carbon future and to fund programs to tackle climate change.
Assistance to business will support jobs and competitiveness and encourage innovation.
And we will provide ongoing assistance to support zero emissions energy generation and renewable energy.
The new clean energy technologies that will be critical to achieving deep cuts in emissions from the electricity sector while maintaining the high levels of energy security and reliability that households and businesses expect.
Australia has bountiful supplies of renewable fuel sources - wind, solar, wave and geothermal and the Government has a range of measures in place to drive renewable generation.
These include the Connecting Renewables program, Solar Flagships and the Renewable Energy Target, the RET scheme as it is called.
The RET will help us meet our commitment of 20 per cent of our electricity supply coming from renewable sources by 2020. 
Large-scale renewable energy projects such as hydro, wind farms, and geothermal are expected to deliver the vast majority of this 2020 generation target.
With a carbon price in place, the RET is expected to drive $16 billion in new renewable energy investment in Australia by 2020.
This is great news for regional and rural Australia where much of this money is destined and the benefits will range from investment in local infrastructure to investment in training and employment.
Friends, the world is acting. 
The race is on, Australia does not want to be left behind.
In a few minutes you'll hear from your keynote speaker tonight, Kishor Chauker who'll speak to you about India's innovation economy.
I'm sure you'll learn much from Kishor and I'm sure you'll carry new ideas and new inspiration with you when you go home from Canberra.
Our Asian neighbour India is a country that is becoming a global powerhouse by seizing the opportunities from the transition to low carbon growth.
I've come tonight to make sure you all know this: I lead a Government which is determined that Australia will do the same.  



Thanks so much Stephen for that generous introduction.
I see my other ministerial and parliamentary colleagues here today - Chris and Gary; Melissa, Glenn, Mark and Louise.
I see your State Labor Leader Eric and his State Labor team and Eric I want to say publicly today what I said at dinner last night: In Government you proved a great Treasurer and you left the State in great economic shape and in Opposition you are proving a courageous Leader of a Party which will be ready to govern in 2013.
I see so many friends from Western Australia's great labour movement, so many people who've worked so hard for Labor.
Branch members and supporters and volunteers who helped us change Australia in 2007, who fought the good fight with us in Canning and Cowan, in Stirling and Hasluck and Swan last year and who I know will fight again for Labor in 2013.
Even a few people who I saw on a warm night in March this year at the Swan Yacht Club, where we shared a hot meal and a cold drink  -  well, we had some beer and some pizza anyway.
All of you, people who know what it means to be Labor,  because you are what it means to be Labor.
It's good to be here again, it's good to be among so many friends.
Friends, I'm sure we all thought of Bob Hawke this week and wished him a speedy recovery from pneumonia.
Today I'm particularly reminded of Bob because he was the last Labor Prime Minister to address this Conference, in 1991.
Now in 1991 Western Australians, per capita, were already bringing in twice as much in export earnings as the rest of us.
But today, twenty years on, Western Australians, per capita, are bringing in five times as much in export earnings as the rest of the country.
We all learned a long time ago that the world doesn't owe Australia a living  -  it doesn't owe any Australian a living.
But no State has better absorbed that lesson than yours  -  no Australians better show they understand that point than you.
That's why you've built a State which is so much more than a mine or a gas field.
When I think about the economy here I think about the State's exports of grain and livestock, the vibrant tourism industry and the world-leading science and research community.
About Barry Marshall and Robin Warren's Nobel Prize-winning medical research, Fiona Wood's skin technology and Fiona Stanley's work in child health,  these citizens of a creative, confident State which is making the most of its human as well as its natural resources.
And when I see WA's successful resources industry and modern economy, I see a good thing for you and a good thing for the country.
Every Australian worker, every investor, everyone with a superannuation account, every consumer, all feel some of the benefits.
You know this, but I want you to be sure I know it too:
It's not a problem to manage, it's an opportunity to seize.
I know that and so does the Government I lead.
And I want you to know this as well:
We have a plan to make sure the opportunities you're creating will build a strong economy here in the West and will spread opportunity to every Western Australian.
Because while we understand WA's strength, we also understand WA feels the patchwork pressures in our economy more than anywhere else.
The growth does create opportunities.
But it also strains infrastructure like roads, ports and airports, like hospitals and schools.
It tests the natural environment and it brings changes to suburbs and towns that aren't always welcome or easy.
It creates pressure on business.
During such growth in investment the resources industry struggles to find the workers it needs.
While other businesses struggle to compete with the wages resources can offer workers and the returns it can offer investors.
And it creates pressures on people too.
On the many people here who can see the benefits around them but don't feel them in their own lives.
The families I've met here feel the price pressures from growth and need practical help to meet increases in the cost of living.
Low- and middle-income earners who are being hit hard by the rising cost of the basics in life.
Who find it expensive to buy a house or rent a house, to eat out or go out. 
Who've faced record increases in electricity prices  -  and who've had no help from the State Government.
I know these pressures are very real.
And our Government has made decisions which are designed to help.
Paid maternity leave for young mums, extending the education tax rebate for young families, extra family payments for parents of teens.
Lifting the low income tax offset for millions of working people, a historic increase in the pension for millions of older Australians.
Friends, we will be making more decisions in coming weeks. 
Finalising our plans for tax cuts and increases in payments to deliver household assistance when we have a carbon price.
I know that many people are anxious about the impact of a carbon price and I understand that they expect to hear from me about what I am going to do about that.
That's why I will be explaining exactly what help Australians will get  -  and how they will get it.
Not everybody will agree with our plan  -  but we will deliver these tax cuts and payments to those who need it most.
I want to make sure that families can make a difference and help tackle climate change. 
We are the only party with a clear plan for delivering tax cuts  -  we will charge polluters to stop them polluting and we will deliver tax cuts to families.
And as we make those decisions let me say this clearly: we will act fairly ... we will not let Australian families down.
Friends, Western Australia is more important to our country than ever.
The hard work and creativity of Western Australians and the riches of the State's resource wealth are contributing more to our nation than ever before.
You've heard the statistics a thousand times.
Actually the most telling number would probably be this one:
The number of people who come over from the East every year to say things like the hard work and creativity of Western Australians and the riches of the State's resource wealth are contributing more to our nation than ever before - now that'd be a real killer fact!
And I'm happy to add to that statistic today.
But I'm not just here to talk about you and about the State.
I am here to talk about all of us and about the country.
About the things we can do for our future,  about the way we can work together to do those things.
And to really have that conversation, I do need to be candid about what Federal Labor has learned from the past.
Friends, when I became Prime Minister a year ago, there were things I wanted to do.
One of the most important was to build a better relationship with the community in Western Australia.
At the height of the Resource Super Profits Tax argument I extended a handshake and began to negotiate with the industry in good faith  -  and the industry responded in kind.
I did that not only because of the importance of the policy questions at stake  -  though they are real.
I did that because I was struck by how much the Federal Government and the Western Australian community had found ourselves talking past each other rather than to each other.
And because I was deeply disappointed that things had got to that point.
So in this last year, I have set out to lead a Government which genuinely listens to the ideas and the aspirations of this community.
A Government which genuinely respects the hopes and fears of this state.
I believe we have.
I know I've quite literally heard the community's voice, because whether I've been walking the shopping strip in Fremantle or leaning over a side fence in Cottesloe, or I've been down at the grain terminal at Kwinana or meeting bushfire survivors and thanking emergency workers in Kelmscott - I've been listening.
And I believe we have acted on what we've heard.
So I've come here today to be sure that you hear this from me:
You deserve the respect of your Federal Government  -  and you have it.
And because you have that respect, we have listened to you as we have developed our new plans.
Our new plan for the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
To sustain the investments, to deliver a share of record profits back to benefit all Western Australians.
I've driven a new approach, we've consulted thoroughly  -  and now we have draft legislation and a clear path ahead.
A path to extra contributions for everyone with a superannuation account, a tax cut for every small business and lower company tax, plus new infrastructure investment in resource regions.
And revenue to fund upgrading roads and access to Perth airport  -  the WA Gateway project which will receive up to $480 million in funding from the MRRT's Regional Infrastructure Fund.
Adding to our investments in better infrastructure in this great, growing State.
$280 million for widening the Great Eastern Highway from Kooyong Road to the Tonkin Highway.
$236 million for the City Link project between Perth and Northbridge.
$118 million for the Bunbury outer ring road.
$350 million for Kewdale's intermodal facility.
$255 million for a rehabilitation centre at the new Fiona Stanley Hospital. 
$195 million for infrastructure alongside the Ord River expansion program.
Along with health and hospitals reform.
I've worked to be sure that our plan is one where we build agreement across our country  -  never dictating from a distance.
Still delivering more doctors, more nurses, more beds  -  shorter waiting times and shorter waiting lists.
And still delivering reforms which unlock economic incentives and unlock the expertise of local health experts.
And we have announced that we will look hard at the distribution of GST revenue to the Territories and States.
Through a clear, honest process for an historic reform.
For reform to a system which so many of you have argued for so long doesn't serve Western Australia well,  for reform to arrangements which I agree don't properly deal with high economic growth here in the West.
I believe for our federation to be sustainable  -  for Australians right around the federation to have great opportunities and access to quality services  -  the system has to be fair.
Fair so that it rewards reform, fair so that people can feel the benefits of success, fair so that inefficiency in government isn't rewarded.
So I am glad that our review of GST has been so widely welcomed in the West and I look forward to the changes which will flow from it in time.
And because we've been listening, we have a plan for the economy that is designed to keep our whole economy strong.
We understand it is a tough time for local manufacturers, with the high terms of trade and costs of raw materials.
So this week my colleagues Brendan O'Connor and Craig Emerson announced new measures to prevent cheap imports being dumped on Western Australia's markets, to stop products being imported at prices lower than the cost of production and to give local manufacturing every chance to remain strong.
Manufacturing remains at the core of the Government's economic agenda, manufacturing remains integral to the modern Australian economy.
We also understand the importance of live cattle exports to employment in the State.
So this week my colleague Senator Ludwig travelled to Indonesia to advance our discussions to resume trade as soon as possible  -  and to ensure we prevent further disruptions in the future.
And in coming days, we will have more to say, outlining measures to assist producers and ensure the safeguards we need are in place as soon as they can possibly be.
So we are determined to keep the whole economy strong ... and we are determined to ensure opportunity for all.
When I last visited the Gorgon project at Barrow Island in the North-West I met a worker on site who lives one block away from my home in Melbourne. 
A great example of the opportunities our natural resources create  -  it's what we want for our nation.
But I also want those opportunities to be shared with everyone in the country and everyone in the State.
It is just not acceptable for opportunity to fly over the suburbs of this city.
For opportunity to be beyond the reach of this State's young people.
This drives our economic policy and our Budget strategy.
Not just tough decisions to get the Budget back into black so the private sector can grow, but investments and reform so we can train Australians to meet the needs of industry and fill the hundreds of thousands of jobs the private sector will create in coming years.
Because we understand the opportunities before the State and we are determined to do what we can to help you make the most of them.
So I believe we're listening better, thinking more carefully about the unique needs of this place, spending more time here.
In January in Carnarvon I heard I was the first PM to visit since the 1970s. 
It should be compulsory. I met some tremendous Australians up there.
Yes, it's twenty years since Bob Hawke as Prime Minister was standing here at your State Conference ... I can tell you it won't be twenty years before I'm back.
And later this year, when CHOGM comes, I'm not just looking forward to visiting.
I'm looking forward to governing the country from this great city, to showcasing the country from this great State.
And as I look forward to the rest of this year, I look forward to our National Conference as well.
The election review I initiated gives us a chance to renew our party processes and make ourselves better.
This will never distract us from governing but we do have a responsibility to renew ourselves and our organisation.
I believe the Labor party should be a party of government and I believe Labor governments must govern for all  -  for the great mass of the people in Ben Chifley's words.
In many ways, this is the true reason for the reform proposals we are considering for our party in this year: to revitalise our movement's connection with the communities we serve.
The Labor Party must be much more than a caucus of parliamentarians  -  even of parliamentarians who listen to their electorates.
We must be a movement which genuinely includes Australian communities.
Not simply listening to the community but being part of the community.
Truly understanding and representing people in every place  -  so that communities like yours are not just heard by our party but are part of our movement.
Being a party of genuine civic engagement in every suburb and town. 
Of people who are engaged in civic projects in their street and in their neighbourhood. 
Of people who are engaged in nation shaping projects.
We must continue to reach out to new groups of voters and to those who have always supported us.
Not just on election day.
But on any day that a person is looking to make a difference to their street, to their suburb, to their town or to their country.
On the day I ordered this review I was determined to create an opportunity for reform which this great Party would not squander.
I remain so determined.
Friends, we are Labor people gathered here and we share the Labor creed.
But we share a higher loyalty as well.
We are all Australians together.
My Government wants to work with all Australians to do great things,  to make the most of the opportunities we share.
With all Australians.
Now, I always enjoy my visits to Perth, though when they come on the heels of one of your teams flogging my beloved Bulldogs, my enthusiasm does occasionally wane.
And that has become more regular in recent times!
But anyone who's followed the Eagles or the Dockers over the years knows that even the strongest club has tough years as well as good years.
Years where you're flying high, years where you'll need a hand.
And just as any footy club has its lean years  -  and believe me, I should know  -  so has the nomic pendulum swung backwards and forwards through Australia's history.
I'm confident about the future of WA's economy but we all know that we must prepare for the future well.
I know how much Australia gains from the great strength of WA, and we all know WA gains from the insurance of being part of the strong and diversified Australian national economy.
And I know how much all Australians share from being one people with all the people in the West, and how much Western Australians gain from what you share with us.
I am passionately committed to WA's place in our nation's shared future.
Australians, together - I can't imagine us apart.
I can't imagine the Australian economy without the great firms and workers of the West.
I can't imagine my own footy club without Brad Hardie's Brownlow.
I can't imagine my own party without John Curtin's courage, my own bookshelf without Tim Winton's Cloudstreet, or our effort in Afghanistan without Ben Roberts-Smith.
That's why my plan for Australia's future is a plan which understands the West.
Which understands the State's challenges and opportunities.                                                            
	Which respects the State's hopes and fears.
	A plan to keep the whole economy strong, a plan to deliver opportunity for all.



I thank Agnes Shea for the Welcome to Country and pay my respects to the traditional owners of this land on which we gather.
In making that acknowledgment, I honour the dignity and resilience of all Indigenous Australians.
And I recall with pride today the fact that eight recipients of the Australian of the Year Award have been Indigenous, including the late Lionel Rose whose loss we mourned in May.
I also acknowledge:
Ministerial and parliamentary colleagues
Adam Gilchrist, Chair of the National Australia Day Council and fellow Council members
Australia Day sponsors and supporters.
Australian of the Year, Simon McKeon
Young Australian of the Year, Jessica Watson
I also acknowledge Professor Ron McCallum, 2011 Senior Australian of the Year, and Don Ritchie, Australia's Local Hero for 2011, who can't be with us today.
Friends, for more than 50 years now, the Australian of the Year Awards have played a vital role in our community  -  helping us to find outstanding role models for us all to admire.
And they do so in a way that is so deeply grounded in our Australian outlook and values.
Donald Horne once wrote that Australians are notoriously reluctant to reward eminence without excellence.
In other words, they will not doff their caps merely because someone holds an office or a position.
And that is how it should be.
That is something truly special about the society we have created here under southern skies.
We are not a people of hierarchy or deference or fine gradations of social status.
There is comparatively little pomp and ceremony in our public life.
I love a nation where the Prime Minister can walk down the street and grab a coffee and have people yell out Julia give us  a wave.
The Australian of the Year Awards are a way of manifesting our democratic temper.
A way for our society to hold up a mirror to itself and discern the qualities and characteristics that are most valued by our community.
The Australian of the Year Award in fact tells a consistent and faithful story of what we value:
As I've noted, eight awards have gone to Indigenous Australians.
Sportspeople are well represented but by no means as much as one might imagine.
There is a generous selection of artists and performers.
A very large number of scientists and medicos.
Two churchmen.
And only one politician!
The 51 years of this award indeed show a grown up nation able to make mature and insightful choices.
A nation that can honour Steve Waugh but also Manning Clark.
John Farnham but also Neville Bonner.
And this year, a unique moment in the history of the awards - the appointment of our first Australian of the Year acknowledged for social entrepreneurship.
Making the point that as we become a wealthier nation,we must also become a more generous nation.
Friends, the single thread uniting five decades of this award is their connection to the Australian community.
Nominations come from the community.
They are not imposed from above.
All Australians have a chance to have their say by nominating someone who they think reflects the qualities that we admire.
I encourage all Australians to take advantage of this opportunity to share the stories of people that they know,or know of, by nominating them for the Awards.
The criteria are very simple:
 * 	Demonstrated excellence in their field
 * 	Contribution to the Australian community and the nation
 * 	An inspirational role model for the community
Sometimes that brings forward obvious and outstanding names like Mark Taylor or Peter Cosgrove.
Sometimes those whose brilliance doesn't always occupy the headlines like Gus Nossal or John Yu.
But there is always a deep wisdom in the names chosen.
The abiding wisdom of a free people in a democratic and egalitarian society.
That is what these accolades celebrate.
Our better angels.
Our nation as it can and should be.
Friends, in launching these awards, I thank our major sponsor, the Commonwealth Bank, for more than 32 years of generous support.
I thank our newest supporter, ABC Television, who have just come on board as the Awards' broadcast partner.
I also thank our other corporate partners:Fairfax Media; Qantas; Holiday Inn; ABC Local Radio and SBS Radio.
I thank Adam and all his colleagues at the Australia Day Council and across government who support these awards and the wider Australia Day celebrations throughout the year.
Nominations for the Australian of the Year Awards 2012 will close on August 31.
That's plenty of opportunity for all Australians to get involved.
So log on to the Australian of the Year website and have your say.
In that great Aussie tradition, have a go'.
If there's someone you look up to or admire, put their name forward.
You never know where it might lead.
It is now my pleasure to declare nominations for the 2012 Australian of the Year Awards officially open. 



I'm delighted to be here today at this haven of books and ideas.
Earlier on, I was delighted to meet our new National Librarian, Anne-Marie,and on behalf of all Australians, I congratulate her on being appointed to our country's pinnacle role in the care and custodianship of books and information.
Anne-Marie gave me a quick tour of the Library's online resource, Trove.
Appropriately named because it is indeed a treasure trove of information that used to require trawling through microfiche and dusty old records.
It's easy to see why this resource was the winner of the 2011 Excellence in eGovernment Award.
I congratulate the Library on reaching out to all Australians, no matter where they live, something we'll see a lot more of as the NBN makes its way into every Australian community.
This is the democratisation of information, and it points to some of the measures that will be embodied in our National Cultural Policy that Minister Crean has just mentioned.
Friends, we live at a time of tremendous change and transition for the arts, publishing and media.
For much of our history, human story-telling occurred through word of mouth  -  myths and sagas told and retold down the generations.
Today, we live in an era where for the first time in almost 600 years, the book is no longer synonymous with paper.
But lest we fall into a slump of existential despair, I'm here to say the demise of books has been vastly exaggerated.
Yes we might increasingly download our books on electronic devices.
Yes the big end of our book industry has taken some blows in recent months.
But the death of the book is vastly overstated.
We've seen Melbourne designated by UNESCO as a City of Literature.
And at the Sydney Writers Festival in May, we saw 80,000 people turn out to hear 400 authors and panellists talk about books and ideas.
And why?
Because books will never surrender their ability to capture our hearts and our imaginations.
Books are an antidote to isolation, boredom and ignorance.
Add a glass of red and a box of chocolates, and books can be the ultimate pleasure.
Books are a refuge and consolation.
They are a joy and a tonic.
Sometimes they are a weapon.
Affordable, portable, mass-producible books have literally changed the world.
A book can never be unprinted.
Its ideas can never be unthought.
The critic David Ulin once said literature at its best slices through the noise and ephemera of life.
Sometimes drawing us deep into reflection.
At other times, impelling us back into the world aglow with energy and indignation.
Friends, in Australia, the act of story-telling is as old as the human occupation of this land itself.
The printed word was carried deep in the holds of the First Fleet, amid the convicts and supplies.
Our first novel was published in 1831.
And long gone are the days when Australia needed to apologise for the quality of its writing, if we ever did.
Friends, if awards like the various Premiers' Awards and the Miles Franklin came into being in earlier decades to encourage a growing and somewhat uncertain industry, these awards now exist to celebrate success.
To celebrate a mature and confident publishing industry of which our nation can be very proud.
In 2011, the Prime Minister's Literary Awards continue to recognise the very best in Australian writing.
This year, for the first time, our prize money has been redistributed so all shortlisted authors achieve some financial benefit to help acknowledge their efforts and sacrifices.
Friends, I know many of you are also keen supporters of the proposed National Year of Reading in 2012.
This is an initiative of libraries and library associations around the country, and has quite rightly garnered support from many of you here today.
Of course, every year is a year of reading in this most literate and literary of nations.
But in 2012, we can take time out to affirm the place of books, reading, ideas and libraries in the fabric of our nation.
To that end, I'm proud to announce that the Australian Government will provide $1.3 million in funding to help make the National Year of Reading a success.
Minister Crean and I especially want to bring a culture of reading to all Australians, especially those who are reluctant readers and those who struggle with literacy.
Initiatives such as the One Country Reading program and the workplace literacy project will help achieve this.
Every Australian who is physically able to read deserves the chance to learn to read.
I feel it deeply that too many Australians still lack the gift of words and reading.
My hope is that the Year of Reading will be the catalyst for many to discover and rediscover the joy of reading.
It is such a fundamental aspect of our social compact and our vision of ourselves as a nation of fairness and opportunity.
Above all, that we should be a nation that values its own writers and itsown stories.
That is why I'm here today  -  amid a testing week in my political life  -  to celebrate with you and to extend my gratitude.
Today we honour 20 shortlisted books and four winners.
But in truth we celebrate the whole industry:
Its resilience. Its self-belief. Its success.
And how we could never imagine the contours of our nation without you.
To all the nominees, my sincere congratulations.
You have each enriched and enlarged our nation and brought us that little bit closer to our better selves.
So keep writing.
Keep thinking.
Never cease believing in what you do.
The journey is always, always worth it. 



Thanks so much Michael Lee for that generous introduction.
I begin with honouring the Gadigal people, the traditional owners of this land - we walk with you on the road of Reconciliation together.
I acknowledge all my Federal Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues here today.
And I offer a special greeting to the heroes of 2010 who held our marginal seats and helped Federal Labor continue its journey in government: David Bradbury, Mike Kelly, John Murphy, Deb O'Neill, Michelle Rowland, Craig Thomson.
I acknowledge also, the man who helped destroy Workchoices, John Robertson.
The families of NSW can have no better champion or friend.
I acknowledge all of John's team and especially the new MPs who will share Labor's long road back.
I acknowledge Michael Lee, Sam Dastyari, John Graham and the whole NSW Party office team.
I honour all the proud and faithful party members who are here today to join John and his team on that long road back.
I offer a very special greeting to those attending their first conference or who are new Party members.
Welcome to the ranks of the true believers.
Delegates, the ALP is Australia's oldest political party.
We formed the world's first Labor Government.
Matters for pride today as much as they were then.
But friends, we are not here to discuss history.
We are here to make history.
And we make history by learning from it, especially the recent past.
Labor has always been a Party of reform.
And if we are to reform the nation and the State, we must also reform ourselves.
Reform begins by understanding what happened in March: a defeat as bad as we've ever known.
NSW Labor cannot  -  and should not  -  ever be the same again.
Let's not imagine we can just move on'.
That would only be denying the judgement of the people.
Rather let's absorb the lessons and learn what it means to be Labor once again.
In 16 years of government, the NSW Labor Government did a lot of good: the best ever Olympics, great school literacy results, historic environmental achievements like saving the South East forests, the remarkable victory over James Hardie, and so much more.
Be proud of these achievements.
Hold fast to them.
As for the faults and failings, learn from them.
Understand what happened.
Ask the hard questions.
And use this time in Opposition to renew.
Because, friends, NSW Labor will renew.
NSW Labor will rebuild.
On the path of reform, we know that Labor's values can never change.
But our rules and practices can.
In fact, as the ALP National Review argues, they must change.
We need to find what the poet Robert Frost called the courage to be new.
We need to shape a new party.
With more members in revitalised branches.
Who represent a wide cross-section of society.
Who are more engaged with their local communities.
And who enjoy a greater say in a more democratised party structure.
Renewal is not an end in itself.
This is about ensuring that Labor remains a Party which reflects and represents the aspirations of the Australian people.
That makes the progressive case for reform over the back fence, over the shop counter, street by street, suburb by suburb.
A Party also capable of making the case for reform over the digital back fence of the new social media where so much of our public conversation now occurs.
That convinces ordinary Australians that Labor has their interests at heart and can be trusted to represent them on the big issues.
I know Sam Dastyari has proposed some reforms for the NSW Party.
They are significant reforms deserving of consideration.
And for those who think reform needs to go further, I say build on these reforms in the years leading up to Labor's return to office in NSW.
Let us be the party of reform in all that we do.
A party always determined to be its best self.
Delegates, if we are a party of reform, we are also a party of ideas.
Labor's greatest achievements  -  and toughest decisions  -  arose from passionate engagement and debate.
I remember the epic debates about uranium in the 1980s, and economic reform in the 1990s.
We've become a better party for the debates we've had.
I know there are people who are frustrated their voices aren't always heard.
And I say to them: I want the Australian Labor Party to be a place where you feel you belong.
A Party where you can express progressive views in a wider conversation about Australia's future.
A Party where we have free and open debates conducted in a climate of respect.
A Party that can discuss complex policy proposals at the same time as governing for all Australians.
Because friends, if we are a party of reform and a party of ideas, we are also a party of government.
It is the very core of who we are.
When our forebears created the ALP in 1891, they deliberately created a party that would seek to gain and hold elected public office.
We would not be a fringe party or a party of protest.
We would be a party of government with all the compromise and gradualism that entails.
But also a party of vision and leadership capable of delivering the big reforms that only governments can achieve.
Being a party of government means balancing the need for a strong economy and strong national security with Labor's progressive intent and values.
That is why John Curtin took a tough decision on conscription.
Why we must take a tough decision on the security of our northern borders.
These are the responsibilities that come from being in government.
And with those responsibilities come great opportunities.
Delegates, we stand at a remarkable time in Australia's history.
Our export income is at a 140-year high.
We've created over 750,000 jobs since Labor came to office.
And profound structural change in the world economy is opening up amazing possibilities.
Think about it.
Having led the nation through the biggest global downturn since the Depression, Federal Labor now gets to govern in times of hope.
To be the navigators to the future we have always wanted to be.
A future that honours the dignity and potential of every Australian.
Friends, the truth is that even at the peak of the last boom when unemployment fell to 4 per cent, there were still places where 12 or 14 per cent of people were out of work.
Still families that had not known employment for three generations.
It offends me to think that behind the windows in so many poorer homes are young people who could be tomorrow's Peter Dohertys or Fiona Stanleys.
But the cycle of generational disadvantage means they never get the chance.
Friends, I want every Australian to have the chance.
Just as our predecessors sought cradle to grave' welfare, I want to see cradle to grave' opportunity.
I want every Australian child to grow up with the certainty of a great education.
A place in training or university if they want it.
Incentives to retrain and relocate as the workforce changes.
Capacity for older employees to stay in a job if they wish.
And a welfare system that doesn't allow people to lapse into the corrosive aimlessness of long-term unemployment.
In Labor's Australia, no-one should be left behind.
Friends, to be a party of government requires the vision to see things not just as they are, but as they could be.
Being a party of government also requires courage.
The courage to make decisions for the long term.
And the courage to stick to them.
If we didn't have leaders in the past who were prepared to do this, we would not have had post-war migration.
We would not have ended capital punishment.
Abolished the White Australia Policy.
Or opened up our economy in the 1980s.
This country never got anywhere without hard decisions.
And do you think Labor ever made any hard or big decisions without the Liberals opposing them at every turn?
The Snowy scheme  -  opposed.
Medicare  -  opposed.
Saving the Franklin river  -  opposed.
Universal superannuation  -  opposed.
Native title  -  opposed.
They resisted every one.
Always on the wrong side of history.
Always on the side of fear and negativity.
Delegates, democracy is not one long opinion poll.
It is about leadership.
And on climate change, Labor chooses to lead.
We know we must lead because the science says we must.
And friends, we've known for an awfully long time.
Bob Carr warned of climate change in this very hall back in 1988.
Even Margaret Thatcher and John Howard recognised the danger and accepted the need to act.
And yet our opponents have the temerity to call our carbon price a toxic tax.
When the only thing that's toxic is the carbon pollution warming our planet and threatening our children's future.
Friends, as members of the Labor family, you know all too well that our opponents have thrown everything at us for the past year:
Stunts and gimmicks.
Lies and distortion.
Attacks on our economists and scientists.
A cynical campaign of fear designed to scare Australian families.
And a nonsense of a policy that subsidises big polluters off the backs of ordinary taxpayers.
After all that, I simply say to our opponents: Is that the best you can do?
Because if you think that's enough to knock us off course, you've got another think coming.
We're still here. We're still ready to fight for the nation's future.
In fact, after months of calm and methodical preparation, I'm proud to say our carbon package can now be placed before the Australian people.
Friends, for the first time in Australian history, we will put a price on carbon pollution.
No longer will the nation's biggest polluters be able to pollute our atmosphere for free.
From July 1 next year, the freedom to pollute our skies will cease.
Two decades of denial and delay will come to an end.
Polluters will have to pay.
And friends, as we set Australia on the path to a clean energy future, we will do it in the Labor way - with fair and generous assistance to ease the path of change
We will stick up for the people we have always stuck up for.
We'll look after the families.
We'll look after the battlers.
We'll look after the pensioners.
We'll look after the people who need that extra bit of help.
The people who are doing it tough.
And why?
Because our plan to price carbon pollution comes from deep within Labor's progressive roots.
It is about our responsibility to Australians right now  -  and our responsibility to future generations.
I know that many Australians are worried.
Tomorrow, the facts will be laid out for all to see  -  and they will tell a very different story to the one our opponents have tried to tell.
Nine in ten households will get a combination of tax cuts and payment increases.
Most people will find that when all is said and done, they are not a cent behind.
And many will come out ahead.
Millions of households struggling with tight family budgets will get an extra 20 per cent safety net.
Millions of pensioners will come out ahead, with extra money for the essentials we know they sometimes struggle to afford.
The most exposed industries will receive assistance to protect jobs.
Because jobs are what Labor is all about.
We will cut pollution, we will protect the household budget, and we will support jobs.
We will do it because it is right for this country.
And we will do it the Labor way.
Because friends, if cutting taxes for the rich and slashing workers' entitlements are deep in the DNA of the Liberal Party, progressive reform in the nation's best interests is deep in Labor's DNA.
We are a Labor government doing unmistakably Labor things.
We are the ones who dumped Work Choices and protected workers' entitlements.
We are the ones who have doubled education funding.
And delivered the nation's biggest ever mental health package.
We are the ones who are investing $3 billion to skill Australians for the mining boom.
And bringing high speed broadband to every community.
We are the ones spending more on public transport than all previous Commonwealth Governments combined.
And putting an extra $4000 a year into the pockets of families with teenagers at school or TAFE. 
And, friends, we are the ones who will do even more as the budget comes back to surplus to extend opportunity in this country to every Australian who will grasp their chance.
My great predecessor, Ben Chifley, in this very hall, talked about the things worth fighting for.
These are the things worth fighting for.
These are the things that make us who we are.
Friends, Chifley said something else in this place too.
It was 60 years ago last month.
Chifley was in failing health but there was no self-pity.
Just the uncompromising message:
Fight for the right, and truth and justice will prevail.
Delegates, six decades later, the nation has been lastingly transformed by the work of successive Labor governments, but Chifley's message endures still.
Fight for the right.
Never give in.
Never lose faith.
Because, friends, this is our time.
Time for Labor to govern in an age of prosperity.
Time for Labor to drive fairness and opportunity deep into the fabric of Australian society.
Time for our nation to build the clean energy economy of tomorrow.
Friends, we are heirs to great history.
Let us be makers of history too.
A Party of reform.
A Party of ideas.
A Party of government.
And always finding the courage to be new. 



Thanks for that kind introduction.
The issues that have brought me here to the Press Club as Prime Minister have been big ones. Laying out my vision for Australia in a national election campaign and making my case in the leaders' debate. Reflecting on the formation of a new Government and announcing our plan to rebuild Queensland.
I come here again today because pricing carbon is surely as important as these.  As Joe Biden no doubt wishes he'd said: this is a big deal.
In my own service in Government, I stand on my record as a reformer. A new workplace relations system which locked in modern Labor values: fairness at work and flexible enterprise bargaining.  Education reforms which gave parents information and offered them choices they'd never had before.
Difficult reforms  -  reforms I knew were in the long term national interest, and under our Fair Work Act, employment is growing.  Under our school reforms, school performance is improving. Time has vindicated the reform case.  It always does.
Now, pricing carbon is this Government's biggest reform yet.
When I look at this decision in the context of Australia's post-1983 reform project it does take on interesting dimensions. Compared with a change like the GST, it's smaller in the short term and more important in the long term. Vastly less complex, applying to hundreds of businesses  -  not millions. Modest in its impact on household budgets, estimated to add 0.7 per cent to CPI  -  not 2.5 per cent as did the GST.
But for the long term it achieves a change of far greater structural significance: decoupling the growth of carbon pollution from the growth of our economy.
Amara's law is the idea that when we think about a new technology, we tend to overestimate its effect in the short run and underestimate its effect in the long run. 
Real structural reform is often like that.
The dollar float is the paradigm example: the big enabling decision, the big change which sets the ball rolling for all the others, the big call for the future which demands courage at the time ... and which when we look back, no one would seek to undo.
The carbon price is our dollar float.
A vital economic reform which will build our clean energy future.
So I want every Australian to know why I am pursuing this.
Yes, climate change is a threat to our environment. Yes, being left behind as the world moves is a threat to our economy. But I am not just doing this to protect Australia against threats.
I am doing this because I see a great opportunity we can seize.
I see a great clean energy future for our great country.
Within a few years, we'll be seeing big changes on the energy supply side, big changes in industrial production, changes among consumers and households as well.
Energy producers investing more and more in gas and in renewable, manufacturers and commercial buildings and hospitals converting boilers from coal-fired to gas. Tenants chasing space in energy-efficient buildings and chemical plants installing scrubbers to reduce nitrous oxide emissions.
The capture and use  -  or flaring  -  of emissions from mining and gas extraction, industry installing more efficient motors. And yes, we'll see smart light bulbs in every home and probably every beer fridge in the country will have a five star rating too.
These are the changes we can already predict.
And I know these changes are upon us because I have seen them beginning already.
This week I've seen geothermal power at work in Brunswick in Melbourne's inner north.  Where a source of energy which we usually associate with hot rocks in the central desert is at work in a city we hardly think of as hot in July.
This week I've seen energy being produced from landfill in suburban Brisbane. Where rubbish from households and businesses generates methane gases  -  gases which in the past have been carbon pollution released into the atmosphere.  Gases which are now being captured for power to feed the city's electricity grid.
These are the changes we can already see  -  and there are changes coming which we can hardly imagine today.
In our lifetimes, think of how information technology has transformed itself and transformed our lives.I wrote my first university essays on a manual typewriter.
I remember the first mobile phone I saw, as big as a brick, and I wondered why anyone would want such a thing. Now I visit classrooms where children use a phone to take a photo of me and share it with the world via the internet before I'm in the car and on the way back to the office.
We walk around with more computing power in our purses and jacket pockets than NASA used for the moon landings. And we apply that technology to new purposes which were never thought of until the power to do them existed.
Information technology has given us the productivity and prosperity which means our children can afford to travel before they've even really started a career. It has given us social networks which let us look at the photos they took of themselves in Thailand an hour ago and then we can send them an instant message saying is that another tattoo? And it has created whole new occupations and industries for them to work in when they come home and settle down in life.
Clean energy is sure to transform itself and in turn transform our lives in just such extraordinary ways.
We talk about baseload power today but smart grids and distributed energy production may fundamentally reshape the way we move energy from the production point to the power point. In less time than we can know, millions of homes may be powered by renewable energy.
Tidal in WA, solar in Queensland, wind in New South Wales, geothermal in South Australia, clean coal in Victoria,  cogeneration in Tasmania. But behind all those changes, behind what we do see, will be the big reform  -  the price on carbon pollution.
Revenue from the carbon price will be funding new investments in clean technology.
The economic incentive the price creates will be driving private investment.
We can already forecast $100 billion going into renewables by 2050, the power of a market mechanism driving investment in the power of the earth, wind, water and sun.
We've heard a bit of talk about how carbon permits are an invisible product.
They're not  -  they're just the invisible hand.
This decision, to put a price on carbon, is a major reform to build a clean energy future, and because I lead a Labor Government, it is a reform done fairly.
Economic and environmental reform, with help for those who need it most.
Because that is how Labor does reform, that is how Australia does reform, that is the way that reform works best.
As we did with currency and trade liberalisation, as we did with indirect taxation, we have had a long debate about the clean energy future of this country.Barry Jones and Bob Carr  -  overseas, even Margaret Thatcher!  -  spoke about this in the 1980s.  We debated Rio and then Kyoto in the 1990s. And through the 2000s, there was growing public support for action on climate change, public support which did ultimately lead to bipartisan support for pricing carbon.
To the then-Coalition Government and the then-Labor Opposition both taking carbon pricing plans to an election.
To 2007 when John Howard decided to price carbon, supported by Tony Abbott, Julie Bishop, Joe Hockey and Greg Hunt, to 2008 and 2009 when Kevin Rudd tried to negotiate with Malcolm Turnbull in good faith to get a bipartisan reform.
Now in the final weeks of 2009, the last Parliament had its Maxwell Smart moment, we missed it by that much. And what followed was the 2010 campaign as difficult and divisive as any we have known.
It has been a long debate.
And as Isaid on Sunday, no government  -  no political party or leader  -  can claim to have got everything right during this time. But the Parliament the people elected in 2010 has found the path to the clean energy future our country so badly needs.
Some were sceptical, but from the day I formed Government I had no doubt this Parliament would prove capable of the task.
I know that for the aficionados the mechanics of how we got here are fascinating: the cross-party nature of this process is unusual and the makeup of the House of Representatives in particular is novel.
I accept that's interesting to the commentators.
But for me, this is a reform.
And in reform, what matters is having the right vision for the country's future, making the big decisions which get us there, bringing people together to get it done.
So now we have had the debate.
Now we move from words to deeds.
We're going to get this done.
This will be the package that comes to the Parliament and this will be the package that goes through the Parliament.
And there will be a price on carbon from 1 July 2012.
And here's how it works.
I wanted a modern policy approach with efficient allocation and incentive to innovate. 
So the price on carbon operates as a market mechanism, creates incentives we need.
For the first three years, the price for each tonne of pollution will be fixed at $23 per tonne then rise by 2.5 per cent in real terms, effectively a carbon tax. I wanted the end point to be a flexibly priced emissions trading scheme.
So from 1 July 2015, there'll be a cap and trade market creating the incentive to cut pollution at the lowest cost. I knew there was no environmental benefit in emissions intensive, trade exposed production simply moving offshore. 
So we will allocate some permits to some businesses without charge, supporting jobs and competitiveness, and helping strongly affected industries make the transition to a clean energy future.
I also wanted to link our carbon price to the emerging international market, keeping Australian industry competitive. So Australian business will be to be able to buy permits which represent credible, additional, offshore pollution reductions.
I wanted our emissions reduction targets to be based on the best expert advice. 
So the independent Climate Change Authority, headed by Bernie Fraser, a great servant of the Australian public, will recommend on the year-by-year steps, as well as the longer-term path, that Australia should take towards the 2050 target.
This is how our carbon price will work.
A fixed price for the first years, a well designed market from 2015, assistance for emissions intensive, trade exposed industries.
Evidence-based emissions targets, abatement at the lowest economic cost.
A new bottom line, where polluters pay.
Our plan makes polluters pay but we know some of the costs will be passed through, and while the price impact will be modest we do know family budgets are always tight.
So in the last few days, as many people have asked me how their family will benefit, I've said this often.
People who need help most will get the help they need.
That's why 9 in 10 households will get a combination of tax cuts and payment increases. For almost 6 million households this will fully meet the average extra costs. And of these, more than 4 million Australian households  -  including every older Australian who relies solely on the pension  -  will get a buffer for the budget, with the extra payments being 20 per cent higher than their average extra costs.
Because delivering this help to households meant cutting tax and lifting payments, I decided at the outset we would take the opportunity for tax reform as well.
I saw an opportunity to use a new tax on pollution to cut an old tax on work.
Just as I did in the Budget, so in this household assistance package, I wanted to reward work.
So we've more than tripled the tax free threshold  -  lifting it from $6 000 per year to $18 200 per year.  And combined with other changes, this means that 450 000 people  -  who earn between $16 000 and $20 500  -  will have all their tax cut.
They will now pay no tax.
This doesn't just help people moving from welfare to work.
It also helps women who work part-time as well.
Take a family where the kids are at primary school and mum is working part time earning, say, $16 000 a year. Currently she has no net tax liability.  But she does have some tax withheld from her take home pay  -  and she can't claim it back until after the end of the financial year. What's more, if she gets an extra shift or takes on extra regular hours worth, say, an extra $4 000, that'll lift her over the tax free threshold and cost her $600 a year in tax. Now, because of our tax cuts, she'll pay no tax at all on that extra income and have very little tax withheld as well.
She's among half a million people who go from having to pay tax to paying no tax  -  and of those, three hundred thousand are women. And while forty four per cent of taxpayers are women  -  sixty per cent of the people who get this tax cut are women.
This is a tax cut for working women.
A tax reform which rewards work.
And it builds on our Budget reforms to lift workforce participation and build the capacity of our economy to grow faster over time.
And because we do want to reward work, we've also made special provision for self-funded retirees.
I think by now many people will know that our plan will help pensioners  -  but our plan also ensures that many self-funded retirees  -  all those who have a Commonwealth Health Care Card  -  receive a payment equivalent to the pension increase. And some others will also benefit from our tax cuts and other payment increases as well.
Australians understand the importance of cutting carbon and understand how their own household budget works, so the best question I'm often asked is this: If so many households are compensated, how does the price signal work  -  isn't the shoe meant to pinch?
There are two key points here.
First, the price signal operates on the polluters.
They compete against each other and if they pollute less they'll pay less tax compared to other polluters.  And they compete against producers who don't pay the tax, so if they pollute less their disadvantage will be less. That means there is a very significant incentive effect on the supply side of carbon emissions.
Second, the price signal operates on consumers through the relative costs of goods.
So yes, the overall increase in consumer prices is just under ten dollars per week, and yes, the average household assistance is just over that. But that help is provided in cash and it can be used to buy relatively lower carbon products which will cost relatively less.
So yes, you may be no worse off if you stay with your existing basket of goods, but you do have an incentive to save by switching to other products.
And the bottom line: with this price signal in place, we will cut at least 160 million tonnes of carbon out of our atmosphere in 2020.
That's the equivalent of taking 45 million cars off the road.
Or put another way: in just nine years' time, that is a cut in every Australia's carbon footprint of almost one quarter , compared to where we would be without a price on carbon.
That's why we're doing it.
To cut our carbon pollution, to build the clean energy future we need.
I've met some interesting people and heard some interesting things in the last few days.
When you give Australians a chance, they give it to you pretty straight. I love that about our country. I enjoy the scepticism and respect the scrutiny. And I also love that Australians in our suburbs and towns are taking on the serious task of judging what is the best approach for our country's future.
Everyone involved in politics and government can learn something from that.
And if we listen to Australians, we're going to learn a lot more in the coming months, we're going to learn about more than the carbon price.
We're going to learn something about this country's capacity for reform.
I don't agree with those who say this country is not up to it and I certainly don't agree with those who say we were a better country thirty years ago. No  -  I just believe this is what the reform road is. What reform is always like for Labor.  If change was easy, a conservative government would already have done it.
I talk a lot about walking the reform road.
About the fact our country should be walking it together, with government bringing business, workers and communities along with us. About the fact it's a long walk, not a short sprint, a road toward long term goals for the good of our nation, where the measure is in the years. But I still think some of you picture the reform road as an easy way through a wide gate.  It is anything but.
The reform road has many obstacles, pot holes to get around and hard hills to climb, the wind is not always at your back.
But I've got my walking shoes on.
Because as I think about Australia at the end of this year, and beyond in the decade ahead, I don't only see a country which will be building a clean energy future, I see a country which will have rebuilt its faith in its own capacity to reform.
It'll be a realistic faith  -  which knows what the reform road is like.
It'll be a determined faith  -  an optimistic and activist creed  -  that drives us forward.
And it will be a faith shared between a creative and confident people and a Government ambitious for the future we share.
I've been Prime Minister for a year now and as well as governing and reforming, it has been a period of learning.
I'm learning more about Australians, meeting people and getting to know them. 
It's really a great privilege.
Australians do want to know more about me and how I'll lead this government in coming years.
Especially when confronted with new challenges in the future, and that means they do want to know what kind of person I am. And look, I'm a decision-maker by nature and I have tended to let the decisions speak for themselves.
It doesn't come easy to me to expose my feelings as I make these decisions. I was the shy girl who studied and worked hard, and it took time and effort but I got from Unley High to the law and as far as here, where I am today. I've brought a sense of personal reserve to this, the most public of professions. And the rigours of politics have reinforced my innate style of holding a fair bit back in order to hang pretty tough.
If that means people's image of me is one of steely determination, I understand why.
But I don't forget where I come from, why I'm here, or what I've learned along the way.  I don't forget Unley High, where I saw kids who sat at the back of the room and did make work and were left behind. I don't forget how I felt at Slaters when I won my first case on behalf of an outworker, I got her paid what she deserved, and she just said, quietly, thanks.
I don't forget September 2008 when the world stood on the brink of economic disaster and it took a Labor Government and urgent action, decisions right in the moment, to save jobs and businesses.
What I learned and believed through all of that was that it's one thing to hang tough and hold a bit of yourself back.
But nothing hard ever gets easier by putting it off to later.
And because of that, in the moment I truly believed I was going to be Prime Minister I told myself: don't ever put off a hard call, because it will only get harder every day. 
Be a Prime Minister, a leader, who sees the future our country can have and has the strength to put in place the plan to get us there, that's the leader I'm determined to be for you.
So I'm walking that road now, walking the road of reform.
This reform is necessary for our country.
We must look beyond the next opinion poll and the next election to the clean energy future of the next generation.
It is time to get on with it.
This has been an issue in Australia for a decade.
There have been plenty of missteps and false starts, no leader of Government has been perfect, I take my share of responsibility for that.
And I said what I said before the election and I can't unsay it.
But when it became clear the only way to achieve action on climate change was to introduce a temporary carbon tax moving to an emissions trading scheme, the choice was this: I either stuck exactly to what I said just before the election, got no action on climate change, and did the wrong thing for the nation or I found a way to get climate change action, to do right for the country and to deal with the consequences.
And what I knew in my heart was this.
Nothing hard ever gets easier by putting it off.
And if you don't do what is right for the nation, then you shouldn't be Prime Minister.
So it's now time to get in and get this done, time to deliver the action on climate change we need.
Time to focus on the crucial debate now facing this country, because in reality, the choice I faced after the elect ion is the same choice Australia faces.
To do what is best for Australian families, what is best for future generations, what is best for this country.
To act on climate change.  To cut carbon pollution. To build a clean energy future. 
I can't  -  I won't  -  just say no.
That's why I'm putting a price on carbon.
I know this is a big change for our country, I know we have the courage to do it together.
And as we do it together, I think we're going to prove to ourselves that the courage to reform isn't beyond us and that there are more opportunities for us to seize together.
I see a great clean energy future for our great country and a great reform agenda for this country's government too.  I know we can get there. 



I thank Jeff for his acknowledgement of the traditional owners of this land.
And on behalf of us all, I pay my respects to the Gadigal people, whose long journey of caring for this land continues proudly to this day.
Friends,
That's why we're here today
Because we love this land.
We respect its people.
And we care profoundly for its future.
Since 1972, the Total Environment Centre has been at the forefront of preserving our precious natural heritage.
Working with visionary leaders like Neville Wran and Bob Carr, you've achieved miracles:
The great forests of north-east and south-east NSW protected forever.
The Blue Mountains not only saved but inscribed on the World Heritage List.
A world class chain of marine parks.
But what we didn't know in 1972 was that greenhouse gases were threatening the future of our environmental wonders.
We know now, and we've known for some time.
Leaders like Bob Carr and Margaret Thatcher raised the alarm in the late 1980s.
By 2007, even John Howard found it prudent to respond as the tide of evidence continued to grow.
Just like the conservative leaders of the UK, France, Italy, Germany and New Zealand have as well.
Today, in 2011, we know in abundant and undeniable detail the threat that carbon pollution poses to our way of life.
And I can tell you this: there is no leader on earth who is getting briefings that tell them anything different.
All of them have faced or are facing the same tough choices we are, with all the political difficulties they entail.
And each of them needs to answer to their own people  -  to humanity at large  -  and to the future ... for the decisions they make or fail to make.
When I am advised that we will face more days of extreme heat, more bushfires, more droughts, coastal flooding, loss of agricultural land in the Murray Darling Basin, devastating effects for the Great Barrier Reef and Kakadu, then the time has come to act.
And act we will. I won't let this country surrender in the face of the challenge of climate change.
Our nation will act to cut carbon pollution and seize a clean energy future.
The costs of acting are manageable.
And the opportunities from acting are great.
Indeed, it is those very opportunities that bring us here today.
New investment and new technology.  New jobs and new skills.
Since 2002, the Green Capital program has connected business and NGOs to debate how we make these opportunities a reality. 
And I'm here today to affirm your great work and to say:
The time for words is over. 
The time for action has arrived.
The environmental imperative to cut carbon pollution is strong, the economic imperative to modernise our economy is strong too.
And I say this with full awareness of global economic conditions.
As we have been reminded this week, Europe is still struggling will high unemployment and excessive sovereign debt.
The US recovery is also showing renewed signs of weakness.
We are not immune to developments in the global economy.
Here, consumers are still more cautious than they were before the global financial crisis, and credit conditions remain tight for some borrowers - and this is not surprising.
At the same time the strong dollar and competition for labour puts pressure on the non-mining sector and contributes to softness in the short-term.
Yet while there are heightened risks in the US and Europe, the fundamentals in Australia and our region are very different.
We are located in the right part of the world at the right time.
The prospects for our region remain much stronger as the weight of global activity continues to shift in our favour.
Just last week we saw China reporting growth of almost 10 per cent for the past year.
Our fundamentals are strong - we have low unemployment, strong job creation, and record terms of trade that are driving an unprecedented pipeline of business investment - $430 billion forecast in resources alone.
We also have a strong budget position, very low debt and a resilient financial system which all position us well for the future.
This fundamental economic strength has its ultimate roots in our creative and confident people ... but thirty years of economic modernisation has been vital.
The floating dollar is a vital safety valve on inflation in our resource-rich, export-oriented country.
Flexible enterprise bargaining lifts productivity and competitiveness in every sector of the economy.
Successive reforms to education and training and the system of skilled migration help lift the productivity of our people.
Superannuation ensures the country's savings, and insures the country's future.
And just as we are economically stronger now for the modernising reforms of the past three decades  -  so we must embrace economic reform now to have a strong modern economy in decades to come.
Just as this Labor Government took steps to protect jobs during the Global Financial Crisis - and just as we have kept the economy strong since, while hundreds of thousands of jobs have been created - we will continue to undertake the reforms this country needs to keep jobs growing.
Pricing carbon will have powerful economic effects.
It will mean we use our energy more productively - producing more output for a given level of energy input.
It will direct domestic capital - steering it towards new clean industries which will thrive in a carbon constrained world. 
It will attract billions of dollars of international investment from firms looking to produce in economies which have certain, efficient policies to tackle the carbon challenge.
In years to come, carbon productivity will be as important to luring investment from multinationals as labour costs, tax rates, human capital, and levels of technological sophistication have been in past decades.
That's why carbon pricing is part of our broader economic agenda - because it will give us a stronger economy, because it will put us on a stronger competitive footing, and because it will allow us to take advantage of economic opportunities as they arise - rather than playing catch-up in the years to come.
This is an important part of our broader economic agenda for the country.
Such as building high speed broadband - to ensure Australia thrives as global growth is increasingly driven by the production, distribution and exchange of information.
Or reforming our schools, universities and TAFEs to drive faster accumulation and more efficient allocation of our human capital.
And introducing an efficient price to fund hospital services, so this large sector of our domestic economy remains efficient  -  and so our long-term fiscal settings are not threatened by the challenges of our ageing society.
And increasing superannuation, to ensure that the benefits from the mining boom continue to be felt in the Australian economy well beyond the mining boom itself.
In the midst of uncertain global economic conditions, we should not lose sight of this country's strong economic backbone - a backbone that has been constructed by reforming governments over decades.
And we should not lose sight of the need to ensure that backbone stays strong in the years to come.
The costs of inaction are greater than the costs of action - both immediately, and in the longer term. 
That is true of climate change - as it is true of economic reform more generally.
One of the messages of recent economic history is this: stay on the reform road  -  keep modernising your economy  -  or pay a high price.
Retreat is not an option.
Friends, the contours of the Government's Clean Energy Future plan will be familiar to you all.
It can be summarised in a single concept:
Making the biggest polluters pay.
Or in the language of economists - pricing externalities.
Pricing carbon is a catalyst for a clean energy investment boom.
As a result of the government's plan, renewables (excluding hydro) will grow by 1700 per cent to 2050.
At that stage, renewables will make up 40 per cent of electricity generation, from a base of just 10 per cent today.
The bulk of that transformation will be driven by our price on carbon.
Starting at $23 a tonne next July and moving to what we expect will be around $29 a tonne when the emissions trading scheme commences in 2015 and reinforced by a nation-wide cap on the total amount of emissions allowed in the Australian economy.
That will change behaviour and therefore drive investment.
And to give the transition an extra boost, we have decided to establish a Clean Energy Finance Corporation to drive private investment.
Call it a catalyst  -  call it an impetus.
It will do amazing things for renewables in this country.
Similar to the UK's Green Investment Bank, CEFC will invest in the commercialisation of renewable and clean energy technologies.
It will provide loans, guarantees and equity to help make these projects a reality.
The Corporation will be independent from government like the Future Fund and be run on a commercial basis.
Investment decisions will be made on a rigorous case-by-case analysis.
And projects that are financed will be expected to pay their own way.
Alongside the Corporation, we'll also establish a new independent Australian Renewable Energy Agency or ARENA to manage $3.2 billion in clean energy initiatives.
This represents funding that is currently being administered at the departmental level across different programs and agencies.
We want to bring that funding together and put it on a more transparent and systematic basis.
The $10 billion allocated to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation will go to mature technologies that are ready to be scaled-up.
The $3.2 billion to ARENA will go to more early stage technologies to assist them towards commercial viability.
As a third complementary measure, we will also close down 2000 megawatts of
high polluting electricity generation in south-eastern Australia.
To preserve market integrity, this will be done by tender.
And no generator will be turned off until we are satisfied that alternatives are in place to keep the lights on.
And we will stand shoulder to shoulder with affected workers and communities.
Friends, put those measures together:
Closing down the worst sources of coal fired power
$13.2 billion for new investments
Our 20 per cent Renewable Energy Target
Plus the impetus from the carbon price, and clean energy will be turbo-charged in this country.
Solar, wind, geothermal, tidal power, natural gas, co-generation.
And, yes, clean coal too.
I've seen some of these projects for myself and glimpsed through the curtain what a clean energy future will look like.
Some, like the CSIRO experimental solar facility at Newcastle, almost seem like something out of sci-fi.
The trial plant at Mayfield West has 4000 square metres of mirrors all facing onto a single tower where compressed air is heated to 900 degrees in order to drive a turbine and create electricity.
Because it doesn't use water, this will be great for remote towns and villages in dry regions of Australia and indeed the world, allowing them to replace diesel generators with clean, green power from the sun.
Other models, like piping methane out of rubbish dumps and using it to generate electricity are so simple it's hard to think why we didn't do them before.
Last week I went to the Rochedale Renewable Energy Facility in Brisbane and saw exactly how it works.
I know the clean energy industry is ready to roll.
And my message today is: Go for it.
I thank all of you at Green Capital for playing such a central role in helping to define the way Australian business thinks about sustainability.
You have shown courage.
You have shown responsibility.
Today, I stand with you on the side of science and reason.
On the side of good economics.
On the side of the future.
With you, I'm focused on cutting carbon pollution, tackling climate change and getting Australia a clean energy future.
Long after the opinion polls have been forgotten, I want to look the next generation of Australians in the eye and tell them: we did the right thing by you.
In the years to come I want Australia to be a nation that finds itself standing on the right side of history.
A nation secure in the knowledge that it has risen to the challenge and tackled carbon pollution.
A nation with a clean energy economy that gives our people the jobs and the opportunities of the future.
We're closer to that future because of the great work of the Total Environment Centre and the Green Capital program.
Thank you. 



I thank Jeff for his acknowledgement of the traditional owners of this land.
And on behalf of us all, I pay my respects to the Gadigal people, whose long journey of caring for this land continues proudly to this day.
Friends,
That's why we're here today
Because we love this land.
We respect its people.
And we care profoundly for its future.
Since 1972, the Total Environment Centre has been at the forefront of preserving our precious natural heritage.
Working with visionary leaders like Neville Wran and Bob Carr, you've achieved miracles:
The great forests of north-east and south-east NSW protected forever.
The Blue Mountains not only saved but inscribed on the World Heritage List.
A world class chain of marine parks.
But what we didn't know in 1972 was that greenhouse gases were threatening the future of our environmental wonders.
We know now, and we've known for some time.
Leaders like Bob Carr and Margaret Thatcher raised the alarm in the late 1980s.
By 2007, even John Howard found it prudent to respond as the tide of evidence continued to grow.
Just like the conservative leaders of the UK, France, Italy, Germany and New Zealand have as well.
Today, in 2011, we know in abundant and undeniable detail the threat that carbon pollution poses to our way of life.
And I can tell you this: there is no leader on earth who is getting briefings that tell them anything different.
All of them have faced or are facing the same tough choices we are, with all the political difficulties they entail.
And each of them needs to answer to their own people  -  to humanity at large  -  and to the future ... for the decisions they make or fail to make.
When I am advised that we will face more days of extreme heat, more bushfires, more droughts, coastal flooding, loss of agricultural land in the Murray Darling Basin, devastating effects for the Great Barrier Reef and Kakadu, then the time has come to act.
And act we will. I won't let this country surrender in the face of the challenge of climate change.
Our nation will act to cut carbon pollution and seize a clean energy future.
The costs of acting are manageable.
And the opportunities from acting are great.
Indeed, it is those very opportunities that bring us here today.
New investment and new technology.  New jobs and new skills.
Since 2002, the Green Capital program has connected business and NGOs to debate how we make these opportunities a reality. 
And I'm here today to affirm your great work and to say:
The time for words is over. 
The time for action has arrived.
The environmental imperative to cut carbon pollution is strong, the economic imperative to modernise our economy is strong too.
And I say this with full awareness of global economic conditions.
As we have been reminded this week, Europe is still struggling will high unemployment and excessive sovereign debt.
The US recovery is also showing renewed signs of weakness.
We are not immune to developments in the global economy.
Here, consumers are still more cautious than they were before the global financial crisis, and credit conditions remain tight for some borrowers - and this is not surprising.
At the same time the strong dollar and competition for labour puts pressure on the non-mining sector and contributes to softness in the short-term.
Yet while there are heightened risks in the US and Europe, the fundamentals in Australia and our region are very different.
We are located in the right part of the world at the right time.
The prospects for our region remain much stronger as the weight of global activity continues to shift in our favour.
Just last week we saw China reporting growth of almost 10 per cent for the past year.
Our fundamentals are strong - we have low unemployment, strong job creation, and record terms of trade that are driving an unprecedented pipeline of business investment - $430 billion forecast in resources alone.
We also have a strong budget position, very low debt and a resilient financial system which all position us well for the future.
This fundamental economic strength has its ultimate roots in our creative and confident people ... but thirty years of economic modernisation has been vital.
The floating dollar is a vital safety valve on inflation in our resource-rich, export-oriented country.
Flexible enterprise bargaining lifts productivity and competitiveness in every sector of the economy.
Successive reforms to education and training and the system of skilled migration help lift the productivity of our people.
Superannuation ensures the country's savings, and insures the country's future.
And just as we are economically stronger now for the modernising reforms of the past three decades  -  so we must embrace economic reform now to have a strong modern economy in decades to come.
Just as this Labor Government took steps to protect jobs during the Global Financial Crisis - and just as we have kept the economy strong since, while hundreds of thousands of jobs have been created - we will continue to undertake the reforms this country needs to keep jobs growing.
Pricing carbon will have powerful economic effects.
It will mean we use our energy more productively - producing more output for a given level of energy input.
It will direct domestic capital - steering it towards new clean industries which will thrive in a carbon constrained world. 
It will attract billions of dollars of international investment from firms looking to produce in economies which have certain, efficient policies to tackle the carbon challenge.
In years to come, carbon productivity will be as important to luring investment from multinationals as labour costs, tax rates, human capital, and levels of technological sophistication have been in past decades.
That's why carbon pricing is part of our broader economic agenda - because it will give us a stronger economy, because it will put us on a stronger competitive footing, and because it will allow us to take advantage of economic opportunities as they arise - rather than playing catch-up in the years to come.
This is an important part of our broader economic agenda for the country.
Such as building high speed broadband - to ensure Australia thrives as global growth is increasingly driven by the production, distribution and exchange of information.
Or reforming our schools, universities and TAFEs to drive faster accumulation and more efficient allocation of our human capital.
And introducing an efficient price to fund hospital services, so this large sector of our domestic economy remains efficient  -  and so our long-term fiscal settings are not threatened by the challenges of our ageing society.
And increasing superannuation, to ensure that the benefits from the mining boom continue to be felt in the Australian economy well beyond the mining boom itself.
In the midst of uncertain global economic conditions, we should not lose sight of this country's strong economic backbone - a backbone that has been constructed by reforming governments over decades.
And we should not lose sight of the need to ensure that backbone stays strong in the years to come.
The costs of inaction are greater than the costs of action - both immediately, and in the longer term. 
That is true of climate change - as it is true of economic reform more generally.
One of the messages of recent economic history is this: stay on the reform road  -  keep modernising your economy  -  or pay a high price.
Retreat is not an option.
Friends, the contours of the Government's Clean Energy Future plan will be familiar to you all.
It can be summarised in a single concept:
Making the biggest polluters pay.
Or in the language of economists - pricing externalities.
Pricing carbon is a catalyst for a clean energy investment boom.
As a result of the government's plan, renewables (excluding hydro) will grow by 1700 per cent to 2050.
At that stage, renewables will make up 40 per cent of electricity generation, from a base of just 10 per cent today.
The bulk of that transformation will be driven by our price on carbon.
Starting at $23 a tonne next July and moving to what we expect will be around $29 a tonne when the emissions trading scheme commences in 2015 and reinforced by a nation-wide cap on the total amount of emissions allowed in the Australian economy.
That will change behaviour and therefore drive investment.
And to give the transition an extra boost, we have decided to establish a Clean Energy Finance Corporation to drive private investment.
Call it a catalyst  -  call it an impetus.
It will do amazing things for renewables in this country.
Similar to the UK's Green Investment Bank, CEFC will invest in the commercialisation of renewable and clean energy technologies.
It will provide loans, guarantees and equity to help make these projects a reality.
The Corporation will be independent from government like the Future Fund and be run on a commercial basis.
Investment decisions will be made on a rigorous case-by-case analysis.
And projects that are financed will be expected to pay their own way.
Alongside the Corporation, we'll also establish a new independent Australian Renewable Energy Agency or ARENA to manage $3.2 billion in clean energy initiatives.
This represents funding that is currently being administered at the departmental level across different programs and agencies.
We want to bring that funding together and put it on a more transparent and systematic basis.
The $10 billion allocated to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation will go to mature technologies that are ready to be scaled-up.
The $3.2 billion to ARENA will go to more early stage technologies to assist them towards commercial viability.
As a third complementary measure, we will also close down 2000 megawatts of
high polluting electricity generation in south-eastern Australia.
To preserve market integrity, this will be done by tender.
And no generator will be turned off until we are satisfied that alternatives are in place to keep the lights on.
And we will stand shoulder to shoulder with affected workers and communities.
Friends, put those measures together:
Closing down the worst sources of coal fired power
$13.2 billion for new investments
Our 20 per cent Renewable Energy Target
Plus the impetus from the carbon price, and clean energy will be turbo-charged in this country.
Solar, wind, geothermal, tidal power, natural gas, co-generation.
And, yes, clean coal too.
I've seen some of these projects for myself and glimpsed through the curtain what a clean energy future will look like.
Some, like the CSIRO experimental solar facility at Newcastle, almost seem like something out of sci-fi.
The trial plant at Mayfield West has 4000 square metres of mirrors all facing onto a single tower where compressed air is heated to 900 degrees in order to drive a turbine and create electricity.
Because it doesn't use water, this will be great for remote towns and villages in dry regions of Australia and indeed the world, allowing them to replace diesel generators with clean, green power from the sun.
Other models, like piping methane out of rubbish dumps and using it to generate electricity are so simple it's hard to think why we didn't do them before.
Last week I went to the Rochedale Renewable Energy Facility in Brisbane and saw exactly how it works.
I know the clean energy industry is ready to roll.
And my message today is: Go for it.
I thank all of you at Green Capital for playing such a central role in helping to define the way Australian business thinks about sustainability.
You have shown courage.
You have shown responsibility.
Today, I stand with you on the side of science and reason.
On the side of good economics.
On the side of the future.
With you, I'm focused on cutting carbon pollution, tackling climate change and getting Australia a clean energy future.
Long after the opinion polls have been forgotten, I want to look the next generation of Australians in the eye and tell them: we did the right thing by you.
In the years to come I want Australia to be a nation that finds itself standing on the right side of history.
A nation secure in the knowledge that it has risen to the challenge and tackled carbon pollution.
A nation with a clean energy economy that gives our people the jobs and the opportunities of the future.
We're closer to that future because of the great work of the Total Environment Centre and the Green Capital program.
Thank you. 



I want to begin by thanking Melbourne University Publishing for making this event possible.
MUP has for decades played an extraordinary role in our national conversation.
You've given our country its greatest work of scholarship  -  the Australian Dictionary of Biography.
You've published works by distinguished writers such as Gore Vidal, Barry Jones, Don Watson, Paul Kelly and Stuart Macintyre.
And you've published controversial works, including the book the subject of today's launch.
And that is no surprise because Fair Cop canvasses some of the very deepest-seated issues in contemporary society:
The role of women.
The nature of policing.
Changing styles of leadership.
Our response to nature's cruelty.
Accountability in public life.
Any of these topics would be the subject of understandable discussion on their own.
To raise all of them in one volume has made controversy inevitable.
I am not here today to adjudicate that controversy.
Readers will be able to judge for themselves.
I am here because Christine Nixon is a high-achieving Australian whose long journey of public service deserves our attention and regard.
That journey begins in the first chapters of this book, which portray a rich and fascinating snapshot of life in postwar Australia.
The years when a sleepy and insular nation began to wake up to the realities and challenges of a changing world.
This book tells the story of a kid who grew up on Sydney's northern beaches in the house where her beloved parents Ross and Betty still live today.
Who enjoyed a childhood of security and structure.
Who acquired a strong sense of community in a close-knit, caring neighbourhood.
Who spent long summer days on the sands of Manly beach.
But who also saw the world changing around her in the late 60s and early 70s, and who wanted to understand and master that change.
Mum Betty was a Methodist church elder who conveyed a formidable work ethic (p.8) and whose expectations of her three children were unapologetically high. (p. 21)
Like my mother, Betty Nixon worked  -  which was uncommon in the 1950s and 60s but provided an invaluable role model for a smart, inquisitive daughter.
Christine's dad Ross was a police officer, just like both my parents were back in Wales. 
Ross Nixon was a clean-skin  -  a so-called white knight in an era of deplorable corruption and brutality, who feared that his daughter's choice of a police career would bring her face to face with the dark side.
In fact, so uncertain was Ross that he insisted Christine gain a qualification in case policing didn't work out  -  which she did, obtaining a TAFE certificate.
And indeed, Christine and her two brothers all ended up earning Masters' degrees, proving the power of education to transform lives and unlock opportunity.
Perhaps the most defining moment came at the end of high school when Christine applied for a management trainee-ship at Coles but was knocked back because of her gender.
So policing it was.
In her NSW Police Academy class, there were just two women in a cohort of 70.
Predictably the new graduate was fobbed off on a series of light duties like visiting schools and directing traffic.
Not for the last time, Christine Nixon would have none of it.
She moved to mainstream policing, starting with the possibly roughest police station in Australia  -  Darlinghurst.
She found mentors among the ranks of the honest cops like the legendary Merv Beck and John Avery.
And she firmly and patiently rose over 30 years of hard work to the rank of Assistant Commissioner before moving to Victoria as Chief Commissioner in 2001.
Christine chose policing because she understood profoundly that no Australian can succeed if they live in the shadow of violence, crime and fear.
That policing must both serve the community and reflect it, rather than standing above or apart.
It was these insights that captured the attention of the selection panel for the chief commissionership in 2001.
When Premier Bracks announced her appointment, it was with these words:
[Christine Nixon] was the stand-out candidate for her vision, her leadership and her views on modern policing, experience as a police officer and impeccable integrity.   (p.122)
From that day a remarkable series of challenges and events followed:
September 11 and the war on terror.
The fight against corruption.
The struggle for cultural change.
The gangland wars.
The 2006 Commonwealth Games.
There were the good days like seeing corrupt officers drummed out of the force or crime figures falling.
Or the bad days when you had to go and visit a widow whose husband had just been killed in the line of duty.
And, of course, there is that most infamous of days  -  Black Saturday  -  February 7, 2009.
A day Christine will reflect on for the rest of her life.
A day our nation has reflected on, including through the important work of the Royal Commission.
Friends,if this book has any theme that unifies its different stories and different chapters, it is leadership.
In Fair Cop, Christine muses at length on the changing leadership styles in policing, drawing on her reforming work in NSW under John Avery, her postgraduate studies at Harvard and her secondment with the Metropolitan Police in London.
Indeed, Christine notes that being a leader has been the vocation at the core of [her] professional life and identity. (p. ix)
Friends,among all the discussion and debate, let us remember this salient fact:
Christine Nixon has dedicated every phase of her adult life to the honourable calling of public service and leadership.
Her book is a vivid reminder that such leadership is the ultimate high-wire act  -  no hands, no safety net.
Few forms of leadership are harder than leading an organisation through change -  be it cultural change, economic change, social change.
And, of course, no worthwhile change is ever straight-forward or simple.
The easy way is to pretend that an organisation  -  or indeed a nation  -  can make its way in a demanding world without the need for change.
That road is easy.
It is enticing.
And it is wrong.
There is no way that the old NSW or Victorian police forces could have justified staying the same.
Home to thousands of honest, dedicated officers whose work was at ever present risk of being overshadowed by instances of corruption, alcohol abuse and brutality.
In a modern and rapidly changing world an old-fashioned command-and-control culture which even the military had discarded, could not have remained untouched.
And again, just as Fair Cop is a record of this change, it is also a record of Christine's leadership.
Leadership was Christine's job for three decades from the day she got her sergeant's stripes.
That journey has included triumphs and mis-steps.
Memorable days and forgettable ones.
All on the public record to be judged by friend and foes alike.
As a sustained reflection on a lifetime of leadership, this book asks us only to understand and judge that record in its entirety.
To read each of these 366 pages.
Examine all her 40 years of public service.
See the whole person and the whole story:
Of the second-generation cop with policing in her veins.
The tough achiever who sought to be judged only on her merits.
The person of integrity who opposed corruption at every turn.
The reformer who sought to build an evidence-based model of policing grounded in our shared values as free citizens in a democratic society.
Whatever your standpoint, this book records the life of a significant Australian whose achievements - from the day she stepped into the Police Academy in 1972, to the day she left the Bushfire Reconstruction and Recovery Authority last year, are worthy of attention and respect.
It is a life told frankly and fluently by its authors.
Thoughtfully edited by Cathy Smith.
And superbly published by Victory Press.
Controversial  -  certainly.
But indispensable for all who want to understand the recent history of our nation.
I declare Fair Cop, written by Christine Nixon in collaboration with Jo Chandler officially launched.



Thank you Josh. Can I acknowledge also Per Capita's Board, Fellows and friends, as well as Corrs, our hosts.
It's good to be with the Per Capita circle again this morning.
And here with all of you, I do want to pay particular tribute to David Hetherington's thoughtful, progressive leadership, which has driven Per Capita's growing success for four years now. 
In 2007, in your post-election Memo to a Progressive Prime Minister, youreminded us:
Successful government demands strategic vision, policy experimentation, embrace of risk and most importantly, an articulation of values.
And in 2010 you wrote to me:
A successful government delivers a small number of outstanding reforms each term.  
If you are able to kick-start productivity, unlock hard' and soft' infrastructure investment, and put a price on carbon, you will have played your part in a proud Australian tradition of progressive reform.
Good advice at the time  -  and a year on from the election, a measure I'm happy to be tested against.
Because we've achieved agreement for a carbon price, to cut carbon pollution and build a clean energy economy
Inked a once-in-a-generation reform to health financing, unlocking the quintessential soft infrastructure investment.
Passed the flood levy, to pay for rebuilding the nation's devastated hard infrastructure.
And the long-term push to get productivity growth going again informs every area of our reform.
From cutting taxes on low-paid workers and improving training and incentive to get into work, integrating enduring Labor values and the economy's contemporary needs  -  through to the structural separation of Telstra, a real white whale which has escaped many a reformer's harpoon in the past.
While doing what needs to be done.  A good solution, a regional solution, to the difficult problem of people smuggling.
So David, if you're adding a one year report card to your Memo, I'm sure you'll be kind!
But the real test for Government is not resolving issues on our to-do list or getting good reviews from commentators.
I don't seek elegant policy solutions for their own sake: I seek better Australian lives.
And I also seek to make enduring changes, changes which will command the support of the community as a whole in the years to come.
So for policy to make a difference now and for it to endure for the future it must be grounded in a deep and sympathetic appreciation of the way our people live.
This is why the reform agenda for the Government I lead is alert to the hope, but also the uncertainty, felt by many Australians about the course of future events.
We know the fundamentals of the Australian economy are strong  -  very strong. 
The Treasurer made some similar observations when he spoke at Per Capita following this year's Budget.
Growing employment, low inflation, interest rates still well below those when we came to office four years ago.
Low public debt, a stable and liquid financial sector, $1.3 trillion under management in our super funds.
A strong pipeline of mining investment.
And we are in the right part of the world at the right time.
Ours is an advanced and educated economy at the outset of a new Asia-Pacific century  -  poised for long-term prosperity through trade with the new Asia-Pacific middle class.
The long-term story is one of long-term strength and I believe Australians know this.
But we are not immune to the uncertainties and risk in the global outlook  -  there are patchwork pressures in our own economy  -  the natural disasters of the summer have cost the economy more than we anticipated even in their immediate aftermath.
Australians sense these things too and are making adjustments in their own behaviour.
After the global financial crisis, there's a new understanding of economic fragility: if we dodged a bullet in the GFC, perhaps it's no surprise that when a car backfires, people duck again.
As the real economy globalises, so does economic and political sentiment.
We can see similar trends, indeed more sharply expressed, at work throughout the English-speaking world, in southern Europe and elsewhere.
And while the fundamentals of the economy remain strong, it's also clear things aren't as they were in the 2000s. 
In the last decade, personal debt rose as people spent more than they earned but enjoyed the lifestyle benefits.
We had a long period of rising asset prices and rising superannuation returns.
Ten Budgets in a row starting in 2001 cut income tax.
In the last term of the former Government, revenues were so high and grew so fast that the Commonwealth Treasury had its own group who joked their job as the Budget was put to bed was to dump out the cash and keep the surplus down.
No more.
Decades of reform and a well-managed stimulus did mean no descent into recession  -  but with that, no soft gains in recovery. 
Utility bills are the new petrol prices.
Decades of infrastructure underinvestment deliver not just the reality of increased costs but a sticker shock' which many suggest is having a disproportionate impact on sentiment and behaviour.
Australians are conscious of the importance of China's demand for our resources and concerned about the malaise of the American economy.
They understand that our strong dollar is a true mixed blessing, both a reflection of strength and a cost to many sectors.
And from the Cabinet table to the kitchen table, fiscal consolidation is the order of the day.
This economic story  -  rich in opportunity, complex in detail, promising for the long term, challenging in the present  -  is of a piece with Australians' wider experience of our times.
Consider our national security. 
We have a continent for a nation with an enviable diplomatic and military strength, in a strong alliance with the strongest democracy, but we recognise the new threats of terrorism, rogue states and cyber attack, while the old threat, nation-state rivalry, never went away. 
And it is rightly sobering to the national mood when Australians are dying for us in uniform overseas.
We had our summer of sorrow, as natural disasters here, in New Zealand and in Japan transfixed us and left us troubled about how violent and unpredictable our world can be.
Yes, these are rich and complex, promising and challenging years.
And as for individuals, so for nations:
Faced with challenge and change, we can pull the doona over our heads and leave the blinds closed all day, or we can get up and get our boots on.
I know what I'll do.
Because we've got a chance now to do something pretty amazing:  To take a once in 150 year mining investment boom and make of it a once in 150 year opportunity boom.
Offering a good education for every kid, a good job for every family, good choices and true security for every older Australian.
And also providing more information and choice  -  creating options for communities, citizens, parents  -  empowering them to insist on better, to insist on productive change.
My Child, My School, My Skills ... My Unis, My Hospital.
Helping mortgageors to switch banks.
Empowering regional communities to direct the various instruments of three levels of government in the one place they call their own.
Consider the way our Minerals Resource Rent Tax will fund future savings. 
Funding contributions to 10 million sovereign wealth funds in which 10 million Australians make super investment choices of their own.
Not dumping cash into one big sovereign wealth fund controlled by the eminent and the grey.
Or the way we'll cut carbon pollution through a well designed market, aggregating competitive responses on the energy supply side and price-driven consumer choices.
Not a giant taxpayer funded slush fund to pay polluters to do the right thing.
You'll see the same approach over time as we work though new ways to extend the fair go to disabled Australians.
As we consider the best polices to provide reassurance to people with disability, and those who love and care for them.
It's right to aspire to be a country where disability services are based on people's need for those services, not the lottery of what kind of disability they have, how they acquired it or what postcode they live in.
Where parents of children with disability know that their children will be safe, well caredfor and happy when they grow too old to provide that care themselves.
And where Australians with disability have good choices in their own hands  -  taking away the barriers to finding work, to being involved and active in their communities.
I believe seizing opportunity and offering choice lies at the heart of progressive responses to the emerging social reality of having two senior generations.
The ageing of our population is a big new change all over the developed world and I want to discuss it at some length today.
A cause of uncertainty  -  people see it in their own lives and know in part what it means for them.
But at the same time, they wonder what it means for the nation.
And an issue people do identify  -  and do nominate as a big challenge.
Not least, because Australia's former conservative Government saw and said that this was a problem.
Now I don't think the burden theory of ageing is right at all  -  nor do I think we have a problem of too many old people  -  or a solution which lies somewhere in the population policy menu.
I see a change: one driven by wonderful good things, by last century's amazing collective achievements, victories over disease and squalor and want, with rising life expectancy for all.
People are living longer than ever before.
When Australian Labor introduced the aged pension and I won't tell you what the conservatives said about the aged pension in 1909 but here's a hint, it started with n and rhymed with go when Australian Labor introduced the aged pension, life expectancy  -  57 years  -  was lower than the age for the pension itself  -  which was 65.
In the century since, life expectancy has gone up twenty years.
We hear that so often that we can race over the thought.
So for a moment, pause and think about it: twenty more years in your own life.
All the books that you can read, the time to teach nieces and nephews to sing or knit, the time to work with wood or to fish with grandchildren, the extra day to reconcile with your parents or partner or friend. 
Time to see the Bulldogs win another flag.
Years of productive work, years of volunteering and caring, learning and leisure and years with loved ones too.
It's an incredible change when you think about it.
Longer lives, more older Australians, this will never be a bad thing to me. 
And as people live longer, we'll have two senior generations.
A new group of people are retiring, while the already retired are living longer too. 
Over the next forty years, the over 65 population goes from one in six Australians to one in four  -  a big change in our lives.
But the over 85 population will go from one in two hundred Australians to one in twenty  -  almost a new way of living.
For now, those two senior generations in practice are the parents of the baby boomers, and the boomers themselves.
Think of the 90 year old woman with the 65 year old son.
And that younger senior generation is the healthiest, best resourced and best educated ever to stop full-time work.
For the first time, there'll be more part-pensioners than pensioners by 2030  -  which tells us both what a significant shift there is to more affluent ageing but also the limits of that shift.
That private wealth will create new choices  -  while the state will retain a vital role in guaranteeing income and security for all.
Not everyone will have a Winnebago or a trip around the world.
Many will work hard: some will share caring responsibilities for frail parents and young grandchildren at the same time.
We will not do away with hard times or the long responsibilities of life, but ageing will change.
And the baby boomers do bridge a historic change in human life.
Their grandparents were born in the nineteenth century and their grandchildren are born in the twenty first.
Even fifteen years ago, retired Australians had lived through a period defined by Depression and war, today, people retiring whose life was defined by post-war prosperity and the sexual revolution.
They're going to want different things. 
Not just security, they're going to want choice.
They changed what it meant to be young and they changed what it meant to form families and adult relationships and they'll change what it means to be old in just the same way.
These two senior generations are with us now: we are living this way already.
It's a big change, based on good things we have done together, creating a new opportunity in turn.
An opportunity to make choice and security the hallmarks of every older Australian's life.
Where individuals, couples, families, will want new ways to make decisions for themselves  -  while no older Australian should be left behind.
This goal is implicit in many measures the Government has delivered since 2007.
Lifting the pension rate and lifting super, while lifting the pension age from 65 to 67 between 2017 and 2023.
Cutting effective tax on older workers who get the pension through the Work Bonus.
Broadband for Seniors, an amazingly popular grassroots initiative to introduce older Australians to the internet.
Almost 100 000 older Australians have used the popular Broadband for Seniors kiosks. 
More than a third had never used a computer before, and almost half had never used the internet.
It's a very good thing.
We're also seeking new ideas.
Wayne Swan has appointed an Advisory Panel on the Economic Potential of Senior Australians, chaired by Everald Compton, to push along solutions as well as to sell the benefits of a seniors' workforce to sceptical employers.
The Panel will examine how we can best harness the life experiences and intellectual capital of the older members of our community.
We need to look at our older Australians as an asset to be valued, rather than as a problem to be solved.
Next week, I'll release the Productivity Commission's final report on Caring for Older Australians.
We asked the Commission to make recommendations, not with a view to the next five years, but the next twenty, in one of the important areas that arise from two senior generations: caring for Australians as they age.
What I want to emphasise as we begin that debate  -  not just the debate on the Productivity Commission's report but the debate about the wider implications of our two senior generations  -  is the values this Government will bring to judging the proposals.
Choice for each older Australian  -  and security for all older Australians. 
New opportunities  -  while no one is left behind.
And we'll apply some practical principles to new ideas as well.
First, older Australians have earned the right to be able to access the care and support that is appropriate to their needs, when they need it.
Second, older Australians deserve greater choice and control over their care arrangements than the system currently gives them.
And third, funding arrangements for aged care must be fair and they must be sustainable  -  both for older Australians themselves, and for the broader community.
I believe we can seize this opportunity of our ageing society  -  this new reality of the two senior generations  -  to build choice and security into the lives of every older Australian.
I know we can do this because of the things we have done before.
I think of what Australians did together when we created the aged pension in 1909.
The very meaning of ageing, what it meant to get older, changed, changing how people felt about their own future, by offering better standards of living, offering freedom from want.
I think of what Australians did together when we created universal superannuation in the 1980s.
The very meaning of ageing changed again, changing how people prepared for their future, by offering better standards of living again but offering new choices as well.
And I look forward to the things we will do together in coming years to seize the opportunity of the two senior generations.
Years when what it means to age will change again.
As a generation retires which changed everything it touched, we can be sure that what it means to age will never be the same.
Yet we can also be sure that the values we share will be our guide. 
Just as they have been through the great changes of the past.
Opportunity for every older Australian.
Choice for each older Australian.
Security for all older Australians. 
And leaving no one behind. 



Thanks Nick for that warm Tasmanian welcome.
It's so good to be among so many friends.
Some friends I've known for so many years that it's best we pass over the detailed chronology, some friends I made here last night and I see again today.
It's good to see my Federal colleagues.
Dick and Geoff, Julie and Sid, Anne and Catryna and Carol, Helen and Lisa and Nick.
I see them too rarely down here but I see them very often in Canberra. 
And believe me when I tell you this is an unusual occasion, one where I'm talking and they're listening.
Friends, Tasmania has the ten strongest voices in my ear in Canberra, every one of them is a Labor voice.
It's good to be here in a Labor State and among so many state colleagues.
And it's really good to see Lara. 
I remember the first time I met your Premier.
A young EMILY's List activist speaking passionately about her State.  And as I listened, I thought this one will go a long way.
But as I've worked with her this last year  -  on health reform, on broadband, on forests  -  I've come to believe Lara will go all the way.
Your Premier, Lara Giddings, is not just going to govern this state well for the next three years, with your help I know she is going to lead this Party to victory in 2014.
I love coming to Tassie.  It's my kind of place.
In the faces I see and the places I go, I don't just meet people I like, I find values I recognise.
Because hard work, education and respect run through the spine of the State.
Through this place where people work hard: in the trucks and the laboratories, the wineries and restaurants, at the factories and on the farms, feeling the benefits and dignity of making their own way. 
And where people understand that everyone who can work, should.
Those values run through this place where people chase the fair go for the future by chasing education for their kids on the long drive to lift school retention rates.
And this is a place where respect is a thing to show not just a word to say.
Where you can feel in every pub and workshop and office that great Australian belief that just because you're better-off doesn't mean you're better.
And these values of hard work, education and respect don't only shine through in the people of your State.
They burn brightly in the Government of your country as well.
And they illuminate our vision for Australia.
We're building a strong economy, where future growth is secured.
A new-technology, clean-energy, high-skill, high-wage economy for the future.
An economy where a small manufacturer of generic pharmaceuticals has a video conference with his supplier in Delhi and Shanghai every Monday.
An economy where an engineer visiting a mill in the northwest doesn't have to drive back to Hobart to get in for a check up with his GP.
An economy where great ideas in a digital age aren't born in Burnie and then raised in Seoul or Boston, they come to maturity in innovation hubs of our own.
An economy where carbon finally has a price, where economic growth is decoupled from emissions growth, where the clean energy jobs of the future are created here and created now.
And while we work to secure growth, we are determined to leave no one behind.
To build a fair society for the future, where all our people can make the choices which build them and their family a better life.
Where every principal has the authority and the incentive to lift school performance every year and every parent has the information to join in the task of school improvement too.
Where local clinicians can run the local hospital, responding to the economic incentives of our health reforms and where patients feel the benefits, in the emergency ward and in the operating theatre.
Where a teen mum can be studying her certificate three in child care services while her own baby is taken care of close by and where through the opportunity of new skills and new work she can create a new life for herself and her child.
Where every older Australian has security and choice where our two senior generations enjoy productive, positive older ways of life.
And where security and choice extend to every Australian person in every Australian State.
And it is when we govern well, driven by these Labor values, that this vision becomes reality.
When we make the hard decisions to build a strong economy. 
Getting the Budget back into the black, walking the reform road.
Creating hundreds of thousands of jobs, lifting the living standards of millions of families and pensioners.
Not reforming policy for its own sake but modernising the economy to secure our strength into the future.
We have seen significant declines on markets over the week as Australia has been affected by events in both Europe and the US.
We know we are not immune from global developments - but we know our economic credentials are among the strongest in the world.
Low unemployment, low public debt, a strong pipeline of future investment and positioned in the region with the strongest growth.
And we know we have dealt with global instability before, through sound economic policies and the hard work and resilience of the community.
No economy is better placed than ours to remain strong in this environment.
This is the strength which enables us to continue making the investments which ensure no one is left behind.
$2.2 billion for mental health.  
130 000 new training places and apprenticeships. 
The parents of hundreds of thousands of teenagers with over $4000 a year extra in family tax benefit. 
Millions of low-income workers with more in their regular pay packet through the reforms to the Low-Income Tax Offset.
Not just a Labor Government led by a Labor Prime Minister, a Labor Budget brought down by a Labor Treasurer.
We do these things for the living standards of our people, to give a hand to families, to give a hand to pensioners.
And these things we do speak not only of our Party's deepest purposes at its founding, they speak of our practical priorities today.
Because we are a prosperous country we have the resources, because we are a Labor Government we have the will to do what is necessary to make sure no one is left behind.
So Labor people can be proud that we are governing well. 
Can be pleased with the decisions we have made and reassured by the delivery we have achieved already this year.
We've switched on the National Broadband Network on the mainland, in Armidale and Kiama and Brunswick  -  and we've signed up hundreds more subscribers across this State.
We've created new incentives and new support to extend the benefits and dignity of work to families and communities who have been excluded for far too long.
We've signed the national health reform agreement, created a single funding pool and a new efficient price, and the benefits are flowing today.
And this Federal Parliament has done what the last could not: made the decisions to put a price on carbon. 
To cut pollution, to support the household budget, to protect Australian jobs, to build a clean energy future for Australia.
A strong economy  -  opportunity for all  -  no one left behind.
This is the vision we seek to build through so many areas of policy.
And this is the vision at the heart of the historic agreement on the future of forestry in this State.
You know well that changing market conditions, both in Australia and around the world, have created pressures on the industry which cannot be ignored.
And we know Gunns Limited's own decision to exit from native forestry will have significant impacts on workers, communities and the Tasmanian economy.
So the State and Federal Governments, the representatives of industry, workers and the environmental organisations, all recognise the need for change.
But together we've recognised that there is an opportunity here as well.
And that's why we've taken deliberate steps forward together, to end the long-running conflict over native forestry in the state.
The Statement of Principles, the Heads of Agreement and now the Intergovernmental Agreement have brought certainty to Tasmania's forestry industry.
And they bring  hope of settlement in Tasmanian society as well.
The State's been divided, sometimes bitterly, for decades. 
There is a genuine chance now to heal that divide. 
Not to abolish democratic differences, but to end the social conflict.
I don't agree with those who say we can't protect native forests and develop a sustainable timber industry in Tasmania.
I don't agree with those who say the people of this State can't settle this issue for the future.
I know there are political players still wanting to fight the war but I believe this community has had enough.
Tasmania is ready to move on.
The signatories to the Statement of Principles, the people who have endorsed the Heads of Agreement  -  the representatives of industry, workers and the environmental organisations  -  they see this possibility.
And I know many of you can see the opportunity as well.
A historic opportunity, now before each party in the Tasmanian Parliament, as it considers the passage of the required legislation between now and the end of June next year.
Under our agreement, the State Government will reserve native forest and both Governments will support workers and their families affected by industry restructure.
Immediate assistance for workers and contractors who are losing their jobs and livelihoods as a result of industry restructure.
Employee assistance, retraining and relocation support and assistance for voluntary permanent exits for haulage and harvest contractors.
But more than this: a genuine partnership to develop and diversify the Tasmanian economy.  To build resilience in the economy here, to add more strings to the economic bow.
With new opportunities for Tasmanian families, with job-creating projects in communities affected by forestry restructure.
A regional economic development partnership to create investment and jobs opportunities.
Tasmania's economic future is a picture of Australia's economic future: diversifying, adding value, balancing growth. 
The whole economy strong, modernising for the future, driving clean energy, high technology, and productivity growth.
The Agreement is the end of a long policy debate. It can be the beginning of a new era in Tasmania's public life.
As Prime Minister I'm proud of the opportunity we have created together because it is good for the State.
But as Federal Labor Leader I'm particularly proud of this process  -  and this outcome  -  because it shows so distinctively the Labor way.
Only Labor Governments could bring the whole community to the table  -  no other Party could genuinely include industry, workers and environmental organisations in the discussion.
Only Labor values could bring the solution to reality  -  no other Party has so deep in its DNA our faith that we can make prosperity, fairness and sustainability come together.
Only Labor's vision  -  a strong economy and opportunity for all  -  could ensure that in our progress toward these good things we leave no one behind.
The contrast with our opponents could not be more clear.
Sometimes we're pretty tough on ourselves in the Labor Party but gee, things could be worse. 
How'd you like to be the Liberals, who had a party review after the last election and had to turn to Peter Reith to do it! 
And if having the godfather of Workchoices tell you what went wrong isn't bad enough, what is seriously scary is that he actually made some good points!
Like the good point he made, when he said that the Liberals' 2010 election Tasmania package  -  put out just 3 days before polling day  -  was more insult than policy. 
But even more, the point he made when he agreed with the Leeser review of the Liberals' policy on broadband, which said:
In the view of many, the [Liberal] Party's policy amounted to a threat to come into people's homes and rip the internet out of the wall ... 
Tasmanians could see the NBN being rolled out, Tasmania is often behind the mainland in receiving new technology so being at the forefront of the NBN was seen as a boost to Tasmania ... 
Jobs for Tasmanian contractors, people to Tasmania from the mainland, flow on effects for Tasmania's tourism, hospitality and service industries ...
The [Liberal] Party needs to make a clear and unambiguous statement about its intentions on Broadband infrastructure in Tasmania in the future
Clever bloke, Peter Reith, and Tasmanians are pretty smart too.
They know Liberal policy on broadband is already clear and unambiguous.  It's the original one-word slogan: NO.
These things we have done together, not just in forests, but in health and education, in clean energy and new technology and so much more, they say something about who we are.
Not just about Labor's vision for the kind of country we are determined to build but about Labor's determination for the kind of governments we are determined to be.
Not just what we are doing and why but how.
Yes, having a plan: seeing a vision, pursuing it with passion.
Not always taking the easy path, always putting the national interest first.
And also, governing for all: bringing people together.
Listening carefully, speaking honestly, showing respect.
That unique combination of progress and unity  -  of new ideas and sticking together  -  which has always been the Labor way.
In the 1890s, they called it just being mates.
When we do that, we can do good things together  -  good things like ending the conflict over native forests.
When we respect each other, respect the facts, and get on with the job, our country can reform health, deliver the NBN, get more Australians into work.
That's how we'll put a price on carbon as well.
And that's how we'll deal with the big challenges to come and how we'll seize the big opportunities that lie ahead.
As the world changes, working together, to master change, and protect the things we hold dear.
Friends, ours is a great country. 
And throughout our history, whenever our great country has had a government worthy of its great people, we have done great things.
And in this decade to come, we must do them again.
We live in a world in transition.
And in that world, the only way we can keep hold of the things we love about Australia today is to shape change to the purposes we choose for ourselves.
To recognise the need for change and to take deliberate steps forward together to get us ready for tomorrow, to keep us strong.
To secure the things we all hold dear for all the years to come.
In the strong economies of the future, high speed broadband will be a matter of fact.
In the strong economies of the future, everyone who should work will work.
In the strong economies of the future, health systems will be sustainable.
In the strong economies of the future, economic growth will not mean pollution growth.
I am determined that Australia will be a strong economy like that.
That determination is written into everything we do.
And I am determined that in Australia there will be opportunity for all  -  that no one will be left behind.
The opportunities of new technology won't only go to the people and places who get them now.
The opportunities of new jobs won't only be created for those who already have a chance.
The opportunities of new kinds of care, new cures for disease, won't only be there for people who can afford them.
The opportunities from new sources of energy, from the power of the wind, the water and the sun, will be driven through our whole nation in the best and most efficient way.
And I know, we know, that these good things will not just happen to our country. 
We must make them so, together.
Together, I know we will. 



I thank Diane Kerr for the Welcome to Country, and honour the traditional owners of this land, to whom Clyde Holding was such a true and faithful friend.
Former Governors-General Sir Zelman Cowen and Dr Peter Hollingworth.
My distinguished predecessors, Bob Hawke and Paul Keating.
The Honourable Ted Baillieu, Premier of Victoria and your eminent predecessors John Cain, Steve Bracks and John Brumby.
Ministerial and parliamentary colleagues, state and federal, past and present.
Distinguished guests.
And above, members of Clyde's family.
We gather today to express equal measures of sorrow and celebration.
We are sad that a loved and familiar figure is no longer among us.
Yet celebrating that he lived such a long, vivid and productive life at the heart of our nation's affairs.
Clyde Holding was part of an extraordinary generation of Victorians, born in the years before World War Two, who so greatly and distinctively enriched our country:
I think of figures like Zelman Cowen and Barry Jones, John Button, Frank Crean, Jim Cairns and Peter Karmel.
Great Australians, many from modest homes, who flourished through the transformative power of education and who saw the primary purpose of their lives as being dedicated to public service and the common good.
Clyde Holding was just such a man.
He grew up in ordinary circumstances, the son of migrant parents.
He won scholarships for school and university places.
And like so many of us, he sought expression of his impulse for community service in the Labor Party and the law, leading, in due course, to elected public office.
Clyde Holding was made for politics.
From first to last, from 1962 to 1998, he was  -  above all else  -  a proud and effective local Member.
But someone as pugnacious as Clyde Holding could not remain on the backbench for long, and he did not.
Instead Clyde found himself leading the Victorian Opposition in some of Labor's darkest days.
The days following the turmoil of the split.
The days when our community confronted the issues of public morality surrounding the death penalty.
Dark days, but also purposeful days, because they were the years of soul-searching that restored Labor to relevance.
Clyde Holding paid a price for being part of that modernisation.
But the years of success under John Cain, Joan Kirner, Steve Bracks and John Brumby are unthinkable without the Holding decade.
In 1977, Clyde joined the federal Labor caucus as it began the long journey back to office.
And when Labor achieved that goal in 1983, he did a remarkable thing:
He sought the portfolio of Aboriginal Affairs  -  a true measure of his commitment.
In typically blunt and unromantic terms, Clyde likened his new job to being a tail gunner on a bomber during World War Two.
And indeed it proved to be a harrowing ride.
There were great victories along the way:
The appointment of Charlie Perkins, who was to become one of Clyde's dearest friends.
Commencing the long and difficult process of repatriating Indigenous remains from museums.
Protecting much of Kakadu for the people as a national park.
Completing the hand-over of Wave Hill station begun by Gough Whitlam and Vincent Lingiari.
And securing the agreement to hand Uluru over to its traditional owners.
But on land rights, his greatest ambitions were dashed.
And yet disappointment in 1986 led quickly to triumphant vindication with the Mabo judgement and the Native Title Act a few short years later.
Indeed, Clyde had helped fund Eddie Mabo's case at crucial points, despite the Commonwealth actually being the defendant.
It was cheeky and courageous  -  and it put Clyde Holding where he will always be remembered: on the right side of history.
Clyde said of the Mabo judgement that it provided our nation with a matchless opportunity to:
redress Australia's oldest and most continuous social wrong and to recognise the depth, nature and spiritual attachment of Aboriginal people to this land.
And nothing could have given him greater pride than to be one of those 78 Members of the House of Representatives who inscribed the Native Title Act into law.
Our nation is truly capable of great things.
Friends, after holding the Aboriginal Affairs portfolio for a record term, Clyde held other portfolios, including the Arts, where he was a staunch supporter of a robust and generous cultural policy against the cost-cutting impulses of his Cabinet colleagues.
And Territories, where he gave self-government to a somewhat reluctant Australian Capital Territory that now treasures its local democracy.
From 1990 until 1998, Clyde served proudly as a backbencher.
He saw great dignity in the role of a local MP and once told John Howard of the contentment he found in that role.
I think that speaks so eloquently of this remarkable man and his career in public life.
It was a career with more than its share of setbacks and disappointments.
He didn't get to be the father of national land rights legislation that he ought to have been.
Or the great Premier of this State he might easily have been.
And yet through it all there persisted an unwavering spirit of integrity and duty, informed by a passion for social progress that bespoke a true Labor heart.
In the end, it was enough for Clyde Holding to be a faithful servant of his party and his nation.
To have done some good.
And to always believe that Australia was at its best when we took the counsel of our own better angels.
I think it was for these reasons that Bob Hawke described Clyde Holding as pre-eminently a good, decent and remarkably brave man.
And why his successor in Melbourne Ports, Michael Danby was able to say: we have lost a true hero of equality and justice.
We have lost such a hero.
We have lost such a man.
Clyde Holding's remarkable life of 80 years is at an end.
And he leaves us honoured and remembered.
Much-loved and very greatly missed. 



Their Excellencies Ms Quentin Bryce, Governor-Generalof the Commonwealth of Australia and Mr Michael Bryce.
Former Governor-General Michael Jeffrey.
His Excellency, Major General Martyn Dunne, High Commissioner for New Zealand.
Mr Jason Hyland, Representing the Ambassador of the United States.
The Hon. Warren Snowdon, Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister for Defence Science and Personnel.
Leader of the Opposition, Chief Minister and other parliamentary colleagues.
General David Hurley, Chief of the Australian Defence Force, your distinguished predecessor Sir Phillip Bennett and fellow Service representatives
Chaplain Geoff Webb.
And above all, to every Vietnam Veteran and your representatives who have come to this sacred place; we are honoured by your presence today.
Friends, the Australian historian Paul Ham wrote a few years ago that the last act of war is to grieve.
Grief  -  and its sister emotion, remembrance  -  are what is left when the guns are put away and the gaze of history turns to other stories and other events.
It's a long time since anyone fought in Vietnam or indeed protested against its waging.
The chief actors  -  John Kennedy, Robert McNamara, Ho Chi Minh, Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Bob Menzies, William Westmoreland, General Giap  -  are all gone.
And the very Cold War which gave rise to the conflict is itself now just a page in the history books.
And yet here, on a very cold winter's morning, we gather.
In fact, we gather in growing strength and numbers.
We gather with a renewed sense of this day's value among the anniversaries our nation's calendar.
And why?
To perform that last and most noble act of war:
To grieve.
And to remember.
Repeating it often never diminishes the power of saying that in this nation, we do not glorify war.
If any nation had earned the right to do so, it would be us:
The nation of Villers-Bretonneux and Milne Bay, Kapyong and Long Tan.
The nation that brings forth men like those of D Company, 6 RAR  -  rightly honoured with a unit citation this day.
We honour  -  but we do not glorify.
We who have never served suspect it.
Those who have been there know it.
Michael Jeffrey said as much on this anniversary five years ago when he remarked that:
War is a dirty, frightening and totally unpleasant business and never to be glorified as such.
For that reason, our days of commemoration are solemn, not triumphant.
We wear rosemary, to prompt remembrance.
The Ode cautions against forgetting.
And our chief shrine is a tomb to a nameless soldier plucked from the mudof northern France.
We do not glorify war.
But we do remember.
Friends, we remember that eighteen of our personnel died at Long Tan;  521 in Vietnam as a whole.
We remember each of them, and judge that they made the supreme sacrifice'  -  because that is what it is.
Parents and siblings, girlfriends and wives, children and mates  -  grieving then and grieving still.
Long lives and brilliant careers and happy retirements cut short and never known.
And so we remember.
This was Australia's longest war yet we treated the returning veterans with shame.
And so we remember.
Three thousand of our own fellow citizens were wounded in body and spirit.
And so we remember.
Sixty thousand served, many against their will and by the casting of lots.
And so we remember.
Her Excellency's predecessor, Paul Hasluck proclaimed our nation's involvement in Vietnam at an end on the 11th of January 1973.
And yet, for many of the 60,000 Australians who went there, the Vietnam War will never end.
As another wise Governor-General once reminded us:
The past is never fully gone.It stays to shape what we are and what we do.
We are a different nation because of Vietnam.
We are a different nation than if those men had stayed at home and workedand married and built their lives.
But we don't always get to choose.
History and circumstance sometimes choose for us.
What counts is our response.
Our response as reflected in the qualities and character of those who go  - 
What Michael Jeffrey in that same 2006 speech called the courage, compassion and professional skill of the Australian personnel who served in Vietnam.
And also the qualities and character of those of us who stay behind:
Our willingness to understand what it is for men to go to war.
To accept that some will return broken or changed, and some will not come back at all.
That is Vietnam.
That is war.
And so we gather.
And so we remember. 



I acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in a spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to their elders past and present.
I also acknowledge my colleagues: Chris Bowen, Minister for Immigration &amp; Citizenship, Senator Kate Lundy, Parliamentary Secretary for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs and other parliamentary colleagues here today.
Andrew Metcalfe, Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, Judge Rauf Soulio, Chair of the new Australian Multicultural Council, the members of the Council and Dr Helen Szoke, Race Discrimination Commissioner.
I also see my dear old friend Laurie Ferguson, who began this process more than two years ago, and who should be very proud today.
But most of all, I want to acknowledge the many people here who have worked so hard for so long toward this moment.
I'm standing before you today because of the brave decision my parents made in 1966 to migrate to Australia 
I arrived here, aged four, the guest of a generous nation.
Being British, it was easier for my parents than for many others. 
But without higher education, obtaining even their moderate level of prosperity involved a lot of hard work.
I think that's why, in my first speech as Prime Minister, I said
I believe in a Government that rewards those who work the hardest, not those who complain the loudest.
I believe in a Government that rewards those who, day in and day out, work in our factories and on our farms, in our mines and in our mills, in our classrooms and in our hospitals, that rewards that hard work, decency and effort.
The people who play by the rules, set their alarms early, get their kids off to school, stand by their neighbours and love their country.
Because those are the values my migrant parents taught me.
That everyone is equal and worthy of respect. 
That it's wrong to view yourself as better than the person who waits on you in a restaurant. In fact, I used to be the person who served tables in a restaurant.
And with that value of respect, my migrant parents gave to me two unshakeable beliefs.
First, the importance of hard work; the obligation that we all owe to ourselves and others, to earn our keep and do our best.
Second, the transformative power of education.
Education is the route to opportunity and self improvement; in today's Australia more so than ever.
And while my parents didn't say it, their life stories are testament to the power of the saying fortune favours the brave'.
The future is to be seized and shaped, not something to be scared of.
Bringing these beliefs and values to the role of Prime Minister has shaped my determination to lead the work we must do together to keep our economy strong today and modernise it for tomorrow.
So that we can be a nation that truly provides opportunity for all and makes sure no one gets left behind.
Belief in equality stands proudly at the heart of this country's character.
Here, we believe that each person deserves acceptance for their contribution, not being judged for the circumstances of their past.
And in building a nation, we've developed a work ethic that's about putting in your fair share.
You have a go, you earn the fair go.
I am determined this ethos will guide us as we live in days of transition and contradiction. 
We live in an economy that is the envy of the world and in a nation perfectly placed to realise the economic prosperity that will flow from the Asia Pacific Century. 
Yet we also live in an economy that is multi-speed, a patchwork, in which some industries and areas feel the reward for their hard work, while others feel as a burden the high Australian dollar and new competitive pressures.
So as a nation we are witnessing some employers cry out that they cannot find enough workers at the same time as others lay workers off. 
As I lead our nation during these days of change I am determined that we will use growth to maximise opportunity for Australians.
And I am determined we will not leave behind those who live and work in regions and industries feeling the strain.
And as we build economic inclusion, ensuring we don't leave Australians behind as our economy changes, I am determined that we continue to build social inclusion.
Because when I think of the Aussies who play by the rules, set their alarms early, get their kids off to school, stand by their neighbours and love their country, when I think of Aussies whose lives are marked by hard work and education and respect, I inevitably think of the migrant experience.
I think of our multicultural Australia.
Because from Phillip and Bennelong, to convicts and freemen, to pastoralists and small holders, as diggers, on the goldfields, in trench or jungle.
Australians have a proud history.
A proud history of overcoming difference, of finding common ground.
Through all these long years, our people have stuck together: as friends, as neighbours, as citizens, as Australians.
It's never been perfect  -  but no people in the world have done so well.
Multiculturalism is the word that we use to capture our love of the things that bind us together and our respect for the diversity that enriches us. 
A concept caught so well by the words school children sing: We are one but we are many.
A fierce determination that we share opportunity and we don't leave any one behind.
So today, I am very proud to launch the Australian Multicultural Council.
The Council will be ably chaired, I know, by Judge Rauf Soulio.
I've greatly valued Rauf's advice and counsel in his previous roles and I look forward to a continuation of that fine community service as Council Chair.
I know Rauf will find in Gail Ker a very sound deputy.
And the other members of the Council, Ms Yassmin Abdel-Magied, Dr Tanveer Ahmed, Dr Hass Dellal, Ms Carmel Guerra, Dr Tim Soutphommasane, Mr Peter Wertheim, Prof Samina Yasmeen and Mr Talal Yassine are strong and vibrant voices all.
The council will also benefit from the advice of two ex officio members: Andrew Metcalfe, Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship, and
Dr Helen Szoke, who has recently been appointed Race Discrimination Commissioner.
The new Council will play a key role in advising me and the Government I lead.
It will not just advise the Government on multicultural affairs, though this is vital.
It will take a formal role in a strengthened access and equity strategy, play a research advisory role for public policy and lead cultural diversity celebrations and Harmony Day activities.
Our new Council will ensure multiculturalism lives in the heart of government.
And today, I'm also delighted to announce that the Council will also implement a People of Australia Ambassadors' program.
These Ambassadors will be local champions for the values we share in our multicultural Australia, and any Australian can nominate a person who they think should be an Ambassador.
This is our way of recognising that multiculturalism really lives because of the millions of Australians who every day make sure they smile to welcome the new arrived family on that first day at school.
Who take the time to understand their neighbours' culture or make a point of teaching their children that putting out a hand in friendship is always better than repeating ugly labels.
These Ambassadors and the Council act as the stewards of the values we share and make our country, our people, stronger for the future.
As Australians, we offer opportunity to all ... we ask responsibility from all.
Give a chance, take a chance.
It's the only way it can work.
It's the way it has worked.
Opportunities seized, responsibilities embraced.
The people who have come here, the people we have become, makes us who we are.
Australians, together. 



Today we gather to honour the central role of good public administration and sound public policy in shaping our nation's future.
Nobody represents those things more completely than our first great public servant, Robert Garran.
Garran was the trusted confidant and counsellor of eleven Attorneys-General and sixteen governments.
Departmental head for 31 years, a record unlikely to be broken.
So great his influence that when the Nationality and Citizenship Act was passed in 1949, Ben Chifley was the first to receive a citizenship certificate and Robert Garran the second.
The stories of Garran are the fireside tales of our public service, told and retold.
How for a brief moment he was the Commonwealth's sole public servant.
How all the documents of that early Commonwealth fitted into a single leather satchel.
Garran was not only a brilliant administrator.
He was a skilled barrister, a translator and linguist, a gifted diplomat, a patron of the arts and of higher education. 
And, of course, a founding father of our Federation.
The late Professor Robert Parker, one of the greatest scholars of public administration in Australia, said of Robert Garran:
His personality, like his prose, was devoid of pedantry and pomposity and, though dignified, was laced with a quizzical turn of humour.
He was capable of strong and decisive administrative action when required.  What people of all kinds most remembered were charity, modesty, courtesy and charm.
It is hard to imagine a more perfect description of public sector leadership as we wish it always to be.
I'm determined that our public administration will remain as strong in the future as it has been in the past.
The Blueprint for the Reform of Australian Government Administration, released this year, contains many sound modernising proposals, designed to preserve the best features of our past in the future we can see.
And I know that no one is more committed to that future than the tens of thousands of Australians who work in public service.
Their working lives are dedicated not just to good public administration and policy in the abstract, but to a living culture of careers in service to Australia.
What began in Robert Garran's satchel lives today, from the Cabinet ante-room in Canberra to the Centrelink office in Sorell.
And it's fitting I recognise everyone who works in public service in Australia today.
You have never been more important.
Because it's only through the work of great public servants, in a world class public service, with courageous political leadership, sharing a vision for Australia's future, that our country can seize the opportunities of these rich and complex, promising and challenging years.
For these are years rich in opportunity and complex in detail.
Promising for the long term and challenging in the present.
And this winter, the economic challenges of the present have been very apparent to all Australians.
The debate over European debt and the near-gridlock in the US, the wild stock market swings that followed along with the growing realisation that for good or bad a strong dollar is here to stay, set the scene through July and August.
And this week, Australians woke to the news of significant plant closures and job losses in heartland regions of working Australia.
Some look at the troubles of the global economy and see Australia as an economic sanctuary: not immune from the world, but still strong in the world.
Certainly, many investors continue to see us in this light.
But Australians know their superannuation savings have shrunk with the fluctuating stock markets.
They remember the Global Financial Crisis and how much work was required to steer Australia away from the economic abyss.
And while Australia has been growing overall, while over the last two years we have created new jobs and lifted take home pay across the board, many Australians haven't felt the benefits in their own lives.
So I understand when people worry about their livelihoods, worry that opportunities might not be there for their children, that it will become harder to make ends meet and make the family budget add up.
When they suspect they are already being left behind, that some parts of the country are getting ahead while others struggle with rising prices and a lack of opportunity.
And I respect the caution and concern Australians feel when they consider the uncertain global environment, uneven domestic economy and the pressures our strong dollar creates.
But caution and concern must be measured against and proportionate to the facts  -  and to the challenges we confront.
This is what Australians should know today: Our economy is fundamentally strong.
There are some problems in the world  -  and there are some challenges at home.
We are strong enough to resist the problems.
We are smart enough to master the challenges.
Today, I'll say more about where the challenges lie.
More about the Government's plan do master them.
And I'll also say more about what that means for all Australians.
Because if we do these things well in this period of change, I can see an evenstronger economy for us in the years ahead.
Understand, first of all: the long term story of our economy remains a story of long term strength.
We have strong fundamentals: low unemployment, low public debt, a deep, stable and liquid financial sector.
And an unprecedented investment pipeline, still building, with a staggering $430 billion planned in resource investment alone.
Projects like Gorgon, Gladstone, Queensland Curtis and Australia Pacific are happening now. 
Long-term investments, driven by decisions over time horizons well beyond the global market turbulence.
And the Australian economy has created jobs while others were losing them. 
Around 750 000 since Labor came to office.
In a period where US unemployment almost doubled, we have more people in work than before the global financial crisis.
This is the most important thing we have done together.
Creating jobs is not just a sign of a good economy, creating jobs is the whole point of a good economy.
Life is given direction and purpose by work. 
Without work there is corrosive aimlessness. 
With the loss of work comes a loss of dignity.
Believing in the importance of jobs for all who seek them  -  of work in every household  -  is deep in our own national culture and deep in my Government's beliefs.
Only Labor Governments will always put jobs first.
Sixty years ago, Chifley's Light on the Hill took a straightforward view of Labor's task.
Not as
... putting an extra sixpence into somebody's pocket ...
But to
... give to some father or mother a greater feeling of security for their children ... a feeling that if a depression comes there will be work.
Two years ago, the global financial crisis came  -  and with it came bad news for jobs.
And Labor in office had one priority: we put the jobs of Australian families first.
We restored confidence in our banks, we provided stimulus payments to families, tax breaks for small business, and delivered investment that ensured jobs for tradespeople and built new road, rail and port infrastructure across the nation.
It wasn't what everyone wanted to hear. But it was what we knew was right to preserve jobs.
And it did the job. We saved two hundred thousand jobs.
Now, in the last two weeks we've seen some bad news for jobs again.
Nothing can diminish the bad news for families in Wollongong and Western Port.
To those workers and families the Government hasn't just extended sympathy. 
We've extended a helping hand  -  providing immediate and practical support.
But I also know the news in the Illawarra and on the Mornington Peninsula was not just heard by those directly affected.
Many people saw the fear of these Australians and thought  -  that could be me.
Now, we do have a dynamic economy.
Around 300,000 businesses start up and close down in a typical year.
Half a million workers change industries.
And every day, Australians navigate economic change in their own lives. How?
They get a full understanding of their own situation, they think through their goals, and they do what's required to make it so
Changing job, retraining, moving industry, sometimes even city, all to build a better future for themselves and their families.
The task for the nation is the same: understand the whole economy's story.
Understand the whole nation's goals.
Make the decisions  -  deliver the policies  -  which will get us there together.
So first, we must understand that what we've seen this week at BlueScope Steel is only part of the story of the future of the economy.
The global demand for our resources is changing the structure of our economy.
That does mean some jobs are no longer there  -  but at the same time it lifts our national income and creates many new jobs as well.
What is happening in the Australian economy right now reflects long-term global forces which have powerful effects at home.
Big changes in global growth patterns are simultaneously creating new wealth and new opportunities while putting added pressure on some industries and parts of the country.
Global growth has long been shifting from West to East  -  and this is accelerating again.
A decade ago, Australia's national income surged off the back of increasing demand for Australian commodities  -  especially coal and iron ore  -  as the Chinese and Indian economies awakened from a generational slumber. 
While the global financial crisis punctuated this boom, it did not end it. 
Indeed the changes which fuelled the boom of the 2000s have continued and in this second mining investment boom have proven even more resilient.
And in the post GFC world, the North Asian giants' appetite for our resources is stronger and more assured than ever before.
Developing countries in our region like China and India emerged from the crisis strong. 
They are generating growth still at historic highs  -  and that growth is not just driven by their own manufacturing exports, but it is increasingly driven by their own internal demand.
Demand emerging from a rapid urbanisation and growing domestic middle class, hungry for the goods and services that mark a better quality of life.
So growth in our Asian export markets keeps parts of our economy surging. 
On top of this, current weakness in Europe and the US makes us more attractive for investment.
And both these changes drive our dollar to its greatest strengths: a climb of unprecedented duration and speed.
Driven by the resources boom, the exchange rate has moved some 45% in the space of two years. 
This has been good for businesses which rely on imports. 
And good for many Australians: it's not just cutting the price of overseas travel or luxury imports; it helps with household necessities like washing machines and clothes dryers.
However, many businesses are finding the higher exchange rate extremely difficult to handle. 
In effect, many exporters have had to put up their prices by nearly half in just two years.
Amplifying pressures that already existed, where long-established business models were feeling the pressure of innovation and competition.
Asian growth, European and US weakness, a boom in mining investment, are all driving our dollar higher.
That puts many sectors of our economy, like education, tourism, some parts of retail, and especially manufacturing, under pressure.
The changes that can release that pressure are driven by decisions we can make.
We have long known that Australian prosperity depends not just on raw materials but on our ability to improve productivity through knowledge, skills, competition and innovation.
So at the heart of my approach to economic management is a long term approach to creating, and sustaining balanced growth for the whole of our nation.
A long term plan to keep the whole economy strong.
As Deputy Prime Minister, two great projects drove me that form part of this long term plan.
The first: to lift the nation's human capital.
To give our people more knowledge and skills and get more out of that knowledge and skills as well.
Universities. Fundamental reform with demand-driven funding, investment in much-needed capital  -  and new support for research.
Schools. Investing in teacher quality, developing a national curriculum  -  and new transparency through the MySchool website.
Early years education. Improving the quality of childcare, making it more affordable  -  and expanding access to preschool education.
The second: to reform the nation's workplaces.
To use flexible enterprise bargaining to lift productivity across our national economy.
Setting up Fair Work Australia  -  creating National Employment Standards  -  harmonising occupational health and safety.
So I got rid of WorkChoices and its plan to compete with the world on wages and conditions.
I got rid of WorkChoices and its plan to end job security.
And I put in place a plan to compete with the world on knowledge and skills.
I put in place reforms to unlock the real drivers of future productivity.
And as Prime Minister, I am still pursuing reforms to unlock productivity and to drive balanced growth across the whole of our economy.
Clean energy. New jobs in new industries  -  a price signal leveraging billions of dollars in new investment.
High speed broadband. Linking every part of Australia to every part of the world.
A tax on mineral resource rents. Taking the value we all own in the strongest sector in our economy  -  to cut company tax for every Australian firm  -  to add to the national pool of savings through higher superannuation  -  and to build regional infrastructure.
Skills and participation. Lifting the capacity of all Australians to get good work and support a growing economy.
Personal tax reform. To reward participation in work.
Supporting every Australian region. With new infrastructure, investment and partnerships  -  indeed we are making new announcements in Tasmania today.
And this is a long term plan for balanced growth which did not begin this week.
This Government has long been on the reform road, has worked methodically over our term in office to keep the whole economy strong.
When we came to office, investing in human capital and reforming workplace relations.
During the GFC, saving 200 000 jobs and steering us away from recession.
Today, meeting the problems in the world  -  the challenges at home  -  making the decisions and delivering the policies which will grow Australian jobs.
Today, building a clean energy future, a high technology future.
The clean energy revolution is poised in the way the information technology revolution was poised a few decades ago. 
And the brutal truth is if you didn't get in on the ground floor then you got left behind.
I won't allow us to get left behind and lose the jobs and prosperity a clean energy future will bring.
Managing our economy today and building for our future cannot be done if we try to live in the past.
While the pressures faced by some of sectors of the economy are real, and painful, we must stand firm against calls for protectionism. 
We know they do not work.
There can be no return to protectionist policies of the past.
The Australian economy has been the great beneficiary of open trade in the world  -  our economy has changed, our firms have adapted, our people have prospered.
Instead we will use our effort, our influence, our reputation, to advocate international action for global stability and balanced growth.
And our challenge, as exposure to the global market grows, is to build new capability which allows us to prosper.
None of that means leaving manufacturing behind.
The investments and reforms we are making create great new opportunities for manufacturing.
More productive enterprises and more skilled workers will make manufacturing stronger than almost anything we can do.
A clean energy economy with economic incentives for new clean jobs will see new goods manufactured for new markets.
And a high technology economy with high speed broadband around the country see manufacturing performed in much more sophisticated ways.
And these benefits hold true -  not only for manufacturing but for retail and tourism and education  -  for every part of our broad and diverse economy
Not hiding away from the world  -  but becoming ever stronger in the world.
We know doing the right thing for the long term isn't easy  -  and it isn't automatic.
I'm proud to live in a nation with a vibrant political culture that enables us to let off steam and express our egalitarian spirit.
Governments should listen  -  but in the end, they need to lead.
Australians don't respect governments that tell them only what they want to hear.
And governments that tell people only what they want to hear can't build the future that people want to live in.
So, we'll stay on the reform road.
If Robert Garran could build a nation's institutions from a satchel, we can find a way to be a strong economy with a strong dollar.
And we can do the right things together for the country we share as well.
We must chart a course which does not rely on wistful reflections of the past but does not abandon or forget the achievements of our economic history.
Our agenda is modernising reform to strengthen our economy and create jobs.
We have a proud Labor tradition: to take on the hard economic decisions, and take them on in ways which mean that all of Australia benefits and no one gets left behind.
We will continue that commitment as we work towards strong, balanced economic growth and jobs for our great country.
We can be a strong economy, modernised for the future.
With a balanced budget, high speed broadband, clean energy.
Skilled workers, productive workplaces, competitive firms.
Always directed toward the great purpose of a great nation's economy: jobs for all who seek them. 



Peter Maher, Chairman of the Financial Services Council.
John Brogden, Chief Executive Officer of the Financial Services Council
I thank Craig for that warm welcome.
It's great to be here to speak with an industry that is so fundamental to the security and prosperity of our nation.
I want to acknowledge from the start of my address that my Government appreciates the contribution that the Financial Services Council and all of your members make to the reform agenda in superannuation, financial services and financial advice.
This month we celebrate 20 years since the introduction of the Superannuation Guarantee, the birth of modern superannuation.
Universal superannuation is one of the greatest social and economic reforms in Australia's history.
And one of the major reasons we can stare global economic uncertainty in the face with confidence.
Behind it all were two remarkable Australians, described by David Love as the Rudolph Valentino and Mickey Rooney' of Australian politics  -  Paul Keating and Bill Kelty.
This remarkable pair charted a path of productivity and reform that helped set up the strong, open economy that today is the envy of the world. 
Friends, because of those reforms and their continuation under successive governments, Australia's economic outlook is strong.
Strong fundamentals based on sustainable growth, and low public debt.
A deep, stable and liquid financial sector.
Rapidly rising levels of education and skills.
An unprecedented investment pipeline, still building, with a staggering $430 billion planned in resource investment alone.
An economy that has created jobs while other nations were losing them - around 750,000 since Labor came to office.
All underpinned by our location in the right part of the world at the right time.
While fundamentally strong, the Australian economy is not immune to developments on international markets.
But it is essential to recognise that the real change underway in the Australian economy is that being driven by a sustained, unprecedented increase in Australia's terms of trade.
A change which is reshaping the structure of our economy.
Global growth has long been shifting from West to East  -  and this is accelerating again.
Developing countries like China and India emerged from the GFC strong.
They are generating growth still at historic highs  -  and that growth is increasingly driven by their own internal demand.
This is driving our dollar to a new high - a push which is currently being exacerbated by the relative strength of the Australian economy, compared to the rest of the developed world.
The appreciation of the dollar has been good for some businesses which rely on imports, and good for many Australians purchasing cheaper overseas travel or imports.
But it is also putting many sectors of the economy, like education, tourism, some parts of retail and especially manufacturing, under pressure.
A reason that while much of our economy is booming, many Australians feel as though they have been left behind.
Doing what we can to relieve that pressure is essential.
Those decisions are in our hands.
Economic management must focus on unlocking productivity and enhancing Australia's competitive position in the world  -  so that enough Australians have what we prize most  -  jobs and opportunity.
I am determined to make sure we not only put in place policies which drive us to do the things we do now more effectively; but also that we gear our economy to compete on the basis of its superior capacity to innovate, and seize new markets.
To help Australians to get ahead, by making sure that Australia gets ahead.
With this approach, we are building a dynamic, high-income modern economy.
An economy driven by:
 * 	Investments in skills - to make sure we have the smartest workforce, providing the services most in demand in the world.
 * 	Clean energy - to attract international capital, and lure direct investment from businesses which want to set up long lived assets in economies like ours which will be managing the carbon challenge in the cheapest way possible.
 * 	Technology, especially high speed broadband - to support advanced manufacturing, and allow our services industry to access clients anywhere, anytime.
 * 	Tax reform  -  to drive growth in the non-resource sectors of the economy by using our resource wealth to fund company tax cuts across the board; and lifting workforce participation by tripling the tax free threshold.
And of course super reform.
Friends, superannuation used to be the preserve of the wealthy or of tenured public servants and academics.
Universal super changed all that.
Jeremy Cooper called it part of the democratisation of finance.
In fact, it is the democratisation of wealth.
Until universal superannuation came along, most Australians had one source of wealth  -  their home.
With super, they can have two.
But perhaps even more amazing is the role super plays in the wider economy.
Today superannuation provides a nest egg bigger than the size of our annual GDP or the entire market capitalisation of the ASX - $1.4 trillion.
As a result, Australia has the fourth-biggest pool of pension assets in the world.
About 40% of superannuation investments are in Australian shares or Australian fixed interest securities.
Our wealth management industry employs 60,000 people.
All of you are part of that achievement and should take immense pride in being part of Australia's success as a modern, confident nation with an incredible story of reform to tell the world.
In the midst of global economic challenges, I want to focus for a minute on the crucial role that superannuation savings have come to play in Australia's economic stability.
Superannuation savings have come to play a key macro-economic role alongside fiscal and monetary policy.
Our pool of superannuation savings has real consequences for economic management.
For a nation with a long-standing propensity to spend more than we earn, a super pool bigger than our GDP helps offset our current account imbalance, and fosters liquidity and stability.
For example, when the global financial crisis hit in 2008, our national savings were sandbags against the leakage of capital we saw elsewhere in the world.
At a time of desperation for many companies, super savings helped our listed companies overcome capital scarcity and recapitalise.
Almost $40 billion was raised in institutional share placements in 2008-09 alone, helping to keep Australia in business, our banks strong and our people in jobs.
15% of capital raisings in 2008/09 globally were here in Australia.
And the companies that recapitalised employed 1.6m Australians.
Since then:
 * 	Super fund investments accounted for nearly 30 per cent of total market capitalisation of the ASX in the 2009-10 financial year.
 * 	Super funds are the largest contributor to managed funds. As at the June quarter 2011, super funds accounted for around 70 per cent of all consolidated assets in managed funds.
The global economic uncertainty we face now should be a reminder to us of the importance of super.
In rocky international seas, super is an anchor.
And it should be a reminder to us that increasing super  -  increasing the weight and heft of that anchor  -  is the right goal.
Some say that in the current economic environment we should be considering establishing a sovereign wealth fund.
I take a different approach.
I believe that superannuation is already our trillion dollar sovereign wealth fund  -  but with market benefits.
That's because it's privately managed by thousands of trustees instead of a sovereign wealth fund managed centrally by a Canberra-appointed manager.
Or alternatively, you could say that Australia has 8 million sovereign wealth funds  -  the superannuation accounts of Australians across the country.
These are the very same superannuation accounts we want to make massive injections into.
But we can't do it without an important piece of policy architecture, and that is the Minerals Resource Rent Tax.
We can only get to 12 per cent by 2020 if we use part of the proceeds of the Minerals Resource Rent Tax to mitigate the lost revenue incurred by taxing super at concessional rates.
Neither the goal of increasing universal super contributions from 9 to 12 percent, nor the MRRT itself, are supported by our opponents.
A risk for every Australian heading towards retirement  -  for every Australian under 65.
And a risk for our future economic stability  -  not now, but in decades to come.
And a risk to jobs.
Our opponents, as usual, are willing to squander long-term economic stability and jobs for Australians for the sake of short-term political gain.
Hacking into the retirement savings of generations to come would be an act of social and economic vandalism that we cannot allow.
Superannuation is also starting to have the fiscal benefits envisaged by Keating and Kelty.
Superannuation has helped ensure Australia spends one of the lowest amounts on age pensions as a percentage of GDP of any advanced economy.
Latest Treasury estimates are that 12% super will mean $10bn saved each year on pension outlays in 2030. 
Our superannuation savings pool, standing at an incredible $1.4 trillion, has doubled in just seven years.
That wealth is held in retail and corporate funds, industry and government funds and self-managed funds.
No model has a majority.
Each model has its benefits.
What unites us all is the understanding that universal superannuation is here to stay.
Like Medicare, it is now a fundamental part of Australia's social compact.
A glittering economic achievement which has created jobs and opportunity for millions of Australians.
And more proof, if anyone needed it, that strong economic management is not an end in itself  -  but a means to build a better nation, to provide work and the dignity that comes with it.
Our task is to build on that legacy.
To borrow a Keatingesque sentiment, superannuation policy is an unfinished symphony.
The Keating generation created the fundamentals of a system that will endure for decades.
It is up to us to take the next steps.
As our population ages, our expectations of quality of life in retirement will rise.
More than half of Australians now working would prefer to retire on an income of at least $40,000 a year, compared to the single age pension of just $17,000 a year.
Yet currently less than 10 per cent of Australians aged over 65 have incomes over $40,000 a year.
It must be the goal of government to do better.
And the fact is we can't address that gap without increasing super contributions.
That is another reason we will increase superannuation contributions from 9 to 12 per cent over the next decade, adding half a trillion dollars to national savings by 2035.
This increase is affordable and sustainable for businesses if introduced in the right way.
That is why we have staged the increases with a gradual ramp up so they start from next year and reach 12 per cent by the middle of 2019.
I am thankful for your support in achieving our national goal of lifting superannuation.
Friends, our other key task is to make the system more transparent and efficient, so that fund members obtain the best possible service and value  -  and importantly have trust and confidence in the system
It doesn't matter whether an employee is a member of an industry fund or a retail fund, they deserve good service and real value for money. They also deserve to be placed in a super fund because it is in their best interests, not because of sales commissions being paid to advisers.
We need to strip away inefficiencies to ensure that as much money as possible flows into the hands of retirees.
Our SuperStream reforms address some of the most basic issues of improving the creaking back-office of the super industry.
On my advice SuperStream could deliver $1 billion worth of efficiencies, as well as giving employees greater peace of mind that their contributions have been paid securely and on-time.
Let's get moving on SuperStream  -  an important part of the productivity agenda for the wealth management industry.
The other big reform, of course, is MySuper.
The reality is that most Australians are not active managers of their superannuation.
They should not have to pay for advice or products they simply don't require.
For most employees, simple and reliable no-frills, low-cost super funds will be all they need.
And all parts of the superannuation industry have a role to play in providing them.
I know that many in this industry have already responded to this challenge by launching simple, commission-free super products.
And we as the Government have a role to play as well. To listen to your concerns and explain our policies.  Our efforts in this respect have been spearheaded by the Minister, Bill Shorten, but I want you to know that my entire Government is committed to working with you to deliver a competitive superannuation industry.
I understand that the issue of how administration fees will be calculated in relation to MySuper products as well as the manner in which existing superannuation accounts will be treated following the introduction of MySuper, is a significant matter for the FSC and your members.
I know the Minister is consulting with you and the Government looks forward to continuing our engagement with each of you on these important issues.
It is in this spirit that we also recently released the first tranche of legislation for our Future of Financial Advice reforms on Monday. We will be releasing further details in coming months and are on track to introducing the legislation into Parliament later this Spring.
A competitive superannuation industry benefits all Australians.
It is the right policy at the right time in our history.
Friends, private savings through super, backed by public saving through tough budget rules.
It's all part of a whole.
A plan to modernise our economy for the future so Australians have jobs.
A plan to create opportunity for every Australian - the opportunity that comes through having a job.
A plan to transform innovation, skills and training  -  so Australians can get a better job.
A plan to build the infrastructure of the future, the NBN, to unlock the opportunities of the digital economy so we don't export jobs to countries with better technology.
A plan for a clean energy future in which economic growth is decoupled from carbon growth, and Australians have clean energy jobs.
Tax reform, to better reward Australians who get a job and to help non-mining companies create jobs
Building the road and rail infrastructure that will reconnect and re-energise our cities, and create jobs.
And, of course, reforms in health, ageing and disability to meet the demographic demands of tomorrow and make sure we don't leave Australians behind.
In uncertain times, it is these things that will decide the outcome.
These are the things that will secure our future as a nation.
A nation confident in the world  -  and confident in itself.
If, on the other hand, political short-sightedness wins the day, then Australia will lose the future
If we allow the insidious belief to creep in that Australia is not up to reform  -  that we should punch below our weight, rather than above - that we should always put off to tomorrow what we'd prefer not to think about today  -  then it is ordinary Australians who will feel the pain of that failure of confidence.
Just as it is those ordinary Australians who are benefiting today from the reforms in superannuation undertaken twenty years ago.
I am optimistic about Australia and Australians. I believe that our best days are ahead of us, and that the choices we make today will make that true.
Australians are rightly proud of our economic achievements.
We did big things before in tougher times than this.
Achievements like Medicare, tariff reform and universal super.
Walking the reform road together, there is nothing but fear preventing us from doing great things once again. 



Thank you very much to my parliamentary colleague Joel Fitzgibbon for that welcome. Can I also acknowledge my Federal parliamentary colleague Sharon Grierson and Jill Hall who are here, as well as state and local members.
I specifically want to acknowledge our colleagues and friends from the CFMEU, Tony Maher the National President, Grahame Kelly the District Secretary and Peter Jordan the District President of the United Mineworkers' Federation.
And I want to acknowledge every unionist here today, their family members and friends and those who have come to mourn and reflect .
This is a sacred day for this place, a day that you gather to mourn and reflect and you've chosen to do it today, a day when the world is gathering to mourn and reflect on events which changed our world ten years ago.
I'm sure all of us here will always remember where we were when we first heard news of the terrorist attacks in the United States.
We felt the shock, we felt the sadness , we felt the grief, and then we felt the sense of resolve that we never again wanted to see lives lost, including Australian lives lost through acts of terror.
Unfortunately, tragically, in the decade in between we have seen lives lost, including Australian lives lost, through acts of terrorism.
So on this day, on this day that marks an event that changed our world, I know that we gather here thinking of the people in the coal mining industry , but also thinking of those Australians who mourn lost loved ones in terrorist attacks ten years ago and on tragic days since.
This is a fitting place for us to gather and to reflect. 
We are here to gather and reflect on those lost directly to you through mining.
Paul Keating first led the first service here in 1996.
I feel deeply privileged to follow in his footsteps today.
On that day, Paul Keating stood alongside the greatest son of these coalfields, Jim Comerford, who is sadly no longer with us.
I honour Jim's memory and I pay my respects to his widow Mabel, who is with us today.
Remember Before God the Men and Boys Who Gave Their Lives in Northern District Mines
These are the words inscribed upon this wall.
Solemn words.
Words that even in this desensitised age are still able to move us and to disturb us.
Because the men and boys killed here in these coalfields number more than 1800.
More than all the soldiers killed in Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan combined.
The youngest of them was just 11. The oldest 73.
And reflect on this fact:
Coal mining began in the Hunter in 1801.
Yet according to the former State Member John Mills, there was no year before 2001 where a miner was not killed in NSW.
Two centuries.
Two centuries of relentless loss and death.
Deaths that have left fatherless children and grieving partners and shattered mates.
Deaths that have diminished us as a nation and as a people.
But friends, those 1800 deaths are not just historic events lodged in a more primitive and distant past.
They are, to our shame, a contemporary reality in this Valley and in this industry.
Four men were killed in the Gretley disaster in 1996.
And three since 2009, including one man  -  Peter Jones  -  killed at Lake Macquarie just 13 weeks ago.
It is well that we mourn them.
We must always do that.
But for a Labor Government and the Labor Movement, it is not enough to be sorry after the fact.
Every employee has the right to leave for their job in the expectation they will return safe home, they will be there for their family and friends when the working day is done.
It is as fundamental a right as there can be in our workplaces and in our laws.
For over 100 years, the union has preached the message of safety at every turn.
Thankfully we now have some of the best mine safety laws in the world.
But in the Labor Movement we know that our duty of solidarity does not stop at Australia's shores.
Workers everywhere deserve the same high protections that the nation now enjoys.
We know from the recent mining accidents overseas how far some countries are yet to come.
And we know that journey will be accomplished faster if the global community speaks with a united voice.
The International Labour Organisation has proposed a Convention Concerning Safety and Health in Mines, known as Convention 176.
While Australian laws exceed this standard, we must play our part in lifting standards in other mining nations.
I can therefore confirm today that Australia will ratify Convention 176.
And having ratified it we will work with other mining nations around the world to ratify it as well.
Friends, consistent with long-standing practice on ratification, we will of course consult State and Territory governments and your union, but we will get this done.
Friends, we should lead.
This wall shows us why we must.
Too many lives lost.
Too many futures stolen.
Too many homes that received a knock at the door or a phone call and the realisation that a morning's hurried kiss goodbye was an unintended last farewell.
Such irreplaceable, wasteful, needless loss.
A tragedy. A reproach.
And a call to do better.
Because there must come a day when no more names are added to this wall.
May that day be soon.
There has been enough pain and enough loss. 



Distinguished guests.
Friends of Australia, from many countries.
Ladies and Gentlemen.
This weekend many Australians read the story of a young New York firefighter  -  James Dowdell.
He wears his father's uniform.
Ten years ago today, Kevin Dowdell was one of the hundreds of firefighters  -  New York's bravest  -  who were killed when the towers came down. 
Kevin led his men in there. 
And his life of service lives on in his sons.
Today James Dowdell is a firefighter like his father before him. 
Patrick Dowdell has worn his country's uniform in Afghanistan.
The Dowdells' story is one among hundreds, among thousands, which we remember today.
Lives lived out in years of service and of peace, lives lost on days of terror and of courage.
Not only on that dreadful day in New York and Washington and Pennsylvania  -  but in the long decade since, from Bali and Jakarta to London and Mumbai and beyond.
But Australia has a special link to the Dowdells' story  -  and it holds special meaning for our American friends as well.
So I am glad Rob Frey is among us today.
Rob, your part in this story is important.
Everyone should know it  -  so I want to share it again.
Many Australians and Americans worked together in the late 1990s to be ready to protect the 2000 Sydney Olympics from possible terrorist attack.
One group of Australians spent two months in New York training and working, including a long time with New York's Fire Department Rescue 1.
They worked hard together and became more than colleagues ... they became mates.
So when it was time to go home the Australian commander gave Rescue 1's chief his Australian Army slouch hat  and the chief presented the Australians with a battle scarred fire helmet.
Dated December 1998 and signed by members of the Rescue 1 crew, including Kevin Dowdell.
After September 11, Kevin Dowdell's remains could not be found.
But that helmet was found in Australia.
And Rob Frey found Kevin's sons.
Rob went to America to return the helmet their father signed. 
Rob and James stood proudly together in the Congress of the United States as a symbol of the friendship between our countries.
And so today, I think of two good men.
Rob and James.
Far apart for now, friends forever.
Just as we think of two great nations.
Australia and the United States.
Whose people believe that all men are created equal, that Jack's as good as his master.
And as we mark two anniversaries.
The 60th anniversary of the Alliance between Australia and the United States.
When the ANZUS treaty was signed in San Francisco.
And the 10th anniversary of the attacks on America.
When the ANZUS treaty was invoked for the first time.
September 11 was truly a dreadful day, a day which saddened and changed our world.
None of us who lived through it will ever forget.
And our peoples mark it today in many ways.
From here, in Reconciliation Place, where we light a candle.
To Sydney's Botanical Gardens, where a tree is dedicated.
To many Australian cities where interfaith services take place.
To New York, where many bereaved families gather.
We remember all the victims. 
Thousands of Americans  -  ten Australians  -  so many other innocent people  -  from so many peaceful nations.
In all these places, meeting in a mood of reflection  -  marking as we do shared sacrifice and loss.
But in all that reflection, finding resolution as well.
Australia and the United States have worked together for peace in the world for many years.
September 11 changed many things but it could not change that.
We will make decisions in coming years to ensure our work in the world  -  and the co-operation between our forces  -  only grows in the future.
And while our fight against terrorism did not end in May, a great blow was struck against terrorism when Osama bin Laden was killed.
Our work together around the world goes on.
But today, around the world, we pause from that work, to remember.
To remember the courage and the suffering our two countries have shared.
To remember that in our darkest days we have been glad to see each other's face and hear each other's voice.
In our days together under attack in the Pacific.
In our decades together from Korea to the Gulf.
On September 11. in Washington and Pennsylvania and New York. 
And so on this day, on behalf of millions of Australians, I say this:
We do not forget. We never forget. 
United always in remembrance.
United always in our resolve. 



I thank you for your welcome today and for the opportunity to speak with you at a time when the Australian steel industry is thinking deeply about what the future holds.
Steel, of course, is a major player in the national economy.
In 2006-07 all major Australian steel manufacturing activities employed a total of over 91,000 people and generated revenues of $29 billion.
As a government, we are determined to keep the whole economy strong.
Every region.
Every sector.
Including manufacturing and including steel.
The health of the Australian steel industry is critical to our infrastructure, energy, defence, transport, automotive, communications, construction and consumer goods industries. 
In the new high-tech, low-carbon economy we're creating, Australian steel has a strong and sustainable future.
It will continue to be a source of well paid, high skill jobs for Australian workers.
Because nothing matters more than bringing the dignity and benefits of employment to all who want to work.
Friends, with the high dollar and lingering global instability, creating a new economic future won't always be easy.
But it is also a time of incredible opportunity as the rise of Asia brings the weight of global economic growth right to our doorstep.
As we prepare to meet the future, our economic picture is one of fundamental strength and resilience.
Last week's National Accounts show our economy grew by a robust 1.2 per cent in the June quarter, the strongest quarterly growth in four years.
Manufacturing was up 2.8 per cent and Transport, Postal and Warehousing rose by 4.4 per cent.
Importantly for this gathering, metal products rose 14 percent for the quarter and 16 percent in the year to June.
These quarterly results reinforce the broader signs of underlying economic strength we have seen since the GFC.
Strong growth in corporate profits, rising incomes, strong savings, solid consumption growth, unemployment levels that remain low by world standards.
And interest rates lower than when we came to office in 2007.
Above all, business is investing with confidence.
A record $120 billion in 2010-11, with a record $150 billion to follow in this financial year already underway.
Now despite the strong growth figures released last week, it is true that not all sectors of our economy are growing as much as we would like.
Many industries are doing it tough due to consumer caution and the higher dollar, and it is no secret that steel is one of those industries.
That patchwork pattern is a reflection of a global economic transformation taking place all around us.
Friends, for the first time in our history, Australia is not prisoner to the tyranny of distance.
Over the last two centuries, Australia was stranded far from the centres of growth in Europe and North America.
In this century we are in the right place at the right time.
The shift of global growth from West to East is perhaps the biggest economic realignment since the Industrial Revolution.
China is now the second largest economy in the world, and is expected to surpass the US in size by 2020 while India is on track to surpass the US by mid century.
The transformation of the Asian economies from developing to developed economy status represents a massive and lasting shift in the global economic order.
Asia's growth will continue for decades as the nations of the region build homes, factories, roads, railways and power supplies to service billions of people.
That growth means rising demand for Australia's natural resources, lifting our terms of trade to unprecedented levels.
In the longer term, those billions of people will also demand the goods and services that come with life in a more advanced society.
Goods and services like high-end manufactures, pharmaceuticals, legal and financial services, education, health care, fine food and wine.
It is mixture of opportunities and challenges.
The challenges are real and they are painful.
We can face them with courage and determination, shaping events to meet our own ends.
Modernising our economy to meet the demands of the future.
An economy creating new jobs, new opportunity.
With no person, no place, left behind.
Friends, there's been much talk about inquiries and reviews.
Certainly the Coalition's policy review is no answer to the hundreds of millions they pledge to cut from industry assistance.
I believe that manufacturing industry in Australia deserves action now.
That is why this Government has a set of policies to lift productivity and to drive balanced growth across the whole of our economy.
High speed broadband  -  linking every part of Australia to every part of the world.
A tax on the minerals we all own to cut company tax, boost national savings and build regional infrastructure.
Skills and participation, to lift the capacity of all Australians to find work and support a growing economy.
Personal tax reform to reward participation and lift people out of welfare.
Supporting regions like Tasmania and the Illawarra with new infrastructure, investment and partnerships.
And direct support to help industry face the world and achieve its best.
Friends, with world-class research, innovation and infrastructure, we can build a vibrant manufacturing sector as an integral part of the new economy.
We want to see Australia manufacturing investing in new technologies, new business processes and new skills.
Moving up the value chain, and accessing global supply and design networks.
Manufacturing based on comparative advantage and value-adding.
Building on our record of creating value-added products like Colorbond that meet a real market need.
We know that you shouldn't be left do all those things alone.
Targeted, practical, effective assistance will help you get there.
Targeted, practical, effective assistance that's on the table right now.
I am proud that the Australian Government is now spending $9.4 billion on R&amp;D and innovation, 43 per cent higher than the level of spending when we came to office.
Proud that we have redesigned the R&amp;D Tax Incentive to make it a tax credit which will provide assistance to innovating companies when they need it most.
And proud that we are making record investments in the CSIRO and continuing the Cooperative Research Centre program as engine-rooms of innovation in this nation.
Indeed, there are six CRCs working in steel and steel related areas. 
But by far the biggest impact will come from our bold decision to set Australia on the path to a clean energy future.
Friends, in a few hours time I will be introducing historic legislation to put a price on carbon and accelerate our transition to a low carbon economy.
For the first time since the Industrial Revolution, we will start decoupling emissions growth from economic growth.
It's an historic opportunity to propel our manufacturing sector to the forefront of smart, low emissions technology.
Those who stand against the clean technologies that come with a price on carbon are no friends of Australia's manufacturing sector.
The Government understandsthat there is nothing more important to our economy than building strong industries that provide jobs and opportunity for all.
So our carbon package contains special measures to support employment and keep our nation competitive internationally.
Targeted assistance measures to ensure that our industries are in the best position possible to manage the journey.
Forty per cent of the revenue raised from pricing carbon will go towards this purpose.
Our $1.2 billion Clean Technology Investment Programs and the $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation will also provide a major stimulus to a whole new range of manufacturing businesses.
As a result, Australia will be able to seize a competitive advantage in developing and applying the cutting edge technologies of the clean energy future.
Make no mistake, future prosperity lies with those countries that grasp the new frontier of clean energy technologies.
Australian manufacturing is well placed to gain its share of those opportunities.
We saw last month at the Clean Tech Showcase 15 Australian firms telling the world what they can do.
Each producing high-tech, clean energy products such as new lightweight materials that cut energy use.
Exporting to the world. 
Employing high-skill staff  -  in high wage jobs.
And giving a glimpse of what a clean energy future can look like.
But for manufacturing and steel in particular, the challenges of transition demand a more targeted and immediate response.
Friends, I know today there are hundreds of steel workers facing a different future as they leave the industry.
There are more remaining in the industry who wonder what will happen to them as well.
That's why as soon as Blue Scope announced its plans, we were immediately on the ground with $130 million in assistance including $100 million as an advance facility of our $300 million Steel Transformation Plan: the first steel plan for Australia in almost 30 years.
Friends, innovative and efficient manufacturing has great prospects in Australia's economic future.
That's why we've made our Jobs and Competitiveness Program a centrepiece of the Government's carbon pricing scheme.
The Jobs and Competitiveness Program will provide assistance of $9.2 billion over the first three years.
In addition, we will provide free permits to the steel industry covering 94.5 per cent of the impact of the carbon price.
The Government will kickstart investments in energy efficient capital equipment and low-pollution technologies, processes and products through the $1.2 billion Clean Technology Investment and Innovation Programs.
This will assist the sector to transform into an increasingly efficient and sustainable industry in a low-carbon economy.
That is what the Government's Steel Transformation Plan is all about: transformation.
Like the Button plans, it is a bridge to build industry resilience and competitiveness.
It is not a handout.
It is a way of helping your industry muscle-up and face the world with confidence.
For Australian industry to compete in a global market, it must have access to opportunities and be internationally competitive.
The Government has been assisting the sector to access these opportunities and we recognise that more can be done.
We have already worked with almost 500 steel and metal fabricator businesses through Enterprise Connect in business development and technology access.
We have provided $34 million for the Buy Australian at Home and Abroad initiative to ensure that local suppliers directly benefit from strong growth in the resources sector.
And $19.1 million of investment through the 2009 Australian Government Procurement Statement.
In support of those measures, we've appointed the Honourable
Peter Beattie as Australia's first Resources Sector Supplier Envoy to champion Australian industry participation in the resources sector.
We're also appointing respected industry leaders as Supplier Advocates, to champion suppliers in the government marketplace and help industry raise the competitiveness of firms and supply chains.
Supplier Advocates have been appointed for the rail, IT, water and the built environment sectors, while Mr Dennis O'Neill was recently appointed as the Steel Supplier Advocate.
We hope to appoint additional advocates in the coming year, including in the clean technologies and in the resources sector. 
Friends, we are serious about Australian industry being able to compete for work.
From 1 January 2010, an approved Australian Industry Participation Plan has been required for all new Australian Government contracts worth more than $20 million.
We are already working with the Western Australian Government on monitoring the implementation of AIP plans for Chevron's Gorgon and Wheatstone projects and now it's time to look at the next steps.
Firstly, we are considering publishing of AIP plans and outcomes.
This would give industry more confidence about the effectiveness of the AIP approach.
Secondly, we introduced AIP frameworks for Commonwealth procurement items with a value of over $20 million.
We are now considering how to extend the AIP to other Commonwealth- funded projects and programs.
These steps would create more opportunities for Australian industry to compete for the lucrative contracts being let in the resources sector and across the economy more generally.
We also want to ensure that Australian manufacturers aren't forced to unfairly compete against product which has been dumped on our shores.
In June we announced a balanced reform package that will better protect our industries and workforce from unfair trade practices.
The reforms will improve the way we administer global anti-dumping rules and better align our laws and practices with other countries, while ensuring we meet our World Trade Organisation obligations.
The changes will improve access to anti-dumping remedies for businesses, and investigations will be resolved more quickly.
Greater resources and expertise will ensure greater consistency with anti-dumping practices in other countries.
It's one thing for a free trade nation like Australia to face fair competition in the global marketplace.
But we won't let our manufacturers be undercut by nations who supply goods below production cost.
It's not fair, and it's not on.
Friends, these are powerful measures, and they stem from the Government's abiding commitment to strengthen Australian manufacturing and exports.
Reflecting that commitment, the Government we will engage in a series of events between now and the end of the year to support our manufacturing and export industries.
In November, Peter Beattie will organise a resources sector forum to provide practical leadership in linking Australian suppliers to opportunities in the resources sector.
In October, the Tax Forum will have a strong focus on the issues of a two speed economy and whether the tax system can help to address them.
And immediately afterwards, we will also host a Future Jobs Forum to generate a shared understanding of the opportunities and challenges in the economy, with a special focus on sectors under pressure.
During this time of rapid change, dialogue between government, business and unions is essential to bullet-proof Australian jobs.
This day-long event will discuss how Australia can build on its outstanding record of economic growth and job creation in recent years, and best position our nation to benefit from the changing global economy.
It will focus on how to move manufacturing and other sectors further up the value chain - driving business innovation, accessing global export markets, and using the most advanced approaches to management and workforce development.
Friends, in these first decades of the 21stcentury, the global economyis changing more rapidly and completely than any of us imagined was possible.
Technology is also changing.
So is the way we use and create energy.
Each of these poses challenges.
But each of them also offers us the opportunity to create new jobs and prosperity.
My call to you is to continue working to turn this time of change to our advantage.
Together we can build a new economy where manufacturing will always have a place.
A strong economy  -  modernised, open, competitive.
Unafraid of the world.
Unafraid of the future.
I believe Australia is up for that challenge, and together we will succeed. 



Mr Speaker, this House has been debating climate change for decades.
Parliamentary debate of this issue predates this building itself.
My predecessor as Member for Lalor, Barry Jones, once said this about climate change:
If we are only prepared to plan five years, 10 years, 15 years or 20 years down the track all the dangers that are feared can be avoided. 
Those words were spoken twenty four years ago next week.
We have now had decades of heated public argument and political opinion.
Alongside decades of enlightened scientific research and economic analysis.
After all those opinions have been expressed, most Australians now agree:
 * 	our climate is changing
 * 	this is caused by carbon pollution
 * 	this has harmful effects on our environment and on the economy
 * 	and the Government should act.
And after all that analysis has been done, most economists and experts also now agree the best way is to make polluters pay by putting a price on carbon.
So that is the policy of the Government I lead.
And that is the plan which is before the House now.
A plan for a carbon pricing mechanism which means around five hundred big polluters to pay for every tonne of carbon pollution they put into our atmosphere.
A plan to cut carbon pollution by at least 160 million tonnes a year in 2020.
A plan for tax cuts, increased pensions and increased family payments.
A plan for clean energy jobs and investment ... a plan for a clean energy future for our country.
Today we move from words to deeds.  This Parliament is going to get this done.
There will be a price on carbon from 1 July 2012.
The carbon pricing mechanism which begins its course through our Parliament today is the product of years of public policy discussion and development.
In the late 1990s, the Australian Greenhouse Office published papers setting out how a carbon price might work and sought public submissions.
Then the National Emissions Trading Taskforce established by the States and Territories, and the Shergold report set up by the Howard Government, embarked on extensive consultation processes.
Each generated wide ranging recommendations on designing the mechanism for a carbon price.
Further consultation on detailed design issues occurred through the Garnaut Review, the Green and White Papers, and in response to draft legislation supporting the former Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, defeated in the Senate.
In September 2010, the Government convened the Multi-Party Climate Change Committee to agree a way forward.
In February this year, the Government released a Climate Change Framework for public discussion.
In July, the Government announced the carbon pricing mechanism and, later that month, released draft legislation. 
We received over 300 submissions on the draft bills and had extensive discussions with businesses, non-government organisations, other governments and legal stakeholders.
All adding to the literally thousands of submissions which have been made to Government on this issue over the years.
Many advocates and advisers have worked enormously hard. 
I am grateful for the tremendous energy and seriousness with which so many have treated these exhaustive  -  even exhausting  -  discussions.
All part of the years of research and analysis which underpin the policy embodied in the legislation I introduce today.
I firmly believe no stone remains unturned, no voice unheard.
So this is the plan for Australia's carbon price.
A modern policy approach, with efficient allocation and incentive to innovate, linked to global markets.
A fixed price for the first years  -  a well designed market from 2015.
Assistance for emissions intensive, trade exposed industries.
Evidence-based emissions targets.  Abatement at the lowest economic cost. All adding up to a new bottom line: Where polluters pay.
Mr Speaker, let me turn to the main features of the Clean Energy Bill 2011.
 The Bill provides that the carbon price will be paid by liable entities, which have facilities that emit 25,000 tonnes or more of carbon pollution a year.
It will also cover landfills that emit 10,000 tonnes or more, where these are within a specified distance of landfills that emit 25,000 tonnes or more.
Large users of natural gas will be liable parties in their own right, while natural gas suppliers such as retailers will pay a carbon price for the emissions that arise from the use of the natural gas by smaller customers.
Around 500 entities will have mandatory liabilities under the carbon pricing mechanism.
Around 500 polluters will pay.
To determine liability, the carbon pricing mechanism will draw on information reported under the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting System, an established measurement system for greenhouse gas pollution developed under the Howard Government and which commenced on 29 September 2007.
The carbon pricing mechanism will not apply to agricultural emissions, legacy emissions from landfill facilities, and emissions from landfill facilities closed before 1 July 2012.
The Bill recognises that there are different ways in which businesses structure their affairs. 
It specifically deals with joint ventures  -  a common feature of resource and energy projects.
And it allows businesses to transfer liability under the mechanism within their corporate groups.
The Bill provides for a fixed carbon price for three years, starting at $23 per tonne of carbon pollution.
A fixed carbon price, set out in legislation, provides business with certainty as our plan begins  -  and allows for a manageable transition to carbon pricing.
After three years, the scheme automatically transitions to a fully flexible cap and trade emissions trading scheme.
From this time on, a cap will be placed on national emissions and the carbon price will be determined by the market.
The Bill also provides for a price cap and a price floor to apply for the first three years of the floating price period.
This will limit market volatility and reduce risk for businesses as they gain experience in having the market set the carbon price.
At the heart of an emissions trading scheme is a cap on carbon pollution.
These caps will guarantee reductions in carbon pollution and allow us to achieve our long term target of an 80 per cent reduction from 2000 levels by 2050.
Achieving this target will take more than 17 billion tonnes of carbon pollution out of the atmosphere between now and 2050.
In 2050 this will cut 9 out of every 10 tonnes of pollution compared to what would happen without our plan.
Under the arrangements that this Bill would put in place, pollution caps will be set by the Government with advice from the expert, independent Climate Change Authority.
If caps are not set, then default caps will apply, which reflect Australia's unconditional, bipartisan commitment to reduce our greenhouse gas pollution by 5 per cent below 2000 levels in 2020.
To provide stability and notice for business, cap-setting regulations will be made well in advance.
The Bill makes provision for the Australian carbon pricing mechanism to interact with credible international efforts to reduce carbon pollution.
International linking gives liable parties access to a broader range of abatement opportunities, which helps contain costs and helps promote international action on climate change.
Liable parties will be able to meet up to half of their obligation through the use of international carbon units.
This will ensure that only robust, environmentally credible international units are allowed to be used for compliance.
The Government understands that there is nothing more important to families than having a job.
So we will take special measures to support jobs and keep Australia competitive internationally.
The Bill makes provision for certain industry assistance measures, which will ensure that our industries are in the best position possible to manage a smooth transition to a clean energy future.
The Jobs and Competitiveness Program will assist emissions-intensive, trade-exposed industries in making that transition to a low-emissions economy, while protecting Australian jobs and competitiveness.
It will allocate around 40 per cent of the revenue raised by the mechanism to this purpose.
The effectiveness of the Program will be subject to ongoing review by the independent Productivity Commission.
The many activities the Program may cover are dealt with in Regulations, to be published in draft by the Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency later this month.
These regulations have been designed in close consultation with the affected businesses and can be adapted over time as needed.
The move to a low-emissions economy will pose an adaptive challenge for our energy supply industry. 
The Government will implement measures to underpin a successful energy market transition and maintain secure energy supplies.
The Bill provides for an Energy Security Fund to provide assistance to Australia's most emissions-intensive coal-fired generators.
This will underpin ongoing confidence in the sector and support new  -  and much needed  -  investment in new energy sources and infrastructure.
Assistance will be conditional on meeting tests relating to maintaining energy security, as well as publishing Clean Energy Investment Plans setting out their intentions for new investments and other matters.
In addition to these legislative measures, the Government will seek to close around 2000 megawatts of highly polluting generation capacity by 2020.
Closing down some of our high pollution coal-fired capacity makes room for investment in low pollution plant and starts the transformation of our energy sector in a responsible way.
The carbon pricing arrangements will be supported by robust and independent governance arrangements.
The Clean Energy Regulator will work with liable entities to ensure compliance with the mechanism and is specifically charged with educating and advising them about it and how they may comply.
The Regulator will have appropriate and proportionate powers to monitor compliance, and where problems emerge, to take action to address them.
Enforcement and penalties are focused on those who have obligations under the mechanism  -  not on the general public.
The Regulator is a public body, bound to act in the public interest and in accordance with the constraints imposed by the Bill and by other Commonwealth laws.
In addition to the specific advice to be provided to the Government on issues like pollution caps, the Bill provides that the mechanism will be reviewed over time by the independent, expert Climate Change Authority.
This scrutiny will ensure its ongoing relevance, robustness and integrity.
This Bill is part of the Government's total package of clean energy legislation implementing the carbon pricing mechanism and related reforms.
The Clean Energy Bill 2011 sets out the core provisions of the carbon pricing mechanism  -  its architecture and its review arrangements.
Consequential amendments are made to other Commonwealth laws to integrate the carbon pricing mechanism with existing laws on climate change, economic regulation and taxation.
These changes are set out in the Clean Energy (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2011.
The implementation of an effective carbon price on transport through the fuel taxation, customs and excise system is achieved through the Clean Energy (Fuel Tax Legislation Amendment) Bill 2011, the Clean Energy (Excise Tariff Legislation Amendment) Bill 2011 and the Clean Energy (Customs Tariff Amendment) Bill 2011.
Charges under the carbon price mechanism are dealt with in the Clean Energy (Unit Shortfall Charge - General) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Unit Issue Charge - Fixed Charge) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Unit Issue Charge - Auctions) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Charges - Excise) Bill 2011, Clean Energy (Charges - Customs) Bill 2011,and the Clean Energy (International Unit Surrender Charge) Bill 2011.
The price impact of the Government's plan will be modest  -  but I know family budgets are always tight.
So most of the money raised from the carbon price will be used to fund tax cuts, pension increases and higher family payments.
The Government has taken the opportunity to give pensioners extra help. 
Every older Australian who relies solely on the pension will be among the four million Australian households who get a buffer for the budget, with the extra payments being 20 per cent higher than their average extra costs.
And the Government has taken the opportunity for tax reform as well.
We've more than tripled the tax free threshold.
Combined with other changes, this means that 450 000 people  -  who earn between $16 000 and $20 500  -  will have all their tax cut.  They will now pay no tax.
A tax reform which rewards work  -  which builds on our Budget changes to lift workforce participation and spread the benefits and dignity of work to every Australian.
The assistance to households provided through the tax and transfer system is delivered through the Clean Energy (Household Assistance Amendments) Bill 2011, theClean Energy (Tax Laws Amendments) Bill 2011 and the Clean Energy (Income Tax Rates Amendments) Bill 2011.
The Climate Change Authority is set up by the Climate Change Authority Bill 2011, which also sets out its functions.  Similarly, the Clean Energy Regulator is established by the Clean Energy Regulator Bill 2011.
Mr Speaker, we govern in a world of change, a world that is transforming.
My task as Prime Minister, my Party's task in Government, this Parliament's task as it meets today, is to lead our country through this transformation.
Not to hide from change, to make change work for us.
To use our strength today to build strength for the future.
The jobs of the future are clean energy jobs.
Employment is projected to grow strongly with a carbon price.
Around 1.6 million jobs to be created to 2020 ... a further 4.4 million to 2050.
The investment of the future is clean energy investment.
All up, the carbon price will support $100 billion worth of investment in renewables in the next forty years.
The Australian economy will continue to prosper while cutting carbon pollution.
Real gross national income per person is expected to increase from today's levels by around $9,000 per person to 2020 and more than $30,000 per person by 2050.
If we can do all this:
Cut carbon pollution.
Keep growing our economy.
Keep growing jobs.
Why wouldn't we act?
So the Government will act.
And the Parliament should support us.
Mr Speaker, there is a reason votes on legislation in this House are recorded.
There is a reason these matters are decided in an open vote.
It is so every member in this place can be judged.
Judged on the decisions they make here, judged on where they stand on the great issues of our national debate.
Judged by every Australian. 
Judged now, judged in the future.
Because the final test is not: are you on the right side of the politics of the week or the polls of the year. 
The final test is this: are you on the right side of history.
And in my experience, the judgement of history has a way of speaking sooner than we expect.
To newer members of this place, I say, just ask those more senior members who sit opposite.
Ask those who voted in this house against Medicare in 1983.
How smart did that look in 1984?
Ask those who voted in this house against universal superannuation in 1992.
How smart did that look in 1993?
Ask those who voted for Work Choices in 2005.
How smart did that look in 2007?
Yes, the judgement of history comes sooner than we expect.
And the demand for policy leadership comes hard on its heels.
Mr Speaker, nothing hard ever gets easier by putting it off.
And if you don't do what is right for the nation, then you shouldn't be in Parliament.
It's time to deliver the action on climate change we need.
To do what is best for Australian families, what is best for future generations, what is best for this country.
To act on climate change. 
To cut carbon pollution. 
To build a clean energy future. 
To create clean energy jobs.
I see a great clean energy future for our great country. 
I know we can get there.
I commend the Bill to the House.



I'm Australia's first female Prime Minister.
And I didn't get here alone.
Today I think of all the women who made my journey possible, all the women who made our journey possible:
A lifetime of support from colleagues and family, mentors and friends like Joan Kirner.
A century of activism by women of matchless courage and resolve.
Some have an honoured place in history like Edith Cowan and Catherine Helen Spence, but there are also the unknown, unnamed women who through countless acts of defiance affirmed the right of every woman to a life of opportunity, freedom and choice.
They did these things inspired by faith in women they would never know and a future they would never see.
We are those women. We are that future.
Today we speak for the women of a thousand generations.
We owe them a debt of gratitude, and we owe to them a responsibility: a responsibility to build on their foundations; to do more, to be more, and to make life better for the women who will come after us; to say and do in our own time the things that were once held to be unthinkable and unachievable.
Friends,
April 25thhas a sacred place in the Australian imagination.
But 19 years before Gallipoli, it was already a significant day in our nation's story.
It was the day Australian women first cast their vote.
The place was South Australia, a laboratory of progressive social change in the late Victorian era.
The Adelaide Advertiser expressed its faith that women would not leave their electoral privileges unexercised for fear of losing the bloom of their delicate and retiring femininity.
While the Adelaide Observer pointed out the air of responsibility on the faces of the newly enfranchised voters.
That was how our journey in Australian political life began.
Those women are long gone now, and it easy to think of them as quaint figures in their bonnets and elaborate petticoats.
But remember this was the age of Mary MacKillop and Louisa Lawson - strong women in a harsh land.
And whether they knew it or not, they were doing more than just casting a ballot.
They were taking the remarkable and rendering it unremarkable, opening the way toa transformative century that would forever change the way human beings live, govern and think.
The 20thcentury was a century of big political movements and ideologies such as fascism, socialism and modernism.
And yet the movement that outlasted them all, and surpassed them all in what it has achieved for humanity, is feminism  -  the struggle for women's emancipation and equality.
Pioneer Australian feminist Rose Scott observed that the vote itself was only a piece of machinery in battling for the liberty, for the freedom of women.
It was the key that unlocked the door to everything else:
The right to learn, to work and demand a fair day's pay;
To choose our partners and our family structures, and manage our own health;
To strive to live free of coercion and violence;
And to shape the destiny of the nations in which we live.
Friends,
It was not enough for women to have the right to vote.
Our system of government must reflect the community it serves.
A political system without adequate representation of women is profoundly incomplete, and it is surprising that Australia, with our robust history of pragmatic social reform, and our early heritage of women's rights, didn't get there earlier.
Many countries  -  including places more traditional than our own  -  had a woman serve as prime minister long before we did, like India in 1966, Israel in 1969 and Britain in 1979.
But we've done it now, and I'm not so much proud that it was me as I am proud that it finally happened.
Proud that decades of waiting came to an end.
Proud that having a second, third and fourth female Prime Minister will not have to be anything unusual.
Taking the remarkable and rendering it unremarkable.
Friends,
I didn't set out to be the first female Prime Minister.
If it came from anywhere, it started with two hard-working Welsh migrants who'd been denied opportunity in their own lives and who didn't want the same for their own children.
That those children were both girls only reinforced their determination.
My sister and I were taught by our parents from childhood to think big and imagine we could do anything.
I acted on that belief all my life, whether as a school student resenting the fact that the girls were forced to study home economics while the boys did woodwork and metal work.
As a lawyer standing up for low-paid migrant women in the clothing industry.
Or as a candidate who took three attempts, against a wall of ingrained factional hostility, to enter federal politics.
I was supported by people close to me who told me to believe in myself, but I was lucky that I was never taught my gender would hold me back.
Perhaps it also had something to do with coming from a family where there were no boys, a family where mum worked, and where neither parent ever suggested that our lives or aspirations should be limited by our gender.
Whatever the reasons, I never conceptualise my Prime Ministership around being the first woman to do this job.
I conceptualise my job as being about delivering the things that make a difference for the nation.
But if visibly having a woman to do this job means even one woman or one girl sees a more expansive future, then it is worth it.
I've become so used to high-achieving blokes approaching me somewhat sheepishly, and I know straight away what they're going to ask:
they want an autograph for their daughters.
Because dads like that know the future has to be different for their daughters' generation than it was for their mothers' generation.
No longer can girls and young women be told, as our predecessors were, that politics and the other professions are no fit place for a woman.
The first female MP in NSW, Millicent Preston-Stanley, had the perfect riposte when she said:
 Parliament clearly is a fit place for a woman provided she is fit for Parliament.
Then and now, women must come to politics with few illusions and sleeves rolled up.
I believe with all my heart that women, as well as men, can thrive in the adversarial atmosphere of politics.
As women, we must never allow ourselves be held to a separate, lower standard because that is just a cruel delusion.
When I look at a Parliament that contains people as diverse as Jenny Macklin, Julie Bishop and Christine Milne, these are not women who received special treatment - nor would they accept it.
They are tough women, resilient women.
They are necessarily tough because politics is tough, and politics is tough because politics is important.
It shouldn't be easy, and it's not.
Not for the women  -  not for the blokes.
The late Virginia Chadwick told a great story about how she mentioned her political aspirations to a senior male MP and was promptly told that she was the wrong age, the wrong sex and from the wrong place.
Chadwick proved him wrong in the only possible way  -  by entering politics and becoming a successful and distinguished NSW Cabinet Minister.
It is our best and only response.
Friends,
The women's movement did not free us from every problem.
It simply gave us the means  -  and the opportunity  -  to solve them.
The key to a room of one's own.
Now that so much of the work has been done, let's not allow a myth to develop that women's rights were somehow inevitable.
Or that they are somehow embarrassing or out of date.
We should never allow the gains of the gender revolution to be reversed, whether in health, education, employment, law reform, or politics.
They are too precious.
Too many women gave up too much to achieve them.
Our female pioneers weren't detached intellectuals.
They were practical women with practical goals - goals deeply grounded in principle and informed by centuries of lived experience.
Those have been our goals, too, in the Labor Party and Emily's List.
We sought to bring issues like child care and domestic violence to public attention, not just as women's issues but as issues affecting the whole community.
And we sought to create an embracing range of policies that would bring opportunity to the lives of women every day.
Modern choices for modern women.
Not just those women who are seen as high fliers, but women who work hard every day in the so-called pink collar industries such as child care, retail, executive support and the community services:
The women with young children juggling work and family responsibilities;
The women are the sandwich generation  -  looking after growing children and older parents and relatives;
The migrant women struggling to find their way in a new land and new culture;
The senior women who have spent their lives looking after others but find themselves lacking the resources for a dignified old age.
These women trust Labor to deliver the polices that will bring security and opportunity to their lives.
That's why I'm proud to be part of the government that introduced Paid Parental Leave, increased the Child Care Rebate and put Work Choices in the dustbin of history.
I'm proud to lead a government that has introduced the National Carer Recognition Strategy and has committed to a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I'm proud to lead the Government that is lifting universal superannuation to 12 per cent, and I'm proud to lead a government that is recognising the value of community sector work through the Equal Pay Case.
These are great reforms. They will touch every Australian woman in some way, and they are enduring proof that good government really can change lives.
But our empathy mustn't stop at Australia's own borders.
Women's rights, being human rights, are universal and indivisible.
The suffering of millions of women diminishes us all and obligates us.
As one of the world's top 20 economies, we have a responsibility to contribute to women's equality globally.
That's why we're making new investments in gender equality through the aid program directed towards reducing violence against women.
Indeed, Australia's National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women is being used by the UN as a template for countries around the world.
We've got a chance to show real global leadership.
Just as in the past we've shown global leadership on issues like landmines, nuclear disarmament and free agricultural trade, so too we can be a leader on women's rights
That's why I was very proud to announce the appointment of an Ambassador for Global Women's Issues this morning.
Australia has a great story to tell, and we should tell it to the women of the world who need our help.
Friends,
When we look at these achievements at home and abroad we see a nation that's come a long way.
We've done great things, especially since the time of the Whitlam government.
Today, 30 per cent of our nation's parliamentarians are women; four of our nine First Ministers; our Governor-General and two State Governors.
We've got more than 30 per cent of board positions across Federal Government agencies held by women, on track to our target of 40 per cent by 2015, and we're changing the regulations so that women can participate in all aspects of military life. 
In the words ofGeneral Peter Cosgrove, men and women will now have an equal right to fight and die for their country.
But the journey of securing women's rights is far from done.
We best honour our achievements by never taking them forgranted, and by ensuring they are passed on  -  intact and augmented  -  to our daughters and our nieces.
This is no time for the momentum to stop.
Friends, there are still too many barriers to women's participation in last bastion fields like engineering, mining or the military.
Very few of those roles have essential physical requirements that necessarily exclude women, and many of them are jobs in expanding sectors where the opportunities are abundant and the wages are high.
There is no reason why women can't have their full share of the mining boom.
But perhaps understandably, most attention goes to the corporate sector because it is the most connected and educated leadership elite in the nation.
Yes, we have seen some welcome progress in recent times.
But 115 years since women first cast a vote in this nation, there are still some public companies with not a single woman on their boards, and many more with only one female board member.
Just 13 per cent of corporate board members are female.
Only 3 per cent of ASX 200 companies have female CEOs.
Less than 9 per cent of key executive management positions in ASX 200 companies are women.
This is simply unacceptable and I say to those companies: this is 2011, not 1911 - just get on with it.
There is overwhelming evidence that gender equality is a strong driver of corporate profit and success, but the impact of women's participation is much wider than individual firms. It affects the health of our whole economy.
Australia's participation rate of almost 60 per cent for women is extremely low by international standards.
The World Economic Forum places us 44th in the world for labour-force participation.
That's too many women missing out on the dignity and benefits of work, especially those like single mums and older women who want to work but don't always have the chance.
As the economy grows, our country will need even more skilled workers if we are going to take advantage of the minerals boom and manage the challenges of our ageing population.
In fact, research by Goldman Sachs released demonstrates just what a difference women's participation can make
The study showed that lifting female workforce participation has boosted economic activity in Australia by 22 per cent since 1974, and if we move to European levels of participation, it would boost economic growth by a further 13 per cent - or $180 billion a year.
That's bigger than the size of the whole mining industry combined, which comprises 10 per cent of Australia's GDP
The source of that productivity is right here amongst us, in the suburbs and towns of our nation just waiting to be included, waiting for the skills and the incentives to connect them with the workforce and make them part of Australia's opportunity story.\
And that's exactly what I'm determined to do, because women's political emancipation is not complete unless we also enjoy economic emancipation.
Friends,
Nowhere is the message of women's participation more important than in our political system, because it is our political system which embodies the way the nation sees itself, and women have the right to see themselves in the public face of our nation.
It's all well and good to have a woman in the top job, but that is no substitute for widespread and lasting change across our system of government.
We have 15 houses of parliament in this nation, along with 565 local councils.
The time is coming, if it hasn't already arrived, when anything less than 50 per cent representation will be unacceptable.
That's where Emily's List retains every part of its original urgency and relevance.
I worked on the constitution of this organisation. I was there at the start, and I can say our job is not done yet.
I know it's been a long haul.
I think of stalwarts like Joan Child, Labor's first female MP in the House of Representatives, who turned 90 this year.
Joan has walked a long road and set a wonderful example, and I'd like to tell her that the journey is complete - but it isn't.
This is no time to fold up the banners or put away the cheque book.
There's plenty more to do - and we do it in the same spirit as the women who wentbefore us: with optimism and with pride.
On the historic day that women won the vote in NSW, Louisa Lawson recorded in her scrapbook:
I have always loved my countrywomen, always admired them, and believed in them. 
Louisa Lawson believed that Australian women were the most capable women in the world, that they belonged to a nation capable of truly great things.
This is my belief too.
A belief that abides.
A belief that grows stronger every day.
A belief I will hold as long as I live. 


Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, friends and fellow Australians.
In September last year I was in Ben Chifley's Bathurst home.
In a room where the self-educated author of Labor's greatest words  -  the light on the hill  -  once read in the evening.
In March this year I was in John Curtin's Cottesloe home.
In the suburb where a gun carriage stood in 1945, bearing Australia's greatest leader, under the stars of Australia's flag.
Today we are in the city where John Curtin and Ben Chifley worked and lived and served our country.
On the street where they walked to work.
To witness a humane and humble tribute to two great men.
And they were great men.
Two great men of courage and conviction in their ideas.
Yes, John Curtin was jailed in Victoria in 1916 fighting conscription in the Great War.
Yes, Ben Chifley was a lily-white who lost his job in the New South Wales rail strikes the following year.
And they were two great men of vision for all Australians.
Men of politics, leaders of party.
But more than that, Prime Ministers, patriots.
Leaders who served the whole nation, in war and in peace.
And two mates whose trust and sympathy speaks to us still.
Whose mateship shines in Don Stephens' famous photograph and is enshrined in this tribute we unveil today.
Looking at his icon of these men, it's impossible not to reflect on what were they saying to each other as they walked to work that day.
They were men of their time. 
They might well have been talking about billiards and pipe smoke.
Reminiscing about the fall of the Bruce Government fifteen years earlier the way old Billy Hughes led dissidents away from the conservative Government, including one wavering MP, who he locked in a long billiard game in Old Parliament House so the government loyalists couldn't get to him during the dinner break.
They were Labor politicians. 
There's every chance they were talking about how to manage the colleagues!
When Curtin made Arthur Calwell Minister for Information he said: He's been fighting with newspapers all this time  -  now he can learn to live with them.
Of course, we can't know.
But here today I like to think I do bring some insight.
From my own knowledge of Curtin and Chifley.
From what I've seen in the houses they lived in at home.
From what I feel of them in my Canberra lodgings now, where they must have met so often, where Curtin lived and died.
From the share I take in their succession.
Because they were true leaders, I can't help but believe they would have been talking about the future.
And in turn, that means, they would have been talking about us.
So I hope this remarkable tribute serves not only to prompt reflection on what they might have been talking about then.
I hope it also serves to prompt reflection on what they thought we would be doing for Australia now.
Friends, life is long.
With history's hindsight, we see two great Australians, without fear or blemish.
But Curtin and Chifley were tested by their times.
One biographer wrote of Chifley's failures in Opposition he had responsibility far too long ever to be a destructive oppositionist.
The engine-driver who became a nation-builder couldn't become a wrecker.
Another writer reminds us that Curtin lost an election in 1937 when he stood for air strength for Australia.
Four years later the bombing of Darwin brought a terrible vindication  -  and an education in the bitter ironies of politics and war.
Tested by their times, but history judges them well.
Their courage became its own reward.
John Curtin died in Canberra, in the Lodge. 
At his grave in Karrakatta we can read this tribute:
His country was his prideHis brother man his cause.
Ben Chifley died in Canberra, in the Hotel Kurrajong.
On his tomb in Bathurst we can read this tribute:
If an idea is worth fighting for, no matter the penalty, fight for the right, and truth and justice will prevail.
John Curtin and Ben Chifley live in our minds and hearts still.
I am very proud to unveil this new tribute now.



Friends. I'm with you today, as your Labor Leader, to discuss our Labor values.
Values 120 years old, values that have shaped this nation.
Values that inspire us today and will inspire us tomorrow.
Values that we have fought for in the past and that we will fight for to our last breath.
Every day, Australians demand that we answer the most important question they can ask of any government: What do you stand for?
They are right to ask.
It is their Government, not ours.
And we should welcome the question, because our answer is clear.
Opportunity for all, not as a theoretical concept but as a call to arms, to be expressed every day in making sure men and women have jobs and that every Australian, child and adult, has access to the transformative power of education, no matter where they come from or what their circumstances in life.
Not leaving any one behind, once again not said as a platitude but as a powerful statement that age, disability, ill health shouldn't spell the end of decent life.
Recognising our responsibility to the Australians of the future, to Australia's children. 
Just as parents work hard to give their children a better life, we work hard to give Australian's children a better life.
Our sense of love and responsibility for the nation's children drives us on to make the social, economic and environmental reforms which will create Australia's future prosperity and share its benefits. 
Proud to call ourselves a Labor Government and proud of our union heritage and union links, always ready to fight against conservative forces, who simply don't accept our core values and who represent the interests of the privileged and the powerful and friends, they are circling again, as the Liberal Party prepares to launch another attack on the rights of Australians at work. 
These are our values, our Labor values, the values I have put at the centre of our government and at the centre of what we strive to achieve for the nation.
They are my answer to that great question, what do you stand for', in words.
But we must always answer that question with deeds as well.
As we did three days ago, when I stood in the House of Representatives and introduced the Clean Energy Future Bill 2011.
As we did four years ago, when I stood in the House of Representatives and introduced the Fair Work Bill 2007.
On our best days our values and deeds come together to dramatically change lives and change futures.
Being our best means learning from the days when we could and should have done better.
My responsibility as the Leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party is this: To do everything in my power to ensure our Party is always its best self.
Being our best means facing up to some hard truths.
We meet in difficult days for social democracy  -  at home and around the world.
We have lost government in Western Australia, Victoria and New South Wales.
In the United Kingdom and New Zealand our sister political parties are in Opposition.
In Europe the tide runs against the Centre-Left.
And President Obama, whilst confronting far more grievous economic challenges, faces comparable problems with hard right wing activism that is long on complaints and conspiracy theories and short on solutions.
The grand paradox of this lean season for social democracy is that it is occurring when the catastrophic global costs of markets focussed on profit but devoid of responsibility have never been more evident.
And when the power of ideas about social and corporate responsibility enlivens so many individuals and so much of public debate.
It falls to us to analyse and understand this contradiction of our age.
We live in an age which at its best is one of individual empowerment and at its worst is one of stress, anxiety and confusion.
A primary school child using a computer at school has more information available at his or her finger tips than was conceivable at any other time in human history.
That child will grow to be a citizen who expects, indeed who cannot even imagine, a world that fails to offer immediate answers, customization, options, choice.
But at the same time, for too many people, the lived reality of a world of so much promise is actually one of feeling adrift in a sea of information and overwhelmed by too much change. 
The lived reality is one of feeling that they have lost control of their own lives.
Indeed, I believe this clash of the choices of modernity with our need for security in life is one of the reasons that there is a sense of anxiety in the community.
These trends of our age are much discussed and analysed.
And in that analysis, many commentators have predicted that the social democracy has past its use by date.
That our notions of collective action, solidarity, unionism, are incompatible with today's individualism. 
Friends, I am here today to say to you, that fashionable thinking is a mistake  -  indeed a grave error driven by a misunderstanding both of our collective traditions and of our ability to apply them to the contemporary world.
Our collective tradition began more than a century ago.
Working men and women came together in trade unions, understanding that collective action gave them a power they would never have alone.
And that tradition of unionism and collective action gave birth to our political party.
Ours is a political party unashamedly built with collective action as our foundation stone.
Its mission, to end want for working people. 
Its method, to stick together.
A collective method, given expression in many forms, from locality branches, to affiliation with trade unions, to the binding discipline of Labor caucus. 
At every level we gave expression to our belief that numbers bring strength.
To end want we have argued for collective action through Government, through a fair distribution of risk.
Think of the great Labor achievement of Medicare. 
At its heart Medicare was born because we said that the cost of ill health should not fall on and break an individual, it should be shared by each of us. 
That the most healthy amongst us had an obligation to share the burdens of the most unwell. 
That life is so full of unknowable risks and we would share those risks so that sudden illness won't bankrupt a family.
And in our historic mission of ending want we have achieved so much. 
From the creation of the old age pension to our plans for national disability insurance.
In the second half of our existence, we aimed higher.
We have never left our concern about defeating poverty and sharing risk behind but we have rightly worked for more. 
We have striven for a fair distribution of opportunity. 
We have worked to ensure we have a resilient modern economy that offers people not just a job but the prospect of better jobs and we have worked for an education system that gives working class kids a chance.
As others have put it before me: the light on the hill now shines from a lamp on the desk.
Friends, this mission of fairly distributing opportunity and sharing risk is not yet done.
It won't be done until a child born into welfare passivity and family dysfunction gets as good an education as the child of a multi millionaire.
It won't be done until an Indigenous boy or girl has the same ability to get a job, a house, to build a good life as their non-indigenous friends.
It won't be done until we fairly share the costs of addressing risks, like the risk of being born with a disability or the risks of mental illness or of the incapacity that can come with ageing.
Because fairly sharing opportunity and risk requires constant effort.
Working together to strengthen and modernise the economy so Australians have the benefits of jobs and ever better jobs. 
Yesterday's Snowy Hydro scheme is today's national broadband network. 
Yesterday's dollar float is today's carbon pricing.
Working together as well to revolutionise education, from early childhood through schools to apprenticeships to university. 
We should never rest and settle for second best in the world when it comes to quality and equity in education.
I feel this deeply with every fibre of my being. 
If I lived in any other age it would have been impossible for me to be standing here. 
Education made me. 
Without great schools and Whitlam's reforms of university education, I would not be here today. 
Every child today deserves this same chance.
The need for collective action is with us today and it will be with us tomorrow. 
But even as we still strive to achieve these great things together, our understanding of our mission needs to deepen and our aim needs to be higher again.
Understand, collective action was never simply an end in itself: we saw strength in shared endeavour in politics, we saw value in sharing risk through government, for a reason.
Because we wanted to empower the great mass of the people, all those the conservatives would leave behind. 
And as communities, families and individuals have embraced the benefits and empowerment collective action has brought them, they have embraced new opportunities and demanded new choice.
So today our ethos of collective action must respond to individual needs and demands for choice and control.
For a long period of time, our great movement believed that if you could lift incomes and end poverty that everything else necessary to get people on the road to a better life would follow. 
Now we understand that for our most disadvantaged, welfare support alone is not the answer. 
Of course, ensuring people have life's basics is necessary but change only comes by marrying a requirement for personal effort and responsibility with the customised supports that give people a hand up and out of poverty and dysfunction. 
For a long period of time, our great movement believed that the highest aspiration of working people was for a decent job. 
Now we understand it can be to run a decent small business.
Protecting rights at work will always be central but building skills, rewarding enterprise, encouraging the embrace of risk, helping people be their own boss, is part of the dream of working people too. 
And for a long period of time, our great movement believed that one size should fit in all in service provision, that those seeking choice were undermining collective aspirations.
Now we understand that desire for choice is rightly strengthening not abating.
In this age we need to pursue our historic mission while also embracing choice and creating ways to give individuals more control.
Australians want to make their own choices and control their own lives.
But this can only happen if the power of collective action, in creating opportunity, sharing risk and not leaving any one behind, is joined to meaningful individual empowerment, joined to personal choices and control.
This is our Labor mission today.
Cradle to grave opportunity.  Cradle to grave care for each in the face of life's risks.
Cradle to grave shared expectations of personal responsibility met with a shared resolve to leave no one behind.
Collective action used to create great jobs, to build great infrastructure, to deliver great public services  -  and then collective action used to empower individuals to choose between these good things.
Some Australians have always had the resources to make every choice they want.
It is our task to ensure that every Australian has every choice.
That the choices made by our people are never limited by the circumstances of birth or where they live or what they do for work.
So at every stage, our great party of collective action must embrace new ways of enabling individual empowerment.
Friends, we are a movement in politics, not a school of philosophy. 
So we must answer the question, what does this mean in practice for policy and Government? 
The example which is closest to my heart is MySchool.
Publishing data on school performance has been both popular and controversial  -  everyone knows that.
But what I hope everyone also knows is why I did it.
Because this is a reform which reflects my deepest determination and is based on the experiences of my own life.
I don't forget Unley High, where so much of my success in life began, but where other kids sat at the back of the room and did make work and were left behind.
And this is a reform which exemplifies Labor's modern approach of joining collective action with choice for individuals.
Because it combines public funding for the education of every child with publication of new information about every school.
MySchool isn't just a conversation starter motivated by education quality and equity.
It is an enabler of millions of choices powered by more information than ever before.
It enables individual choices about which school is best for your child, community choices about how to make a school better, national choices about how to improve all schools.
It is something I believe in, something I fought for, something which together we have achieved.
And MySchool  -  along with many other policies we have pursued and many more which lie ahead  -  rests on my confidence that social democrats, with our understanding of social solidarity and our sympathy for individual freedom, are best placed to respond to the needs of today.
Working with my team, it is my job to shape our shared future.
But I also keenly understand that in this age, as our Government writes the story of our collective future, every individual Australian wants to write the story of their own lives with more choice and control than ever before.
This approach  -  combining the strengths of collective action and the opportunities of individual choice  -  needs to live and breathe in our political party as well as our government.
Just as the Australian people demand customisation, options and choice in policy, so they demand this in politics as well.
Some hold that the historic structures of the Labor Party are sufficient to the complex and personalised politics of today.
I do not. 
I believe we must also embrace choice and control within our political party  -  not just collective action.
Our National Conference at the end of this year is an important opportunity to do this.
This will never distract us from governing but we do have a responsibility always to renew ourselves and our organisation.
I look forward to the debate in December in Sydney.
I am determined that we have a fair dinkum Labor Party conference, not an American-style convention.
I want there to be debates, I want there to be votes, I want there to be surprises. 
And so that the debate can be a real one, and the openness genuine, I do want to put forward my proposals for Party reform today.
Not brought down from a mountain and written in stone.
But brought up from the members, through an election review I initiated, in a process I began.
Here's what I'll propose.
First, we should aspire to be a growing Labor Party with new and active members.
So I'll set the Party a challenge  -  recruiting eight thousand new members next year  -  and I want the Party Conference to sign up to the challenge.
Second, we should embrace a community organising approach to ensure that we are growing and that we are connected to the community.
So I'll move that we increase our local connections to Labor supporters by trialling community preselections, or primaries, in some seats. 
I understand and respect the concerns of those who want to ensure that primaries are about community not a vehicle for maximising the voice of special interest groups.  The trials will be a genuine learning experience and are important to working through these concerns.
Third, we have to offer a richer experience for members of the Labor Party, including by giving them more opportunities to have a say and a direct vote in important decisions.
So I'll move that we embrace the party members empowerment reforms proposed in the Faulkner-Bracks-Carr review  -  including the proposal that the National President elected by members serve a full, three-year term without rotation.
And fourth, we need to modernise our structures and recognise that the old branch structures alone are not the future.
So I'll move that we embrace online membership and opportunities for supporters to become more involved.
So members and supporters can hear directly from me and their Labor Government  -  and so I can hear directly from them.
Friends, this is what I propose to reform and modernise our Party.
And this is what I want discussed at the open conference I look forward to this year.
I don't want to get my own way on every precise detail. 
I don't want everything sewn up by some meeting at midnight the night before. 
I do want change.
This is vital if we are to strengthen our party and be a party of ideas.
On the day I ordered our review I was determined to create an opportunity for reform which this great Party would not squander. 
I remain so determined.
This is my approach to our great Party's future.
Not change for its own sake, but progress for a purpose.
So our Party and our movement are always their best, so we fight for our values in the future just as hard as we have in the past.
So we always stand for opportunity for all. 
So we always insist no one be left behind.
These values are the measure of our responsibility to Australians not yet born  -  the motive for the nation-building reforms we pursue  -  but they are more than this.
They are a statement of hope for the future  -  a statement of our enduring optimism for this great country we love.
They are the tenets of our abiding Labor faith that we really can build a workingman's paradise in this land.
I am optimistic by nature  -  but as an Australian and a Labor person I am more than that.
I am optimistic by experience  -  because of what has already been achieved by our people to make Australia what is today.
I am optimistic by observation  -  because of the millions of Australians who each, in their own way, do so much to make this a better place tomorrow.
And my optimism is determined, specific, real.
Because I don't only see that better country we can be in the future very clearly in my own mind.
I want kids like those at the back of the room at Unley High to see it as well.
I want them to see a country where their education is the best in the world and where their education is as good as any Australian child's.
I want them to see a country where they can find a job, and keep a job, get a better job and where their boss respects their rights at work.
I want them to see a country where they are cared for and protected if they become mentally ill, if they become disabled, and when eventually they age and become frail.
I want them to see a country which is courageous enough to act on the threat of climate change.
For them to see all that  -  for our nation to be all that Labor must be true to its values.
Labor must be at its best.
When I knew we would meet at Old Parliament House today, I began to look forward to the opportunity of coming to address you all, in this historic place.
It's a grand thing to come to this old House of the people, this home to so many of Labor's grandest days.
Here where we enacted Medicare  -  and Medibank before it.
Here where we legislated the Snowy Hydro scheme.
Home to grand days of Labor courage and conviction as well.
Here, where Calwell lost the 1966 election and won his place in history speaking as a voice for reason and right ... when the drums beat and the trumpets sound.
Here, where Curtin's courage kept us free in times of war and Chifley's convictions built a nation for the peace.
Here, where Labor caucuses met after hard fought election victories understanding the responsibilities that came with governing for the nation's good.
And it's a grand thing to address the Labor faithful as well.
Because ours has never been solely a parliamentary caucus or a campaigning organisation. 
Labor in Australia is a movement.
A movement of people, in a great cause for change.
A movement for the future and a Party of hope.
That is what we have been on our best days.
That is what we have been on our bravest days.
I firmly believe it is what we remain on this day in this House.
I absolutely know it is what we will remain in all the days to come.



Hon. Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition.
Ministerial colleagues Robert McClelland, Joe Ludwig and Brendan O'Connor, my Parliamentary Secretary, Kate Lundy.
Representatives of the Australian Parliamentary Friends of Police Group, Chris Hayes MP and Senator Stephen Parry.
Federal Police Commissioner Tony Negus and all your fellow State and Territory police leaders.
Vince Kelly, President and Mark Burgess, CEO of the Police Federation of Australia, and your union colleagues from around the nation.
Most importantly  -  to our National Police Service Medal recipients and your families
It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to Parliament House.
I welcome you today as Prime Minister.
But I also welcome you as the proud daughter of parents who were both police officers.
And I approach today's ceremony knowing this is our opportunity to pay the highest respect for who you are and what you do for our nation's safety and security.
Our opportunity to pay this respect anew with the first National Police Service Medals.
Friends, everyone who wears the uniform in any of our military, police or emergency services does so because they are honoured to serve.
They do not seek recognition.
But a grateful nation must be always ready to provide recognition.
Friends, this award has its origins in a long-held belief among our police community that officers should be recognised for the quality of their work, not just the length of their tenure.
It is a belief that this Government shares.
We embodied that belief in an election commitment four years ago.
And it has finally come to fruition today.
It has admittedly been a long journey.
Deciding the criteria and rules for any award is never as easy as it first appears.
The Police Federation of Australia have been making submissions to Government to establish this medal since 2004 and I pay tribute to their persistence and resolve.
You have succeeded in your mission, and the nation owes you its thanks.
I also express my gratitude to current and former colleagues John Faulkner, Joe Ludwig, Kate Lundy, Brendan O'Connor and Bob Debus for helping to see this commitment through.
Most importantly, I honour Rick Steinborn and James Cheshire for their work on designing the medal and ribbons.
Both serving officers.
A medal designed by police for police.
A fact that makes this award all the more significant as it assumes its rightful place in the Australian Honours system.
Friends, this is not a medal to measure the length of service alone.
This medal is also a measure of the quality of that service.
Of the many thousands of police officers whose service and commitment warrant this recognition, today we recognise 16 officers who set the benchmark for ethical and diligent service.
Sixteen police officers who have dedicated their lives to serving their community.
But more than an award for service past, the National Police Service Medal is also a commitment to the future, because this medal also commits the recipients to maintaining the standards they have set in order to retain the medal.
The National Police Service Medal sends a strong message of support to the 50,000 men and women who serve across this country.
They are the men and women who keep our communities safe and allow fellow Australians to go about our lives with the freedom we cherish.
It is true that we sometimes take for granted the responsibility that goes with putting on the uniform.
We can forget that it means sacrifice and you only have to look at the memorial across the lake and ponder the 749 names inscribed there to understand the depth of that sacrifice.
We can also forget the strains and demands that are the daily obligation of every police officer.
Being called out in the middle of the night to witness families torn apart by violence and discord.
Knocking on the door of a family home to tell parents a son or daughter has died in a car accident.
Working, sometimes for years, to crack cases so that victims of crime can see justice done.
Police officers rarely know what each working day will bring.
They see the best of human nature and also the darkest.
They investigate.
They counsel.
They console.
And then, after all they see and all they experience, they go home to their own families and contribute more to our society as partners, parents, friends and community members.
It is not so much a career as a vocation.
A call to service that requires commitment and demands excellence.
The medal recipients we honour here this morning represent the best of Australian policing.
These officers have given their nation the ethical and diligent service that befits the uniform they wear.
I thank you all for setting an example for other officers to follow and for living up to the trust your community places in you.
Today we award the first, honouring 16 outstanding Australia police officers  and beginning a tradition that will last for decades and perhaps even centuries to come.
I know our nation will never be short of worthy recipients.
And our police will always have our gratitude and our respect. 



Thanks Lucio  -  not only for your kind introduction, but for your thoughtful discussion of the issues at hand.
Can I acknowledge Heather Ridout, AI Group Chief Executive.
Members of the diplomatic corps, and members of the academic community.
My ministerial colleagues and parliamentary colleagues, far too many to name.
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Canberra's a meeting place and it's good to meet not just people but ideas.
And Lucio, as you've observed already  -  we meet in interesting times.
Times of sustained economic transformation  -  rich and complex, challenging and promising  -  when we must make change work for us.
Yes times of strong fundamentals: low unemployment, low public debt, a deep, stable and liquid financial sector. 
But also times when Asian growth, European and US weakness, a boom in mining investment, are driving our dollar higher and in turn putting many sectors: education, tourism, some parts of retail, especially manufacturing, under pressure.
You know that better than anyone  -  you live it every day. 
I want you to know that in Government, we live it too.
Here tonight you have a brief respite from those pressures, but you'll be heading back soon enough, back to work where you're working so hard to make change work for your firms and for your country.
I can assure you, we're doing the same, heads are down, evidence and proposals are open on the table.
And we're working through our plans to deliver the policies which will see industry through.
Evidence and options, policies and plans, to modernise the whole economy  -  to keep the whole economy strong.
Based on our long term approach to creating, and sustaining, balanced growth for the whole of our nation.
Driven by our long term vision of a new technology, clean energy, high skill, high wage economy.
It's important to understand what we're already doing, what we've been doing for four years now, to modernise and strengthen our economy.
Because the work we've already done sets the foundation for our plans for the future as well.
In our first years in Government, two great projects drove me.
The first: to lift the nation's human capital.
To give our people more knowledge and skills and get more out of that knowledge and skills as well.
Universities and vocational training.
Fundamental reform with demand-driven funding, investment in much-needed capital  -  and new support for research.
And in coming days, Minister Evans will be announcing some important new measures, designed to underpin both growth and quality in this tertiary sector.
Schools. Investing in teacher quality, ending our national complacency about leaving disadvantaged kids behind ... developing a national curriculum  -  and new transparency through the MySchool website.
Early years education. Improving the quality of childcare ... making it more affordable  -  and expanding access to preschool education.
I want every Australian child to have opportunity  -  and you want every new worker to be ready and able to work.
The second: to reform the nation's workplaces.
To use flexible enterprise bargaining to lift productivity across our national economy.
Setting up Fair Work Australia  -  creating National Employment Standards  -  working to harmonise occupational health and safety.
As part of a plan to compete with the world on knowledge and skills. 
A plan to unlock the real drivers of future productivity.
And in our year of decision and delivery, I am still pursuing reforms to unlock productivity for the years to come.
Clean energy, to create new jobs in new industries  -  a price signal leveraging billions of dollars in new investment.
High speed broadband, to link every part of Australia to every part of the world.
A tax on mineral resource rents, to cut company tax for every Australian firm  -  to add to the national pool of savings through higher superannuation  -  and to build regional infrastructure.
Skills and participation reforms, to move people from days of exclusion and idleness into work and to lift the capacity of all Australians to get good work and support a growing economy.
Personal tax reform, to reward participation in work.
We're delivering a long term plan for balanced growth  -  one which has long been in train.
We're also walking the reform road in Government every day.
I lead a modern Labor Government  -  we know no other way.
Because Labor charted this reform road ourselvesin the great days of Hawke and Keating.
And because the great lesson of the 1980s is that reform isn't easy, but it works.
That while the pressures are real, and painful, industry and Government have to stand firm against populist voices. 
I know industry is standing firm. I know you understand: There can be no return to closed door policies.
Because the Australian economy has been the great beneficiary of open trade in the world  -  our economy has changed, our firms have adapted, our people have prospered.
Because our challenge, as exposure to the global market only grows, is to build new capability which allows us to prosper anew.
And just as we all understand we can't look back, we also all know none of this means leaving manufacturing behind.
The investments and reforms the Government is making create great new opportunities for manufacturing helping them climb the value-add chain.
More innovative enterprises and more skilled workers will make manufacturing stronger than almost anything we can do.
A clean energy economy with economic incentives for new clean jobs will see new goods manufactured for new markets.
A high technology economy with high speed broadband around the country will see manufacturing performed in much more sophisticated ways.
These benefits hold true  -  not only for manufacturing but for retail and tourism and education  -  for every part of our broad and diverse economy. 
So Government and industry will be working together to do just that. 
At the Tax Forum, at the Future Jobs Forum, we'll bring good people together, get the best evidence and ideas.
And we're working through practical new steps, like our reforms to the anti-dumping system, the first of which are expected to pass the Parliament this week.
But the most important decisions won't be made at Cabinet, in Parliament, or in a Forum.
The most important decisions will be made in boardrooms, in corner offices, as every business and every firm makes the decisions which will make change work for them.
Your decisions will be the most critical to our future.
Decision made by leaders and firms who will survive and thrive not just by understanding the long term structural change that the economy is undergoing, but by bravely embracing the right risks to pursue the rich rewards from change.
Through new strategies: to diversify into new goods and services, to find a new point of connection to a production process, to restructure your operations or team up with an old competitor or a new supplier.
Making an old business new, or starting a new business from scratch, requires new investment decisions which embrace sound risks.
New investment, not just in machinery and equipment but in developing new goods and services and skilling and re-skilling people as well.
So you need to weigh up the returns on a range of potential investments in deciding how to proceed in a changed economic environment.
And while you live the risk and rightly reap the reward, it's vital that public policy settings don't hold business back  -  that they don't hinder businesses taking smart risks.
Perhaps no system of policy settings is more central to business planning than business tax.
We need new flexibility in the tax system now if business is to thrive in an economy undergoing significant structural change.
We need to be sure that Australia's business tax system doesn't hold industry back.
The Henry Review outlined some of the specific problems.
When the tax system hinders investment in a struggling business, or discourages lending to a business with a new idea, it does more than add to patchwork pressures.
It harms national productivity as well.
Giving workers more capital, more and better machines, new technologies and smarter ways of doing business  -  all this investment adds to productivity.
And it is vital for making change work for us as well.
For business to grow when the competitive winds are with them; to stand fast when the winds are against them; and to change when they can stand fast no more.
You need investment flows to be flexible if business is to thrive in an economy undergoing significant structural change.
You deserve the flexibility and incentives to do your job  -  to make the decisions which you know will help your businesses to seize the opportunities change creates.
This is something I want the Tax Forum to consider next month.
The Tax Forum will be an opportunity to start to discuss options for a business tax system which supports decisions to change.
To start discussing new ways to ensure our business tax system adds to the flexibility of the Australian economy  -  not just now, but for the future challenges and opportunities that we may face.
Let me give one example of the kind of change we have already made  -  a change which could be a model for further reform in the tax system over time.
In the 2010-11 Budget, the Government made an important change to the tax system to make investments in long lived infrastructure more attractive.
We recognised that the tax system was getting in the way of much needed investment in infrastructure. 
As you all know, traditionally, business profits are taxed immediately.
But when a business is in a loss position, expenses associated with investment are not recognised in the same timely way.
Instead, they are carried forward to offset future profits  -  but at their face or nominal value.
So for long lived investments, where it takes some time for projects to move from loss making to profit making endeavors, old expenses don't have much value by the time you can cash them in.
This is a distortion which can make what would be viable infrastructure projects unattractive after tax.
And this is why in the Budget we announced that from next year, tax losses incurred in investments in eligible infrastructure projects will be uplifted to maintain their value over time.
For the first time, these losses will also be able to recouped even where there is a change in ownership of the project.
A smart and practical change to the system  -  but more.
A model for reforms to enhance flexibility.
The type of flexibility which I'd like to see discussed more at the forum next month.
A model for further reform in the tax system over time.
Removing distortions, lifting barriers, delivering flexibility, making change work, encouraging enterprise, rewarding risk.
Friends, I don't shareMargaret Thatcher's values.
But one of her most famous remarks does rather summarise the position of the Australian economic debate today.
There is no alternative.
What government and industry have done together in the past few years, what we'll do together in the coming months: growing jobs, getting back into the black, staying on the reform road, making the decisions for the long term. It is the only way.
We won't solve patchwork pressures by giving in to populist pressures.
We won't create jobs by always telling people what they want to hear.
What we're working on together is the serious economic plan, with the serious economic team, charting the serious way forward.
We're optimistic and determined, confident and ready to work.
To modernise the whole economy ... to keep the whole economy strong. 



It's a great pleasure to welcome you to the nation's capital to share in this important gathering.
TTF is a serious organisation with a serious agenda.
Through your advocacy and research over 21 years, you've earned a front seat in the reform conversation.
I'm proud to share and extend that conversation here with you this morning.
With our historic Clean Energy Future Bills currently in the Parliament, there couldn't be a better time to emphasise the timeliness and urgency of reform.
Reform is what we do to ensure the future is better than today.
Reform means taking care of the nation's business.
The hard tasks that never become easier with deferral and delay.
As advocates for infrastructure, you understand what I mean.
You watched through the 2000s as the project list grew longer and the political will grew shorter.
An infrastructure deficit compounded by a skills deficit.
By repeated, failed plans to roll out nation-wide broadband and deal with Telstra's market domination.
By a tax and welfare system that penalised effort and kept too many working-age people out of a job.
And a succession of false starts on dealing with the scientific and economic reality of climate change.
Labor came to government to do the nation's work.
It hasn't always been perfect.
But that decade worth of backlog is now being broken away, piece by piece.
Our reforms have always been the right thing for the nation.
But they take on an even deeper significance as the Asian century unfolds before us.
Yes, we are in period of uncertainty due in part to events in Europe and the US, and I don't underestimate their seriousness for a moment.
But it is precisely our location in the Asia Pacific, at the right time in history, that positions us very differently than before.
Thanks to the work of reform since 1983, and really since Whitlam cemented ties with China in 1972, our fortunes have increasingly been connected to the dynamism of the region in which we live.
Well and truly within our lifetimes, the economies of China and then India will surpass the United States economy in size.
By just 2030, two-thirds of word's middle class consumers are expected to be located in the Asia Pacific region.
Like us, they will enjoy access to international travel, purchase consumer goods and services, and seek excellent levels of education.
To put it simply, Asia will not only be the world's biggest production zone but also the biggest consumption zone.
As a result, the Australian economy of the future will look different to the economy of today.
The demand for minerals that results from Asia's growth is not a short-term mining boom like the late 60s or the early 80s.
Our terms of trade are high and may remain high for decades.
We need to be honest about the change that this is bringing to our economy.
This long-term transformation is creating pressure on sectors that export or compete with imports, and that pressure is unlikely to recede.
Industries like manufacturing and tourism will have a place in the future Australian economy, but only if they continue to become smarter.
With investments in quality, technology and innovation, we know that they can be.
Indeed, we should be confident that with Asia's transformation comes Australia's opportunity.
It means rising demand for minerals and petroleum products.
But it means so much more.
Asia's rise means growing markets for our services and quality manufactured goods.
In fact, it's worth keeping mining in some perspective.
Despite the big increase in mineral prices, Australia earned more from providing services to China last year than it did from selling coal.
Since 2003, the mining sector has grown at an annual average rate of 1.8 percent, while the services sector has grown by 3.1 percent.
Services exports to China have grown at an annual rate of about 20 per cent over the past decade.
Jobs in mining itself don't even begin to exhaust the opportunities that are emerging from Asia's expansion.
There is a rich cluster of associated industries such as engineering, logistics and transport, chemical products such as explosives, and information technology.
Add to it finance, accounting and legal services.
Tourism and education.
Fine food and wine.
Creative industries and media.
Things Australia is good at.
Things Asia will want to buy.
Our priority, as it has always been, is to create jobs and seize opportunities for Australia:
To achieve sustained prosperity for the whole nation, brought about through balanced economic growth.
But only the reform road takes us there.
Reform for our needs and reform for our times.
I am frequently disappointed, but never surprised, when I hear pundits say that all we need to do is raise the GST and bring back WorkChoices and all will be well.
It is a narrow analysis that completely misreads the circumstances in which Australia is placed.
An illusion that misrepresents the past and endangers the future.
It misrepresents the past because the prosperity of the 2000s, though real, was in many ways lazy prosperity.
Productivity fell behind.
We didn't invest in the capabilities that could make the Asian century work for us.
If we are to build a modern, strong, resilient economy, it will take more effort on the things that have not been a big part of our economy in the past.
Like clean energy, innovation, infrastructure, skills.
That is how we create jobs and opportunity in the 21st century. 
The things we didn't do in the 2000s.
The things that will modernise our economy to make it more productive.
That's why our Government from day one in 2007 has put in place the building blocks to gear our economy to unlock competitiveness and enhance growth.
Addressing patchwork pressures, and keeping our whole economy strong.
We will continue to invest in people through better training so they can get new jobs and better jobs.
That's why in the last budget we outlined a $3 billion skills package and measures to promote workforce participation.
With the NBN, we will make Australia the most connected continent on the planet.
The NBN is expected to generate some $37 billion of economic activity over the life of the project.
Remember that innovation from ICT is the single biggest driver of business productivity.
It drives 78% of productivity gains in service businesses and 85% in manufacturing businesses.
Not cutting wages and conditions.
We will continue building the infrastructure that gets our goods to market and our people to work.
We're making long term infrastructure investments
Like urban rail projects to unclog our cities.
Port facilities to free-up our exports.
Tackling the big legacy projects like completing the Pacific Highway upgrade by 2016.
And improving the quality of infrastructure through reforms to taxation and the way we plan for the future.
We will protect our soft infrastructure'  -  our people  -  with health, disability and aged care reforms that shield them from the misfortune that can touch us all.
Reforms driven by transparency, quality and choice.
We will create a seamless national economy, where federalism works for our nation's interests not against them.
A national school curriculum to help families who move interstate.
National regulation of the medical and legal professions.
National workplace and OH&amp;S laws.
Single national regulators for the transport sector.
A one-stop shop to register business names instead of separate systems in every State and Territory.
We will keep reforming the tax system to reward effort and foster innovation.
We've cut taxes most for the lowest paid and to attract those outside the workforce.
We will help maximise the benefits from the mining boom to increase competitiveness across the entire economy through a cut to the corporate tax rate and tax breaks for small business.
At next month's Tax Forum, we will discuss options for a business tax system that supports, rather than inhibits change.
A business tax system that adds to the flexibility of the Australian economy will help us make the most of challenges and opportunities that we face.
And friends, we will create a future where economic growth is decoupled from emissions growth, and carbon finally has a price.
Not just because it's right thing for the environment and for future generations.
But because our economic prospects demand it.
Global investment will flow to countries that have made the switch to a low carbon future and have efficient and modern industries.
Australia's businesses will find increasing international demand for their research and technologies that generate less pollution and reduce energy consumption.
Don't let anyone tell you our carbon price legislation won't lead to change.
It will put change on steroids.
By 2050, the share of Australia's electricity coming from renewable sources will increase from 10 to 40 per cent.
We'll see $100 billion invested in renewable energy.
We will see sweeping changes in our energy supply, in our industrial production and consumer behaviour.
The nations that succeed in the 21stcentury will be those that decouple economic growth from carbon pollution growth.
The rust bucket, smokestack economies will be those that get left behind.
I don't want Australia to be one of them.
That's why pricing carbon truly is a generation-defining policy decision.
Friends, the legislation to achieve these things is before the House of Representatives, literally today.
The fourth time this issue has come before the Parliament.
Two decades since the need for action was signalled at the Rio Earth Summit.
After all those years of discussion and debate, the time for words is over.
The time for deeds has arrived.
Business always claims that it seeks certainty and fears its absence.
I offer these two certainties today:
 * 	The carbon price will be law by Christmas.
 * 	The carbon price will commence on July 1 and today's claims that the sky will fall in, will be shown to be silly, reckless and wrong.
That is the certainty I bring to the table.
The uncertainty comes from the other side of politics who are not just content with denying the science and denying the economics.
They are prepared to surrender our nation to the chaos and confusion of ripping this carbon price out of the Australian economy:
Rescinding tax cuts.
Rescinding pension increases.
Destroying private property rights.
Unravelling commercial loans.
Creating another decade of uncertainty.
And only ensuring that we have to go through it all over again.
Just like Fraser junked Medibank and we had to go through it all again under the Hawke Government to reinstate Medicare.
Because the science won't go away.
The economics won't go away.
Therefore this is our best and last chance to get this right.
To get it right.
And keep it right.
Friends, this conference is about leadership.
My Government's task is to lead our country through this period of transformation.
To help navigate us towards a better future.
We are a young nation with an incredible capacity for self-renewal.
We did it in the postwar era with the immigration program.
We did it in the 60s and 70s through progressive social change under Dunstan, Whitlam and Wran.
We did it in the 80s and 90s with the Hawke-Keating reforms to our economy.
This is a nation capable of thinking big and looking far ahead.
It is not the fearful nation that others are appealing to.
I don't recognise Australia in that version of our nation.
It is not the Australia I know and believe in.
My Australia is a nation that has done great things and will do them again.
We will manage change.
We will face the world.
And together we will succeed.
Thank you very much. 



Can I acknowledge today:
David Whitely, Chief Executive, Industry Super Network.
Ged Kearney, President of the ACTU.
Jeff Lawrence, Secretary of the ACTU.
The Honourable John Cain, Former Premier of Victoria.
I see Garry Weaven. 
Garry doesn't need an introduction from me to a room like this  -  a giant in this industry  -  still working for the good guys too.
And I see so many other comrades and colleagues, allies and friends.
Friends, there are some rooms where you feel like a visitor, some like a friend, some where you feel like you're at home.
For any Labor Prime Minister, a room full of industry super funds people is a good room to be in.
Because universal superannuation is a great Labor achievement.
Universal super is a great Labor reform.
Some people in Australia had always had superannuation, it took Labor in Government to make it universal.
That is how we govern.
Informed by our values  -  and walking the reform road.
Determined to spread opportunity to all and determined to leave no one behind and determined to bring those values to concrete reality through visionary economic reform.
Every Australian is better off because of the decision to introduce universal superannuation.
It's built greater security for every Australian worker.
Lifting income in retirement.
And it's built a savings pool for the whole Australian economy.
So the world's seventeenth biggest economy  -  has the fourth biggest pool of managed funds on the globe.
The founders of universal superannuation saw the opportunities on the reform road  -  and measured them with hard headed analysis of the economic environment of their day.
We do the same now.  And hard headed analysis is required.
Despite Australia's strong economy, we've all been given pause for thought  -  frankly, cause for concern  -  by recent developments in Europe and the United States.
There's concern at the kitchen table.
Australians are acutely aware of the escalation in volatility in global financial markets in recent months  -  and of the direct implications for each of them through their superannuation and through the investments in many portfolios.
I know many Australians are watching these developments anxiously. Some retired, some about to retire. To them I say:
In this period of uncertainty, the Government I lead will manage the economy in the interests of every Australian.
We will leave no one behind.
There's concern at the global economy's top table too.
The International Monetary Fund has warned that the global economy has entered a dangerous new phase and that downside risks are growing.
The Treasurer is in the United States this week, as you know.
There, he's told global policymakers that while some important steps have been taken, there remains much more to do.
That we cannot ignore the risk that a financial market dislocation in Europe could be transmitted through the global real economy via a big hit to confidence and a reduction in world demand and output.
That while the developing world continues to grow strongly, a loss of confidence could further impact on the already soft recoveries struggling to keep momentum in advanced economies.
That swift and credible action is required to restore confidence among global markets that governments particularly in Europe do have the capacity to resolve this situation.
And as the Treasurer and I have spoken in recent days, we have reflected that in a period where so many are uncertain, these messages must be sent very clearly.
In the world  -  and at home.
So the message to the world is clear:
There is a problem in Europe.
Solutions must now emerge to restore the confidence that markets need. 
Governments must now act.
The message at home is clear as well:
Australia is playing a global role in encouraging a solution.
We are not immune, but we are strong  -  no country is better placed in this challenging economic period.
And we are strong for simple reasons.
First, we have a strong economy, with strong fundamentals.
And second, we have a plan for the future: a plan for growth, a plan for jobs.
The economic story is unfolding day by day  -  with implications for the economy as a whole and for a sector such as yours.
So some background to the current market situation is warranted  -  though many of you here are more than familiar with the course of recent events.
The recent volatility and uncertainty has hurt confidence and increased speculation that downside risks to world growth are beginning to crystallize. 
Two key issues are fuelling the current uncertainty.
First, concerns about the very high levels of government debt in the Euro area and the US.
Second, fears that steps to reduce this debt will retard the patchy recovery of the global economy.
And this combination of circumstances is fuelling significant volatility in European financial markets.
Markets which have been concerned about the private sector's ability to repay debt  -  and which are now worried about whether overseas Governments can meet their debt obligations.
And the EU's measures to increase the flexibility of the European Financial Stability Facility, announced two months ago, remain un-ratified by 12 of Europe's 17 parliaments.
So in the Euro area, markets are now closely examining the potential for a default by one of the highly indebted EU economies  -  and they are weighing up the implications of such an event.
Despite the range of institutional reforms and fiscal adjustments that have been announced across the Euro area, sentiment has deteriorated.
While across the Atlantic markets are genuinely concerned about the strength of the United States' domestic recovery and the likelihood that successful interventions will kickstart jobs and income growth.
In this way, events in the northern hemisphere are conspiring to create a most uncertain outlook.
Australia is playing a global role in encouraging a solution.
Restoring sustainability to European public finances will take years  -  so while that long term repair begins, we need to see solutions emerging to restore the confidence that the markets need.
We are encouraged by the resolve among countries to arrive at a pragmatic solution.
There are signs they are putting the blame-game to one side and working to return confidence and stability to the global financial system.
And European leaders are discussing the need for further changes to institutional frameworks to better align fiscal and monetary policies, including stricter fiscal rules.
But the time for Governments to act is now.
We will continue to take a cooperative and practical approach with our international partners and friends.
Pressing hard for a coordinated global response. 
This week in the US, the Treasurer has been doing just that. 
At home, Australians understand we are not immune from these global developments.
The globally connected nature of financial markets means that volatility in international markets will be felt in Australia, including through returns to superannuation accounts.
But Australians should take some reassurance when these effects  -  and their impact on Australia  -  are seen in their proper perspective.
First, our fundamentals are strong.
Just last week, global ratings agency Standard &amp; Poor's reaffirmed our top-tier AAA-credit rating on the basis of our fiscal strength, strong balance sheet and public policy stability.
We have very low debt  -  our net debt will peak at less than one-tenth of the major advanced economies.
We also have low unemployment because we acted decisively during the crisis  -  in fact the economy has created more than seven hundred thousand jobs since the Government came to office.
We've got some $430 billion of planned investment in our resources sector alone  -  which is stunning relative to our $1.4 trillion economy.
Second, the latest data from our regulatory authorities indicates our banks have negligible direct exposures to peripheral European sovereign debt.
And our advice is there is no Australian bank exposure to Greek public debt.
They also have low exposures to European banks and other borrowers that might be affected immediately by a major financial shock in Europe  -  below 2 per cent of total assets.
Our regulatory environment is the envy of the world.
Our banks survived the global financial crisis  -  they are now better-placed than they were before it.
Stronger capital buffers.
Stronger funding positions than 2007.
Increased holdings of liquid assets  -  up almost half since 2007.
Plus solid profits and relatively low levels of non-performing loans.
We've got a strong and stable banking system which came through the crisis in very good health after many years of tough supervision.
So as they consider the current financial environment Australians can be confident that our banks are well placed.
And third, as they examine their own superannuation, Australians should remember that it is a long-term investment.
Yes, super funds invest widely  -  including in global and local share markets, which have historically generated the greatest long-term returns to investors.
But the majority of super funds also diversify their investments over different asset classes to help minimise the impact of a volatile share market on their members' investments.
Share markets move in cycles and recover from downturns over time, as they did following the GFC.
I know this is no immediate comfort to Australians who've retired recently, or who are about to retire.
They need their savings now  -  and for them, a fall in returns is a cut in take home pay.
This is one reason the government is introducing MySuper.
Not only to ensure workers won't be paying unnecessary fees or charges that erode their retirement nest eggs.
MySuper providers will also be given the option of offering so called lifecycle strategies that automatically reduce the level of investment risk when the member reaches a certain age.
So, for example as theyreachretirement their cash allocation automatically increases.
A smart solution for the kind of complex economic situation which is playing out now.
Looking at the global economic situation, Australians can be reassured.
This country, this government, my economic team, have seen uncertain times and even global crisis before and we have demonstrated our resilience as well.
Australia is not immune from the world, but we are strong in the world.
I would not swap our economic position with that of any country.
We have a flexible economy.
We have a strong mix of trading partners.
We have rich resources and their prices are at all-time highs.
We have talented, hard-working, innovative people.
And we have a plan for the future: a plan for growth, a plan for jobs.
Friends, we have a plan for the future of super as well.
Because the future of super is the future of every Australian.
When the aged pension was introduced, the average lifespan was less than the pension age.
Today, living to eighty is the norm  -  a great thing.
And one British scientist, Dr Aubrey De Grey, has ventured to say that the person who will live to 150 has already been born.
Perhaps true, perhaps not.
But we are certainly living longer.
And while our working lives are becoming shorter than our non-working lives  -  the choices we hope for and the security we seek in retirement are only growing.
Financial experts generally believe the average worker will need between 60 and 70 per cent of pre-retirement income to live comfortably.
Nine per cent super is simply not enough to get there, especially for women, who have breaks in their career.
This is why the Government I lead will lift compulsory superannuation contributions from 9 to 12 per cent.
Delivered in a manageable way  -  rolled out over the next eight years  -  but wewill get this thing done.
But just increasing super from 9 to 12 isn't enough.
It's not enough for super to be adequate  -  it must be secure.
As a lawyer I acted for female clothingworkers to get their super paid, and it was a privilege to work with those women.
But employees shouldn't need to turn to lawyers or unions to secure basic entitlements like superannuation  -  it should be a normal part of every workplace.
That's why I'm proud of our Securing Super reforms.
Minister Shorten announced the Securing Super reforms last week, so every employee can see with his or her own eyes that super is being paid, in full and on time.
Employees will receive information on their payslips.
So they know when their superannuation will actually be paid into their accounts  -  and so they can monitor their contributions as well.
We're also ensuring that superannuation concessions flow to those who need them most.
It's of particular concern to me that whilst women live longer than men, their super balances are around 35 percent lower.
It is tragic and unnecessary that the financial independence women treasure so much in their working lives should be lost in their retirements.
Currently, around 2 million women get no tax benefit from super because the 15 per cent contribution tax is higher than their income tax rate.
That's why we are acting on the Henry Review recommendation that superannuation tax concessions be distributed more equitably. That starts from 1 July next year.
60 percent of the beneficiaries of this policy will be women.
It delivers $830 million in additional wealth every year to low income Australians  -  the very people who would otherwise struggle to set this money aside.
It's a Labor policy.
A policy I'm proud of  -  a policy with a very simple core:
To make sure no one is left behind.
I do see many friends in the room today, I see many leaders too.
Because when universal super was introduced, Labor introduced another innovation alongside it:
Industry super funds.
This wasn't just a vision of what could be done differently in this country  -  it was a vision of how it could be done differently as well.
Of how the savings of working Australians would not have to be handed to the big banks and old financial houses at the cost of high fees.
A vision of how those savings could be managed by the representatives of working Australians themselves.
A vision that we could spread opportunity to all, that we could leave no one behind and a vision that we could do it our way. 
By sharing, by sticking together.
Today the industry super funds are multi-billion dollar entities.
With the confidence of our community through their good management, strong returns and low fees.
And in a global economic environment where many feel uncertain  -  in a period where many Australians are anxious about their retirement savings and their retirement income  -  industry super funds have a vital role to play.
Adequate retirement income for every working Australian.
Secure retirement savings for every working Australian.
Australians looking to retirement are looking to you.
A great responsibility  -  but a cause for great pride.
You should feel proud that under David Whiteley's leadership, you stood with us from the earliest days in our determination to secure a better retirement for all Australians.
You stood with us to get rid of the conflicts of interest and the excessive fees.
You stood with us to secure the iconic opt-in policy to bring fairness to financial advice.
You stood with us to bring simple, low fee super accounts to every worker who needs one.
You stood with us to distribute super tax concessions more fairly so that all Australians benefit.
You play a role in broader policy debates, on occasion at the vanguard of public policy debates.
Through ISN, you're working with us now on issues from the upcoming tax forum, to banking competition policy and nation building infrastructure.
So yes, universal super is a reform of which Labor Governments are rightly proud.
But universal super is a reform built by leaders in many places and at many levels.
Leaders in unions, leaders in industry, leaders in workplaces, leaders in financial institutions, leaders in ideas.
Many of you here today.
Still leading, still building the future for Australia, still doing it together.
Still spreading opportunity to all, still working to make sure no one is left behind.
Still working for the good guys.
Still walking the reform road. 



Senator the Honourable Stephen Conroy, Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy
Professor Glyn Davis, Vice-Chancellor and Principal, The University of Melbourne
Professor Rod Tucker, Director, Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society and your Institute colleagues.
We are living in a time of sustained global transformation where the nations that survive and prosper are those that modernise their economies.
We face an ageing population, increasing globalisation and the currency impacts of our mineral exports.
We can only meet those challenges if we increase our productivity.
And that means envisaging a whole new economy.
A high tech, high skill, clean energy economy anchored in innovation and creativity.
Boosting Australia's productivity doesn't mean cutting wages and conditions, as if shaving a dollar or two off the hourly rates of shop assistants will make a bit of difference.
It isn't about snatching a few lazy moves out of the Thatcher-Friedman play book.
The big movers of productivity are the capacity investments like quality infrastructure, a skilled and flexible workforce and the ability to innovate and capture new opportunities.
Few investments will bring us a greater return than broadband.
The United Nations has stated that broadband is the next tipping point, the next truly transformational technology.
That's why this Government has put the National Broadband Network and our Digital Economy strategy at the heart of our policy program.
The NBN will make Australia the most connected continent on the planet.
Broadband is an economic game-changer.
Allowing us to do old things better, and to do new things not even yet imagined.
A Deloitte-Access Economics Report released in August estimates that the Internet contributes around $50 billion a year or 3.6 per cent of Australia's GDP.
That's the same size as our agriculture industry.
And it's set to grow by around 7 per cent a year by 2016.
Further, research being released yesterday in Europe by Ericsson and Arthur D. Little finds that every doubling of broadband speed increases GDP by 0.3%
To put this into perspective; the basic service offered under the NBN has a speed of 12 mega bits per second - significantly faster than the 1 to 5 mbps speeds most Australians experience today.  
And think about this:
The single biggest driver of business productivity isn't cutting wages or working longer hours.
It's information technology.
Working smarter.
Information Technology drives 78% of productivity gains in service businesses and 85% in manufacturing businesses.
As exposure to the global market grows, only businesses that innovate and build new capacity can prosper and survive.
We know that embracing new technologies is one of the best ways to achieve that.
Clearly more businesses are making the attempt; clearly many need more help to login.
The most recent ABS survey of business IT use reveals that just 40 per cent of Australian businesses had some sort of web presence in 2009-10.
And among our smallest businesses, the figure was just 29 per cent.
These businesses should not be left behind.
If a search engine can't find you  -  then it is most likely that your customers can't either.
And yet, here we are in the second decade of the 21stcentury, and more than half of all Australians businesses aren't on the Web.
A recent global study by McKinsey found that SMEs with a strong web presence grew more than twice as quickly as those that didn't.
They also had twice the export revenue and twice the jobs growth.
For businesses, the online environment renders distance irrelevant and opens up once unimaginable national and international markets.
Like digital supply-chain systems that allow bottlenecks to be identified in real time and shortfalls in stock to be met.
These are the very real benefits available to business today.
But think of the next wave of innovation that will develop as the NBN brings high speed broadband to all Australian homes and businesses.
The NBN will provide the basis for new methods, processes and products to drive efficiency and productivity growth.
To create and commercialise a whole range of new products and processes that enhance the way companies go about their business.
We know that not all businesses have the skills and confidence to participate.
That is why the Government has committed funding to the Digital Enterprise program, and its predecessor - the Small Business Online program  -  which Senator Conroy will speak more about shortly.
But there are many businesses who are ready to take the next step and see their ideas become reality.
This is why I am delighted to be here today for the launch of the Australian Broadband Application Laboratory.
This laboratory - ABAL - will enable the application and development of new broadband ideas and service offerings.
It will provide the right environment to help companies  turn their ideas into new products and services.
And I congratulate the Victorian Government for its funding and support not only of this laboratory but also their ongoing support for the Institute for a Broadband Society. 
Friends, we know Australians have great skills.
We are smart, innovative, adaptive people.
But our people and our firms need the framework and the opportunity to prosper.
We celebrate stories like Bill Gates the university drop-out who'd started mucking around with computers as a 13-year-old kid.
Or Steve Jobs, building the first Apple computers in his parents' garage.
I sincerely believe that there are people like Steve Jobs and Bill Gates in this country.
In our schools and universities and businesses.
But they need the hardware and the innovative climate to succeed.
People like Lars and Jens Rasmussen who invented Google Maps in their Sydney garage.
They are the sort of people who are writing Australia's economic future.
Just like ABAL will.
Productivity begins here.
In our labs.
In our classrooms.
In our small businesses
In our minds and our creative instincts.
We need a new economy.
It is Australia's non-negotiable passport to the future.
To be up there with the best.
Not stuck behind with the rust bucket, smoke stack economies of the past.
It will be an amazing journey.
The Australian Broadband Application Laboratory will help take us there.
And I very proudly declare it launched. 



Here I'd first like to acknowledge Sid Myer, Group Chairman of Asialink and the Asia Society  -  and of course a leader in philanthropy in Australia  -  along with Jenny McGregor, Asialink and the Asia Society's Group CEO.
Richard Woolcott, Founding Director, Asia Society AustralAsia Centre, one of this country's most eminent diplomats.
Professor Glynn Davis, Vice Chancellor of the University of Melbourne.
Professor Ross Garnaut, now Vice-Chancellor's Fellow, University of Melbourne and who was present at the creation of the modern Australian economy.
The Secretary of my own Department, Ian Watt and the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Denis Richardson, two very trusted counsellors.
Murray McLean, my former Ambassador to Japan. Good to see you again Murray, under less trying circumstances.
John Brumby, a great Premier of Victoria and who remains a great friend.
Robert Doyle, Melbourne's Lord Mayor.
Members of the diplomatic corps.
And can I particularly acknowledge my old colleague Gareth Evans.
Now the Chancellor of the Australian National University  -  and who in a past life set the mould for great Labor foreign policy in a great Labor Government.
Friends, the work of Asialink  -  promoting public understanding, providing information and training, building professional networks  -  only mirrors the good work done by the many people I see here today.
Not only the distinguished guests who've joined us, but by the great variety of Australians in our audience, joined by visitors and friends from overseas.
Reflecting the deep engagement of our people in our region.
And reflecting Asialink's vital mission, working with business, government, philanthropic and cultural partners to initiate and strengthen Australia-Asia engagement.
And given the deep and educated engagement in our region which all of you here represent, I know that the great phases of the Asian story  -  the curves of the arc of our region's rise  -  are more than familiar to you as well.
Two decades of rapid post-war growth and industrialisation in Japan  -  from the ashes of 1945 to be the world's second largest economy in 1968.
Then the years in which South Korea and Singapore, Hong Kong and Taiwan emerged as the Asian tigers'.
Next Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Vietnam opening their markets and pursuing export-led growth.
And now  -  the dramatic emergence of China and India  -  defining our new century in entirely new terms.
You're also more than familiar with the sheer scale of that story as well.
Not just the absolute scale, but the scale in the world as well  -  the way the changes have accelerated  -  the extent to which China and India are increasingly to the fore.
Consider:
As recently as 1990, the Australian economy was larger than the ten economies of ASEAN combined.
Today, we're about two-thirds the size of ASEAN's economies in market exchange rate terms.
Or this:
On the eve of Australia's long run of economic growth, before our two decades of reform-driven prosperity, ours and China's were economies of roughly comparable size in market exchange rate terms.  
Now, remember Australia's been growing for twenty years since and yet on the same basis China's economy is today close to four and half times bigger than ours.
In twenty years, China and India have grown so fast they've almost tripled their share of the global economy  -  and increased their absolute economic size almost nine-fold.
Just two countries, which have grown from less than a tenth of the global economy to almost a fifth, in just two decades  -  and which, over the next two decades, are projected to grow from a fifth to a third.
This incredible economic growth in our region is driving economic and strategic change in our world too.
Asia has never been of greater global significance and as global economic and strategic weight shifts from west to east, global institutional frameworks reflect this in turn.
With no better example than the emergence of the G20 as the global economic forum proper, one where Asia has its proper seat.
The existing habits of co-operation within our region are becoming deeper.
New institutions have emerged and new issues are discussed at them.
And a new shape of interconnections is emerging too.
Creating friendships and partnerships considered unlikely in the recent past, as rivals and even former foes combine to drive regional change in areas as diverse as girls' education, climate change mitigation and capacity-building through aid.
These are changes of type, not of degree.
I summarise our new strategic environment as simply as this.
Australia hasn't been here before.
Here, with our largest export market and largest trading partner neither a democracy nor part of our alliance system, a nation whose economic transformation is in turn transforming the economic and strategic balance of our world.
A new China.
Here, with an English-speaking democracy with 1.2 billion citizens, rising to find its place in the world and our region and on an ocean whose shores we share.
A new India.
Here, with the world's largest Islamic population living in the world's third largest democracy, one remarkable and too little remarked-upon country, every day disproving the millions of words spent arguing that Islam and democracy are incompatible.
A new Indonesia.
Here where new powers are rising and where power relativities are changing too.
Now, it's certainly true that the United States' absolute lead in military power will remain clear for some time to come.
And those who underestimate the power of the American economy to innovate and adapt are very mistaken.
There is always someone predicting the eclipse of America  -  they're yet to be proven right.
So too with the strength of our friend and partner, Japan.
By any measure, a major power, the third largest economy in the world with industry synonymous with quality and innovation.
Yet for all the strength and resilience of Japan and the US, we are now seeing the most profound rebalancing of global wealth and power in the period since the United States emerged as a major power in the world.
Just one illustration of that shift: the emerging and developing world could well be a net foreign investor, while developed countries become net foreign borrowers, as early as 2025.
While so much is new, many old tensions remain  -  and the classical world of inter-state rivalries never really went away.
With no better example than the Korean peninsula.
Where a Republic whose friendship Australia greatly values, at once prospers with a free future and remains threatened by its neighbour.
A rogue state which is a threat to its near neighbours, to the region as whole  -  and to its own captive people above all.
Australia, like every country in our region, is touched by the changes.
And the changes touch some of the most central elements of our national policies.
So for example, much is written on the potential tensions inherent in our economic relationship with China and our Alliance ties.
I'm a decision-maker, not a commentator, and I don't by nature reach for the jawbone or the megaphone. 
But I do say this:  The Government's approach comprehends the challenges and risks.
Certainly, these relationships will not manage themselves and we are far from complacent about them.
But we are far from pessimistic too. 
Because there is nothing in our Alliance relationship with the United States which seeks to contain China, because a growing, successful China is in the interest of every country in the region, including our own and because our national strength, and that of our ally, is respected in the region and the world.
I have no doubt: We can stand strongly in our changing region.
Standing as a mature and confident power.
Strong in the Asian century  -  with an ally in Washington and respect in Beijing.
For our nation and our people, the implications of this Asian century are profound. 
It brings strategic, social, even environmental challenges.
But for Australia, the economic opportunities are how the Asian century begins.
The historic boom in mining investment in the Australian economy is fuelled by Asian demand.
The increase in commodity prices has lifted our terms of trade to a 140-year high.
Driving the biggest resources boom since the 1850s gold rush.
Since 2004, mining investment has increased fivefold.
Just this week, Chevron gave final investment approval to the $29 billion Wheatstone liquefied natural gas development in the Pilbara in our north-west.
It's the fourth multi-billion dollar gas project to gain investment approval in Australia just this year.
Each of them, single projects which over their life attract a scale of investment equal to that of whole industrial sectors in some years.
But there are real challenges in managing the investment boom's effects on the economy.
The patchwork pressures are very real.
It is remarkable that in an economy as developed and diverse as ours, four big mining companies and four big banks could generate seventy five percent of reported pre-tax profits of our largest fifty firms in the last twelve months.
Seventy five percent of profit  -  ninety nine per cent of profit growth.
An extraordinary illustration of the challenges we face, where some parts of the economy are strained by growth while others risk being left behind.
Above all, through the pressures created by our strong dollar, driven in turn by high commodity prices and high terms of trade.
Parity with the US dollar late last year was a first since the 1983 float  -  and now for the foreseeable future, a strong Australian dollar is a new status quo.
A strong dollar, making it harder for our exporters to compete in the markets of the world  -  while mining's hunger for equipment and workers can also raise costs and make it harder for these non-mining sectors to compete for resources at home.
We've made plans to meet these challenges  -  we have an ambitious agenda to modernise the Australian economy.
Investments in skills, so Australian industry can climb the value chain and compete on quality not cost.
Tax reform, using our resource wealth to fund company tax cuts across the board and build our pool of national savings.
Technology investment, especially in high speed broadband, allowing every business in the country to do business more cheaply and more quickly.
Transforming our economy for a clean energy future, with a price signal to deliver change and innovation at the lowest economic cost.
And practical steps to ease patchwork pressures, like streamlining visa processing arrangements for Australian universities and strengthening the anti-dumping regime for firms facing unfair competition from overseas.
But these are only the challenges of the present.
We know that Asian demand creates historic change in Australia and historic opportunities as well.
In the Asian century, what used to be considered our traditional disadvantages  -  our reliance on natural resources, our location in the world  -  become great new strengths.
For much of the post-war period, we were seen as an old' economy.
Overly dominated by primary industry, overly reliant on extraction for export, through a long period when commodity prices were on a steady but continuous decline.
But since 1970, close to four hundred million Chinese have moved to cities, with another two or even three hundred million expected to do the same in the next twenty years.
Now urbanisation may be an elegant, Latinate noun, but it describes a muscular, industrial reality.
It doesn't mean a person moving to a new town, it means a nation building new cities.
And you don't build cities without commodities  -  without, for example, a lot of iron and coal.
A typical Chinese apartment needs six tonnes of steel.
A kilometre of railway needs about seven and a half thousand tonnes.
Each tonne of steel needs more than one and a half tonnes of iron ore and more than half a tonne of coking coal.
Australia has plenty of both and we are reaping the benefits accordingly.
No longer an old economy and no longer subjects of the tyranny of distance' either.
Asia has turned this on its head, giving us what The Economist has neatly termed the advantage of adjacency'.
For the first time, we are closer to the fastest growing and most economically dynamic region of the world than our competitors.
This drives new investment patterns here.
Twenty four years ago, the government of China committed to invest in the Mt Channar iron ore deposit in Western Australia, the first major mining investment outside China. 
By 1990, Chinese investment in Australian had reached $1 billion in today's dollars and from that low base has increased almost tenfold in twenty years.
And it drives new advantages in trade as well.
The sailing time from the Pilbara to Qingdao in China is just 11 days  -  it's 35 days from Brazil.
And it is not only in natural resources where we stand to be beneficiaries of our adjacency to Asian growth.
Here is the paradox:
Yes, Asian growth and Asian demand is driving a rise in the dollar and the rise in our terms of trade which put sectors under pressure.
Education, tourism, parts of retail, manufacturing in particular. 
But while Asian growth is creating new conditions, new competition, it is creating the future demand as well.
Because yes, the new Asian middle class lives in apartments and catches urban trains built on our coal and iron.
But they'll do more. 
They'll fill those apartments with high-end manufactured goods, dine on clean, high quality produce and drink premium wine.
They'll look to countries like Australia for tertiary educations and for technical skills, they'll travel in new ways, seeking new custom-made holiday experiences, not the package tours of former years and through life they'll want sophisticated financial advice and the benefits of the world's best medical services as well.
And in doing all this, the new Asian middle class will give Australia an opportunity to make our whole economy strong.
The challenges for Australia are significant, the structural adjustments forced on us are real.
The economic opportunities are enormous as well.
The Asian century has begun and my Government is leading Australia through its challenges and towards its opportunities now.
Investments and reforms to keep the whole economy strong.
Easing patchwork pressures, creating jobs and spreading opportunity, so no person and no place is left behind.
And pursuing our interests in the world.
That means maintaining economic openness.
The key to growth in the region and jobs at home  -  working in the G20 to deal with structural imbalances, at APEC to open the region as a whole, alongside a Free Trade Agreements agenda to deepen country-to-country economic ties.
It means developing effective regionalism.
Groups with the right membership and mandate to address the full range of security, political and economic issues facing the region. We've got the EAS off the starting blocks now but there's a long race ahead.
It means maintaining strong bilateral relations with our key regional partners. 
Strengthening new relationships while nurturing existing ones.
It means a strong Australia-United States Alliance.
A continuing, strong stabilising role for the United States in our region, the vital role it has played now for sixty years. 
It means a strong defence force to reinforce Australia's strategic influence, founded on the principle of self-reliance.
Delivering the significant new capabilities developed through the Force 2030 White Paper.
These are the things we do now, the things we must do.
They are the usual business of government  -  but in the Asian century, business as usual is not enough.
Because what we know clearly is there isn't a single aspect of government policies and national planning that won't be touched by the great changes to come.
Food security and foreign investment, immigration and education, stock market structures and financial regulation, energy policy and environmental standards.
This is a vast landscape of change.
Some parts of this landscape we can see already, and the challenge there is to set our course, while some parts are uncharted still.
Now, perhaps that is no surprise.
The growth and change in Asia is something really new, to adapt an expression from another century, this is a change of world-historical significance.
When Great Britain industrialised, it took seventy years  -  the whole period from 1830 to 1900  -  for its economy to quadruple.
I'm Welsh, by birth, and the things that happened for good and ill in that industrialisation are the mythology of my own family and are marked in the families of millions.
It was an industrial revolution which changed almost everything. 
It redrew the map of Africa and painted half the atlas pink.
It created industrial politics and Labor Parties and defined the essential outlines of the democratic structures we live with today.
It remade private life, changing everything from the shape of the family home and the layout of cities to the experience of childhood and what it meant to be a woman.
Now that happened when the economy of Great Britain, a nation of millions, grew by a factor of four over seventy years.
In the last twenty five years the economy of China, a nation of 1.3 billion, has grown by a factor of twenty.
Already the world's largest manufacturer, the world's largest exporter, the world's largest consumer of energy, already the world's second largest economy, on some projections, on track to be the world's largest in twenty years.
And India is rising too.
Set to surpass the US economy for size by mid-century in purchasing power terms.
Enormous economic changes.
At these rates, China doubling the size of its economy every eight years ... India every eleven years and Indonesia every fifteen.
Enormous economic changes  -  human changes too  -  creating enormous human opportunity.
Millions of people leaving absolute poverty absolutely behind.
While Asia now has a large and rapidly growing middle class.
Within a few years, it will be bigger than that of the rest of the world combined, North America and Europe included.
China is already the world's largest consumer market for automobiles and for computers  -  not the largest maker, the largest buyer.
With the world's greatest number of internet users and the most users of mobile phones as well.
Now when a person first gets a car, a computer and a mobile phone, it changes their life.
When hundreds of millions of people first get these things, it changes the world.
As I recall the histories I read as a child, I can't put aside this thought: chapters of great change often seemed to open with the words the middle classes were rising.
This rapid growth in much of Asia will change the social and economic, strategic and environmental order of our world.
And while Asia's rise has been with us for a lifetime, China and India remain relatively poor countries in per capita terms, with decades of growth ahead.
These changes have barely begun  -  these changes will define our future.
That is why I announce today that the Government has commissioned a White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
To ask and answer the great national questions through this period of great national change.
There will be plenty of hard questions  -  and not all of them will have easy answers.
We have asked one of Australia's finest public servants, Dr Ken Henry, to lead work on the preparation of this White Paper.
The task we have set Dr Henry and his team is substantial.
There is the intellectual task of the White Paper itself: fully to comprehend the implications of the Asian century, fully to describe its opportunities and risks.
There is the public task of the process of its development and discussion: to ensure these implications are understood in every part of our nation.
And there is the task to set the pattern for more work over time.
Providing the analysis and understanding which will ensure that every part of Government is working with the same approach.
Offering the information and advice which allows every part of our business community to make the most of their ability to prosper and profit in this new world.
The Asian century ideas which define a financial market reform or test the priority for an education investment.
The Asian century approach which comprehends the economic and environmental context for getting the cleanest energy at the cheapest price to the customers who need it most.
Naturally, I expect a person of Dr Henry's policy credentials will offer some well defined and immediate insights  -  and that these will lead to some specific initiatives for implementation during this term of Government and the next.
But the real aim is higher.
The White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century should generate a set of general propositions to guide policy development over the long-term.
To guide preparations over the next five years for major policies and projects which would become reality over the next ten to fifteen.
This will be a thorough and traditional White Paper process.
Formal terms of reference and details of the governance of the White Paper are being released today.
The terms of reference are wide but it should be noted the White Paper will not review the decisions outlined in the Defence White Paper Force 2030. 
A new Defence White Paper is due in the first quarter of 2014 and preliminary planning for this is already underway.
The terms of reference also reflect my view that we are not on a quest for more regional or indeed global architecture.
Our challenge is to ensure new institutions like the G20 and the EAS have growing meaning and purpose.
As my advisor, Dr Henry will lead work on the preparation of the White Paper.
A Committee of Cabinet including external advisers will be established, supported by an appropriate Secretaries Committee to review progress.
Dr Henry will be supported by an officials taskforce based in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet with representation from the Treasury and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and other agencies as required.
The White Paper will include an intensive process of consultation with the Australian community, business, academia and international partners.
A series of public consultation forums will be held and the process will call for submissions from interested parties.
The White Paper will be considered by the full Cabinet in the first half of 2012 and released during the middle of the year.
The White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century will make a major contribution to public debate and establish major new directions for public policy.
A national blueprint for a time of national change.
These are historic changes.
Change isn't easy, change has never been easy.
But Australians always make change work for us, turning our creativity and co-operation to the task.
We haven't been here before.
We truly are already a decade into an Asian century.
A great future is there for us  -  there for us if we understand and explain these great changes  -  there for us if we make great decisions as well.
Australians should be optimistic.
Not because change is always good  -  but because Australia is always good enough to make the best of change.
And Australians should be determined.
Because the prize is rich indeed.
A peaceful, open, rules-based Asian system.
Effective regional institutions, respect for all countries of the region, large and small.
Space for a rising China.
A robust alliance between Australia and the United States.
That is the Asian future we seek in the Asian future we face.
That is the task, one together we share.
To build a great future for our own great nation. 



Thank you very much, and can I start by acknowledging all of our friends at North Melbourne who make today possible, to James, to Eugene, and of course to that well known Shinbone supporter Simon Crean, my very great friend.
Can I also acknowledge our friends from Geelong who are here today, Colin Carter and Brian Cook, a great day for Geelong. And can I acknowledge all of the people from Collingwood as well, and when I say people there's really only one person, it's Eddie McGuire.
Eddie McGuire likes to be known as a man of the people, but of course he's football royalty. This came through to me very, very strongly at last year's grand final, where an AFL assistant was out with another assistant saying We should get some water to people. There's Andrew, we'll get a water bottle to Andrew. There's Eddie, we'll just get this woman to pass a water bottle to Eddie.'
It was a member of my security team who said That woman's the Governor-General and she's not here to pass water to Eddie McGuire'. He's definitely football royalty.
I sat at the grand final last year next to Andrew Demetriou, who barracked for a draw from the moment the ball bounced, right til the end. I've never sat at the footy before when someone is screaming, absolutely screaming hit the boundary' when the scores are level. That's what I had to put up with last time. So no one's saying draw today, we don't want a draw.
But it did give me the opportunity to go and spend the second grand final with our troops in Afghanistan and I know when the national anthem is sung today we'll all be spending a moment thinking about them.
But I do want to say that I've got some problems, Andrew, that I wanted to raise today with you. I've got some problems with the new teams, I've got some problems that we're using Kevin Sheedy, as much as I love him, as the person to take the great game of AFL to Western Sydney. After all, he talks like Yoda  -  no one is going to understand him.
And what about Gary Ablett? He can't even win the tipping competition. I did better than him in the tipping competition. Well, I suppose that's what happens when you have to tip the Suns every week.
Andrew, you've got these new teams wrong. I gave you the advice a few years ago and it's not too late to take it. One of the new teams should be called The Rangas, that's what we need a team of rangas. A few stalwarts on the ball, Dustin Fletcher down back, he's going to play forever. Bluey McKenna in the coaching box and Brownlow winning captain Adam Cooney, the original ginger ninja himself. The Rangas could be a great team, Andrew. It's not too late.
But there are no rangas and no Dogs playing today, so I've had to make a decision between the two teams available  -  Collingwood and anyone but Collingwood. So yes, I've gone for anyone but Collingwood. I'm going for Geelong. I'm consoling myself that I'll get to see Podsy play. We used to watch him at the Werribee Tigers, he was a legend then and he's going fantastically now. So Geelong for Podsy, Geelong for today.
I've had some great footy moments this year, even if I haven't had the grand final that I wanted. I did get to teach President Obama how to handball, I did get to spend some times at the Presidents Lunch at the Werribee Tigers, as well as some Dogs games. So I've has some great footy moments.
But I'm actually here for another great footy moment, because it's my incredible honour to be able to announce to you the Football Personality of the Year. Everybody would say he's big, some would say he's bad, I would say he's beloved. The Football Personality of the Year - Barry Hall.
[ENDS] 



Thank you very much, and can I, too, start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and in the spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and present.
Can I welcome each and every one of you to this tax forum, particularly my Federal Parliamentary colleagues. We are here mob-handed to participate in the events over the next two days.
What I wanted to do at the start of this forum was to set the context for its discussions and to outline the principles that I believe we should bring to the discussions in the forum over the next two days.
In doing that, I wanted to talk to you about what's happening in our nation, what's happening in this Parliament House, and what I believe should happen in this room during the course of the discussions.
First, to what's happening in our nation. It's a nation worthy of tribute and we often forget to pay that tribute to the great nation we live in. I want to pay a tribute to the work that we have done together over 30 years of hard economic reform, ensuring that the Australian economy is the envy of the world and is a resilient economy. We've done it together and it's been painstaking work driven by a reform zeal and I want to thank the people in this room for their participation in much of that painstaking work.
I also want to pay a tribute to our nation and to the people in this room and beyond who worked together so that our nation came though the global financial crisis strong. We did it together, each and every one of us, Government playing its proper part, but working with employers and unions, working right across this great land of ours to keep people in work during such a profound global economic shock, and I thank you for the work that we've done together to ensure that our nation came through that strong.
The backdrop to today's discussions, consequently, isn't one of doom and gloom. If we were meeting in almost any other Western democracy we would be having a very different dialogue - a dialogue against a backdrop of high unemployment, of low growth, of great anxiety.
We aren't having that discussion here today because our economy has emerged strong from the global financial crisis. Instead, the backdrop to our discussion is one that is a rich tapestry of opportunities and we need to focus on those opportunities over the next two days.
But like any great era of opportunity there are risks - risks we need to understand and navigate and discuss over the next two days.
So, let me take you to the five factors that I believe are shaping our nation and our economy today, as the backdrop to these discussions.
First, the overhang from the global financial crisis and the continuing volatility that we see in the world economy. Because we came through the global financial crisis strong, we often underestimate its continuing effects on our economy and on the psychology of our nation. We are continuing to see direct, tangible effects for Government and for businesses, but we are also seeing intangible effects on our economy and the participants within it.
There has been a knock to confidence, a greater understanding of risk and a greater feel of what changes in the world economy can bring. Against this backdrop of loss of confidence we've seen continuing volatility on world financial markets, concerns about the sluggishness of the US economy and concerns about the need for Europe to get its house in order.
As a result of all of these factors we do continue to see an economy in which people lack confidence and are concerned about the future. It's important in this age that we are reliable interpreters to the Australian people of the strengths and opportunities in our economy, as well as what is happening in the global economy. It's important that people have a deep understanding of the trends in the global economy, but that we aren't spooked - understanding, but not frightened.
I'm always struck as Prime Minister, as I travel this great nation of ours, how much people are now attuned to movements in the global economy. I think an overhang of the global financial crisis is people are now more strongly attuned to global economic events and to messages of risk and we need to understand that in our discussions today about our economy and about how our tax system can best serve it.
Second, our economy, our nation, is being shaped and reshaped by the Asian century. We are 10 decades in to that century and the story of this century is one of Asian growth.
It means that even in difficult days in the global economy we live in the right part of the world. We have an advantage of adjacency - being in the region of the world that continues to grow strongly.
That presents continuing economic opportunities for us.
The economic opportunities flowing from the demand for our resources is very clear to all of us. As China, as India, as the nations in our region continue to grow, they will be strong demanders of the things that we have to sell  -  of coal, of iron ore and of resources beyond that. This is a great opportunity for our nation and one we are seizing now, but we also understand that this opportunity brings pressure to other parts of the economy, that the record terms of trade and continuing strong Australian dollar are putting pressures on manufacturing, on tourism, on international education and other trade exposed sectors.
So, the story of today's economy is of a patchwork, and we need in our discussions to be very clear as to what that means for opportunity right around our nation, and what that means for pressures on jobs and businesses in parts of our nation and sections of our economy.
Describing this phase of economic transformation and growth we use the language of boom, but the language of resources boom often gives us the impression that this will be short-lived. Indeed, a lot of this nation's history has been written around resources booms inevitably followed by busts.
We are in a different economic phase, and we shouldn't let the language of boom deceive us. It is a boom. It is a huge opportunity for growth in our resources sector and great opportunities for jobs and wealth creation as a result, but it is likely to be sustained for a very long period of time, and that means that transformations in our economy that it is driving will be deep and occasionally painful.
So, working through our tax settings needs to understand the dimensions of this change and the patchwork economy that is resulting from it.
But the story of the Asian century will be more than the story of this resources boom. It will also be the story of a rising Asian middle class. It is anticipated by 2020 that we will see 1.2 billion people join the middle classes of Asia. That is a huge opportunity for our economy, as those middle classes desire and want to purchase the things that we aspire to ourselves, whether it's the best of food, the best of wine, the best of education, the best of tourism opportunities, the best of legal services, the best of financial services, the best of manufactured goods and beyond, this is a great opportunity for our nation.
So, during this period of our economic transformation there's a challenge for us to nurture the boom, a resources boom, hungry for skills, hungry for people, hungry for infrastructure, to maintain the diversification of our economy during the days of the resources boom and beyond it, so that we are sustaining industries beyond resources despite the contemporary pressures upon them, and we are making sure that we are seizing the opportunities presented by this new, rising, Asian middle class.
Of course, these are the questions we've squarely asked Ken Henry to work through in the Asian Century White Paper, and they form the profound second shaping factor of our nation as we meet today.
Beyond the overhang of the global financial crisis, beyond the resources boom and the patchwork economy, we meet during days when globalisation and the revolution in information and communications technology is reshaping our nation. In this age of mobile capital, we've always got to be conscious of our competitiveness in a ruthless world, and in this age of ever-faster change in information and communications technology, we've got to make sure our nation is keeping up with the best.
The fourth factor shaping our nation is the move to a carbon-constrained future, and despite all the heat and fire in this debate in our contemporary politics, the reality is sensible people from all political parties agree that climate change is real, that we need to address it by cutting carbon pollution, and that the best way of doing that is putting a price on carbon - and we will achieve that in the House of Representatives when it sits next week.
And fifth, the fifth great factor shaping our nation as we meet today, are the changes driven by ageing, being an ageing society, and the changes driven by different burdens of disease in our contemporary society.
We know that our society is ageing. That requires us to do smart things to increase participation in the workforce so that we do not see unsustainable changes in the dependency ratio that close down peoples' abilities to have options and choices as they age, and recognising today that the burden of healthcare falls as a result of chronic disease and disability we need our health system to be more agile and connected in meeting the needs of people with chronic diseases, and we need to do better by Australians who confront a life with a disability, with all of the implications that means to them and their family.
So, they are the factors shaping our nation, the context in our nation as we meet today. The context in this Parliament House is of a parliament that is working and addressing some of the biggest challenges that confront our nation; of a Government that is determined to navigate our nation through this age of change and transformation, driven by two abiding Labor principles: one, of ensuring opportunity for all right throughout our nation; and second, of ensuring that during this phase of economic growth and change we don't leave people behind.
Bringing those principles to our decision making, we have already embarked on a series of major changes to meet the needs of our nation today as it changes, as its economy changes. This includes addressing what I've referred to as the global financial crisis overhang - it means we, as members of the Government, need to be very good explainers to the Australian people of the opportunities in the Australian economy now, of the risks in the world economy, and of what they might mean for us, but also of the resilience of our economy and we are determined to do that.
We are determined to deliver the fiscal consolidation that our economy requires today, and consequently our drive towards a budget surplus continues with determination.
And we are also very motivated to make the best of the opportunities we have on the world stage, including in the G20 and beyond; to have our voices heard as the global economy struggles through what the International Monetary Fund has referred to as a dangerous phase.
Second, we are determined to assist our nation to navigate the opportunities of the Asian century. The White Paper will play a major role, but we have not waited for the White Paper in order to act. We have structured the Minerals Resource Rent Tax because this is the right time for the turbo-charged section of our economy to pay more tax to assist with the other sections of the economy through cuts in the company tax and support to small businesses. It's the right time to grow our pool of national savings through increased superannuation, and it's the right time, too, to be better investing in infrastructure, particularly the infrastructure the mining industry is hungry for.
We're also maintaining our reputation as a great trading nation - out there in the world advocating for trade and trade patterns that will advantage the global economy. This is not an era in which we should turn back to the practices of the past, but as we maintain our role as a great trading nation, we also understand the unfair pressures that can be brought to bear in the Australian economy, which is why we have moved on the anti-dumping regime and we continue to have a good dialogue with business and unions on manifestations of unfair competition.
We are also strongly working with those sectors under pressure as a result of the strong Australian dollar. Whether it's the New Car Plan or whether it's the Knight review of international education, we are determined to work with those sectors of our economy under pressure to sustain diversification during these days of change and in the days that lie beyond the resources boom, however far away those days are.
We're also very determined in these days of change to take a spatial and regional approach to understanding our economy.  We use the language of patchwork deliberately because we know that parts of the nation are travelling very differently; that if you journey around this nation you can go to places screaming for more people, screaming for more growth, and you can also go to places that are screaming about continuing high unemployment and there people worry about a future for their kids, so we've got to bring an understanding of regional economic development and space to our work.
And we've got to be working to sustain the boom with all of the settings in skills and infrastructure that implies, as well as appropriate work on immigration, and we have determined to be guided by that work through the resources round table which brings together participants in the resources industry.
We are also continuing the human capital revolution which I started as Deputy Prime Minister and which is driving us now. In these days of globalisation, even with our natural endowment of minerals wealth and other assets, we increasingly compete on the world stage on the basis of knowledge and capabilities. To ensure that we can always hold our head up high in that competition, we need to be continuing our human capital revolution, from the earliest days of learning for our smallest children through the days of school, through the days of skill acquisition in apprenticeships into the days of university. That reform agenda will continue unabated and the next tranche of major reforms in the human capital revolution is the skills work we have embarked on with states and territories to be delivered using the $3 billion that we set aside in the May budget.
We will address our carbon constrained future through the carbon pricing legislation next week, but also by working with industry, with unions, with all sections of our economy to unleash the forces of a clean energy future, and I believe this is an age of great possibilities for us.
And we have continued to use our market-based reform tools to ensure that we better provide services, whether it be in health or whether it be now in the journey towards a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
This is the Government's reform agenda to meet the great reshaping of our economy and our nation which is going on today, but it has been partnered with a major tax reform agenda as well, and my colleague, the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, will explain to you what has been achieved in tax reform to date, but I would just put an emphasis on one part of what we have achieved in tax reform, and that has been the deliberate decision we made as we put a price on something that we want to see less of - carbon pollution - to put an extra value on something we want to see more of - participation in work.
That is no accident. We have deliberately structured that reform so that it triples the tax-free threshold to send the clearest of possible messages to Australians that we value work and we want them as participants in the Australian economy to see a greater benefit from their labours, whether they be someone on a welfare-to-work journey a woman making a decision to return to work after a period of caring for children. This is an important reform and it is spelling out to you the kind of principles that we bring to tax reform.
So, against that backdrop, what's happening in our nation, what's happening in this Parliament House, what's happening in the Government offices here and what is driving us as we do our work as a Labor Government, we now come to the deliberations in this room, and these deliberations will be wide and they will be broad but I do want to say something to you about the priority I put on the discussions over the next two days.
I want to make sure as our economy is in this time of change that during the two days of this tax forum we are clearly turning our minds to how we can ensure that the tax system does not inhibit the changes we need to make. I've explained some of the forces that are reshaping our economy. Those changes are experienced by individual businesses and individual workers. People will need to adapt in order to prosper, and I want to make that our tax system is not sending them perverse messages as they seek to adapt and change. Indeed I want our tax system to facilitate that change. We have to have a tax system that positions us to take full advantage of the opportunity that growth in our region presents, a tax system that enables us to see the innovation in our businesses that we will need as our economy becomes ever more flexible and ever more responsive to the new opportunities that present themselves. This is a key challenge that faces this tax forum during its deliberations over the next two days.
Now, there is no attempt here to constrain the discussions, but I do want to remind of some things that the Government will bring to bear in its understandings of the work of the Tax Forum and how the discussions today should be taken forward.
First and foremost, we will, over the next two days, be talking about tax, but we shouldn't forget that tax, it has to be raised fairly and it has to be raised efficiently, no-one on their deathbed ever says I wish I'd spent more time with my tax accountant. We understand that, so - fairly and efficiently.
But in raising tax we shouldn't lose sight of the purposes that it's used for. We will be talking about tax, but let's not forget that tax is the money that enables us to be a society together, whether it's meeting our needs for defending our nation or whether it's ensuring that a child can get an operation in a hospital or a disadvantaged kid can get a great start in life through a great education. We need to bear both sides of the equation in mind.
And whilst there are no fetters on what you discuss today, there are two things that will always guide this Government in proposals it takes forward. We are a Labor Government, and that means we will never agree with increasing the tax take or tax burden on the poorest in our community - never have, never will, and no proposition that advocates for that will be taken forward by this Government.
Second, we are a prudent Government, a Government determined to return the budget to surplus, so things that cost have to be paid for, and it is not properly paying for things to say I'll do the spending and someone else can pick up the tab. I'm absolutely sure if you turn to the person next to you and said What about I race down to the shops and spend $1,000 and you give me the money to do it?', you'd probably have a fairly difficult conversation at your table.
Well, life is like that in Government, too. Money spent has to be paid for, clever ideas about spending money have to be managed with clever ideas about where that money is coming from, and that is a challenge for this Forum over the next two days.
Can I conclude by wishing each and every one of you two days of good discussions. We are going to be here in force as a Government and indeed as Parliamentary representatives during the next two days, eager to tap into your insights, eager to hear your perspectives, eager to shape a work agenda that is practical and capable of being taken beyond this room.
Thank you very much. 



Thank you very much to Wayne for those words of introduction, and thank you to all of you, particularly the people who have been on the 3-day journey, for your fortitude and you contributions.
I'd also like to thank Peter Shergold for doing the moderating this morning. To everyone who's engaged in presenting today, to all of the staff who have kept us organised and supported during the course of this event  -  thank you very much.
First, I'm going to start with a sad reflection, which is whilst we have been meeting today, the news has broken that Steve Jobs, the creative genius behind Apple, the iPad, the iPhone, the iPod, has died today, and so as we've sat here talking about innovation, the world has in fact lost one of its leading innovators.
Now, words of condolence are being spoken all around the world for Steve, and I would join in those words of condolence. Flowers are apparently being left outside Apple stores, and already someone has launched on the internet an Apple logo with his face silhouetted against the black background of the Apple logo.
Now, all of this is going to be big news and cause for reflection over the next few days, but as we remember his life it should reinforce in us the belief that innovation can change the world. He changed our world.
As I've moved from session to session today I've thought to myself, knowing about this news, how many people were sitting there on their iPads, taking notes, doing emails in their bit of down time. He's changed our world.
So, innovation can change the world and it can lead to prosperity and opportunity, one of the things that we've been reflecting on today.
Friends, I've taken a number of important insights and reflections from today. Before getting into the meat and potatoes of this concluding address, I want to point out, too, Andrew Liveris said to us this morning passivity isn't a growth strategy, and Steve Vamos said, during his session, whether you want to grow a business or grow an economy, you have to say we want to do this and will do this'.
I want to assure you that it's not in this Government's nature to be passive, and we are very determined, during this phase of economic transformation, to spread opportunity  -  the opportunity for work through our nation during this phase of change; to seize the huge opportunities which will come from the growth of Asia, the resources boom, a clean energy future and the National Broadband Network; that we're very determined to nourish the diversity of our economy during these days of change; and to emerge from the resources boom with an economy more diverse than when we entered into the boom.
And we'll also want to make sure, during these days of economic transformation, that we don't leave people behind.
When I spoke to you this morning I said that my aims for the day included, first, deepening our understanding of today's trends and tomorrow's opportunities, and I believe we've done that. I was particularly struck by Andrew Liveris telling us, in a most compelling fashion across the video link - which came back for us, fortunately  -  he told us about how countries around the globe are preparing for an era of even more intense globalisation, and he urged us to think about how we can fit into this age of globalisation through innovation; through falling in love again with science; through building genuine partnerships between Government and industry.
I think we have shared and deepened our understanding of today's trends and tomorrow's opportunities. We will continue to work with you on that as we develop the Asian Century White Paper. That is, in essence, what it's for.
I also wanted us to emerge with more of an understanding of the future vision for industry sectors under pressure during these days of economic change. I've received good feedback during the course of the day about the great work that has been undertaken by the Future Manufacturing Industry Innovation Council under Kim Carr's leadership, and we need to build on that work.
In relation to another sector under pressure, the tourism sector, I can commit to you that an updated tourism strategy will be released before the end of the year, but we will take two immediate steps for tourism.
First, we will extend business support through Enterprise Connect to tourism, and second, I will ask Nick Sherry to work further on ensuring tourism is ready to capitalise on the advantages that the NBN will bring, given, of course, that today, looking for a tourist opportunity, working out where you want to go, is being driven by the information you can get by going on the internet, and that will be turbo-charged by the NBN.
I can also commit to you, in relation to another industry under pressure, international education, that following the well-received Knight review of international education, Chris Evans will shortly appoint the International Education Advisory Council to continue defining and realising the best vision for the future of that vital sector of the economy.
This morning, I also spoke to you about the aims for today, including having a sophisticated discussion about productivity, and we've done that. The next iteration of the important work about management and improving productivity that is being done by Steve Vamos will emerge from a workshop being held in December, and I will ensure that that important work is shared as quickly and as widely as possible.
Finally, this morning I talked to you about leveraging the resources boom so that it benefits the rest of the economy. That's critical to spreading opportunity right throughout our nation during these days of change.
We've heard, during the course of the day, from right around the room, how urgent it is to support manufacturing during these days of change: to enable it to compete in the new global landscape, and with the headwinds that it is experiencing with the high terms of trade; to enable the sector to move up the value chain; to enable it to more actively link with high-quality research and development taking place in our unis and TAFE; to build the skills that the sector needs to ensure it can access the capital it needs to re-tool and re-equip.
Now, I believe that this task is urgent and it requires a whole-of-government approach. I will therefore establish a Prime Minister's taskforce, drawn from manufacturing industry leaders and unions, to co-ordinate and catalyse the work occurring across government. We need to be in a position to rapidly respond to this structural adjustment.
I will personally chair this taskforce, and Minister Carr will be the deputy chair. Other senior ministers, because this is a whole-of-government task, will be members of the taskforce.
I do genuinely believe that we can be a country that continues to invent things and make things. I want our economy to be one that includes high-quality, good-paying jobs for Australian workers in manufacturing. It's a vital part of our economy, and it's got to be a long-lasting part of our economy.
In addition, I talked to you this morning about some of the work we're already doing through the buying Australia at home and abroad work, and the supplier advocates that we have working to get manufacturing a share in the work being generated by mining, and Peter Beattie has been here as a participant throughout the day.
Today, to build on those efforts, I announce that the Government will move to extend the requirement of Australian Industry Participation Plans for Federal Government grants of $20 million or more, and for grants of $20 million or more to the states and territories where they do not apply their own industry participation plans.
We already require these plans for our own major procurements, the Commonwealth's major procurements, and we will now work with states and territories to ensure Australian suppliers have opportunities to compete for projects and work.
The Commonwealth provides billions of dollars in grants each year. Some of these go direct to industry, some go to infrastructure projects, some are delivered through states and territories. Requiring Industry Participation Plans as part of those grants, I believe, is an important new initiative.
This measure will be consistent with our international trade obligations. We are not taking a step back from our firm belief in the value of open markets. We will work to ensure local suppliers have an opportunity to compete on the level terms in bidding for Government-supported projects.
Now, to get this done we will appoint an implementation working group, and they'll be working very quickly indeed. I'm hoping no-one wanted Melbourne Cup Day off, because the working group will report and finalise what it needs to do by the end of this year.
It will include representatives from industry, unions, Commonwealth agencies, as well as the states and territories.
In addition, the Government will also extend opportunities for Australian industry participation in the enhanced project by laws scheme. Now, this is a tariff concession scheme that provides eligible projects with relief from a five per cent general tariff that applies to imported goods. To be eligible for this concession, major projects have to provide Australian industry with an opportunity to compete for work, but there have been criticisms of the operation of this scheme, and we intend to tighten it so it works better to provide Australian manufacturing with opportunities.
We will be requiring more comprehensive evidence of opportunities being provided to Australian industry. We will be requiring project proponents to list opportunities for Australian industry to participate in major projects on a public website.
We will be requiring project proponents to more regularly report on how their industry participation plans are working and their outcomes, and we will be amending the guidelines to require approval of eligible goods as an additional step for large projects.
In getting this concession, it is important that people respond by being clear and transparent in their conduct. This is something that a number of stakeholders have agitated for. There's no point in having rules unless people can, each and every day, clearly and transparently see that they are being abided by. Consequently, we will require these Industry Participation Plans to be published on a website so I, you, anyone can check on progress against the plans.
This is all about giving Australian business the fair go that it deserves. If you want Australian taxpayers' dollars, then you're going to have to give Australian business a fair chance to compete for work.
In addition to those measures, one of the things that has struck me today in the discussion has been the focus on skills - something very close to my heart. As many of you are aware, we are engaged in a major reform process through COAG on skills development, and we've got reform work also occurring through the National Workforce Development and Productivity Agency. Chris Evans has recently announced some steps to broaden and bring forward the work of this agency and I'll be working with Chris to see what we can do to accelerate that work, and to ensure that in the skills reform process we are responding to the industry sections that we've spoken about today.
We particularly need to be ready to nurture the resources boom with the skills that it needs. We need to be ready to focus on the new skills we will need for a clean energy future. We need to have a focus on the skills development required to take manufacturing up the value chain, and then of course we need to be providing the skills necessary for other industries, including tourism and the huge growth that we are expecting in sectors like health and community services, and also in the professional and technical sections.
So friends, with those words I want to thank you once again for participating in this work. This is not a one-off day. We didn't start with a clean page. We came here having worked with many of you through different arms of government - supporting jobs, thinking about skills development, working on productivity, working on responses to the patchwork economy. I believe through the efforts today we've catalysed that work, we've driven it further, and it's certainly my intention to stay in very close contact with this group and beyond as we continue to drive that work forward.
The transformation in our economy brings challenges, but let's leave this room reminding ourselves of the opportunities. We've got an amazing opportunity to spread wealth from the boom in resources, during the days of the boom to use that wealth and those opportunities to drive depending and diversity in our economy even as we face some strains from the high Australian dollar. We've got a great opportunity through the resources boom and beyond to strengthen our economy for the future so that we emerge with a diversified economy: high skill, high wage, clean energy, high productivity.
That's the journey we've been on today and I thank you for your contribution. 



Prime Minister O'Neill.
High Commissioner Lapani and other members of the Diplomatic Corps.
Your ministerial colleagues and their Australian counterparts who have been meeting in the Ministerial Forum.
Departmental secretaries from PNG and Australia who've been similarly co-operatively engaged this week .
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen  -  welcome all.
Prime Minister, it is my particular pleasure to welcome you to Australia on your first official visit here as Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea. I sincerely appreciate the significance of your visiting Australia so early in your term of office.
We also met at the Pacific Islands Forum last month.I was struck by the Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's remark pointing out that of the ten Parliaments in the world which have no female representation, half of them, that is five, are in our Pacific region.
So I particularly appreciated your leadership in the discussions at the Forum about the need to increase the number of women in regional parliaments. And I want to congratulate you on the leadership you are showing through your Equality and Participation Bill designed to reserve 22 seats in your Parliament for women, and warmly wish you and your Government every success in that endeavour. For our part, Australia will support your efforts through a new one million dollar program to help women political leaders in PNG gain skills in democratic politics.
Prime Minister, PNG stands at a threshold of historic change and opportunity.
And you stand at that threshold with a partner in Australia. A new chapter in the story of our bilateral relations is beginning.
Our nations are each rich in natural resources, our governments each seek to ensure investment in mining and energy resources delivers opportunity for all. With that in mind I am pleased PNG officials working on the development of Papua New Guinea's Sovereign Wealth Fund will soon be able to undertake short-term secondments with a number of Australian institutions. A most valuable and practical form of partnership, and one designed to reinforce your work to strengthen governance and transparency in all your nation's institutions.
We work together for the continued development of Papua New Guinea through our aid program.
I am passionate about education and its capacity to transform the lives of individuals and of nations. So I am very pleased to be able to announce today an additional 20 places for students from rural areas of PNG to obtain teaching qualifications. Another area where partnership is vital.
We are also partners in pursuit of peace and regional stability. Papua New Guinea is an important leader in our region, so I want particularly to acknowledge your encouragement of Fiji to return to democratic government and your significant contribution to the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands.
We respect your historic  -  and continuing  -  preparedness to work with us and in the region to deal with irregular people movement.
We also work together in the wider world. So I am pleased Australia has been able to assist Papua New Guinea Defence Force personnel to prepare for peacekeeping missions in Darfur and South Sudan historic deployments, as the PNGDF prepares to make its first ever contributions to a UN peacekeeping force.
Prime Minister, I spoke recently about Australia's future in the Asian Century.
In the Asian Century, my nation looks north, and when we look north, we see a friend in PNG; we always have. Next year, we will particularly reflect on our history as friends.
I do want to acknowledge, Prime Minister, your announcement yesterday of a generous contribution towards the memorial to mark the sinking of the Japanese transport Montevideo Maru] in 1942. That awful tragedy saw the loss of more than a thousand prisoners of war, mostly Australians captured at the fall of Rabaul, when a US submarine torpedoed the Japanese ship unaware of her human cargo. Thank you for your generous support as we remember one of the saddest moments of the war.
2012 will be a time when both our nations commemorate the seventieth anniversary of many other sad and proud moments of 1942.Those hours when the best among both our peoples were quite literally arm in arm, those days when our freedoms were ours alone to save, that year when we set the course by which we prevailed.
Our two nations were neighbours and friends then and we were partners as well. And we remain partners now as we look to the future together.
Prime Minister, it was good to meet you in Auckland, it is great to have you here in Canberra, and it will be wonderful to welcome you to Perth soon.
Welcome to Australia. 



Eddy De Gabriele, Chairman of the RDA Illawarra committee.
Rev Fr Chris Riley.
Our distinguished guest, Professor Howard Armitage.
Local business and community leaders.
I thank Sharon Bird for that generous introduction.
Sharon and Stephen Jones are outstanding advocates for this region -  and I pay tribute to them today.
I honour the traditional owners of this land, the Dharawal people.
They wrote the first chapter of this region's development and we're going to write another great chapter in that very long and proud story.
Friends, it's a great honour to be back so soon after my last visit and I'm here for one reason:
To keep faith with this region and its people.
As you undergo this process of change and transformation, you will not walk that road alone.
We will build a prosperous local economy that sustains high-wage, high-skill jobs for the region.
And we will do it together.
I know the job losses announced by BlueScope have been a bitter pill for this region.
I know there are many families who have been sitting around their kitchen tables thinking about what their future will hold.
But I also know this: in tough times we can turn adversity to advantage.
Challenges to opportunities. 
That's exactly what Australians are good at  -  we are a smart, adaptable, resilient people.
This is a smart, adaptable, resilient region.
A region familiar with the task of transformation.
From the 1840s, the dairy industry eked out a living along this coastal plain.
The coal industry began to supplant dairy from the 1870s.
Then came steel-making in the 1920s.
And then the big wave of economic reform in the 1980s, now being revisited in our own days.
Wave after wave of change.
That's the history of this region.
The history of our nation.
A trading nation open to the world  -  and thus a nation always subject to the forces of change.
Friends, I look back on the changes that occurred here in the 1980s and at the time it must have been hard to envision any sort of future at all.
Employment in the steelworks fell steeply from a peak of 20,000.
Eight thousand jobs were lost in just three years alone - 1981 to 1984.
But the Illawarra didn't give up hope.
With support from federal and state governments  -  and the ongoing commitment of BHP, now BlueScope  -  you found a way through.
It is my belief that you can do it again.
I'm an optimist about the Australian economy.
 I'm an optimist about a long-term role for manufacturing.
But in this time of change, we need to keep working to strengthen and modernise our economy with the new opportunities of the future.
Here in the Illawarra we are reminded that global events, even those a long way away, do affect us in Australia.
As is well known, Asia's demand for our resources is not only boosting national income; it is also pushing up the Australian dollar.
This puts a lot of competitive pressure on trade exposed sectors of the economy  -  including industries vital to regions like the Illawarra.
More broadly, the Australian economy  -  like all economies  -  is being buffeted by sovereign debt problems in Europe.
Over the weekend, the Treasurer met with other G20 Finance Ministers.
And in three weeks I will meet G20 leaders in Cannes  -  a meeting which will hopefully place important ballast under the global economic recovery.
But between now and then, European leaders must take decisive action to put an end to the sovereign debt crisis when they meet this weekend.
The crisis of confidence in global markets being caused by the situation in Europe must be expunged.
The time for muddling through is over.
Substantial and comprehensive reforms must be put in place. Nothing less.
The world is watching - including from the shores of Australia
And as we work together with the world's leading economies to encourage global stability and growth, I am also here to say again that the Australian Government is working with you to help make this a regional economy that thrives in the 21st century.
That is why we've brought forward the Steel Transformation Plan and made up to $100 million available as an advance help BlueScope adapt to the current economic conditions.
And why we have, with the State Government and BlueScope, created the $30m Illawarra Region Innovation and Investment Fund.
Funds for economic diversification and the creation of new jobs and new opportunities.
And I'm proud to say the Fund guidelines were approved on Friday and the scheme is now open for business. 
The Fund is backed by a high-powered Regional Task Force and Advisory Committee to ensure that any proposed solutions are solutions made by this region, for this region.
A process that involves the people of the Illawarra working with us, with the State Government and with Local Government, local employers, local unions, working together to design a shared vision of the future.
I know there are purists who sit in their think-tanks and decry any cent of money invested in particular regions or industries.
But like those who have stood in the way of planning for a clean energy future, they are wrong.
When a region and an industry wants to build a bridge to the future, I will be there to ensure you have the tools to do it.
To create high quality new jobs.
To create new business opportunities.
To renew technology and update skills.
Not a hand out  -  but a hand up.
We know from your experience in the 1980s and the lessons from other regional centres like Newcastle that this transformation is possible.
Newcastle has transformed itself from a one-company steel town to a leading centre of knowledge and innovation currently enjoying near full employment.
Not only stronger, but more diverse.
Because diversity is the missing strength in some of our regions.
Diversity equals resilience.
So the Illawarra will keep making steel  -  but it will be cleaner, smarter steel-making.
The Illawarra will keep manufacturing  -  but the goods you produce will be based increasingly on innovation and value-adding.
The Illawarra will keep producing coal; indeed we've seen old mines reopened in recent years.
Mines that will be cleaner as our carbon package clicks into place next year.
The Illawarra will keep building on the region's growing presence in industries likeinformation technology, tourism, financial and property services, and the arts.
I travel all over Australia, and few regions have the assets that you do.
A truly world-class university, led by a great Vice-Chancellor. 
A university, incidentally, which has the highest number of IT graduates of any university in the nation.
Facilities like the Innovation Campus, which saw its first commercial building opened just last month, boasting tenants like BHP Billiton.
The brilliant new $30 million headquarters for the Illawarra Health and Medical Research Institute opened last year.
Or the $60 million SMART Infrastructure research and training centre at the University of Wollongong.
Wollongong is home to major financial players like Oasis Asset Management and the Pillar superannuation administration corporation.
You've got a great port facility that I know has just undergone a major expansion, with a further expansion now underway.
And the $350 million TRUenergy gas-fired power station opened on the shores of Lake Illawarra.
So even before BlueScope announced its decision, this was a region on the move.
A region determined to shape its own future.
So as you digest the news of BlueScope's restructuring, and the wider economic implications of Asia's rise and the high dollar, I say:
Be confident.
You have so much going for you.
And because you do, the support and backing will follow.
Not just the $100 million we're providing under the Steel Transformation Plan.
Or the $30 million from the Illawarra Region Innovation and Investment Fund.
The Illawarra will get its fair share of our national infrastructure too.
Earlier today I announced the next big move for the National Broadband Network.
We've seen successful trials in several regions, including just south of here in Kiama and Minnamurra.
Now it's time to begin the volume rollout of fibre to 93 per cent of Australian premises. 
Today the NBN Co released its inaugural one-year construction schedule which will see high-speed broadband delivered to half a million premises by this time next year.
The Illawarra is central to those plans  -  and here's how it will work.
The NBN's 12 month schedule will include the fibre network passing through 10,900 premises in the Dapto and Wollongong areas.
In addition, six exchanges from Corrimal in the north to Nowra/Bomaderry in the south will made fibre-ready for the rollouts to continue into 2013.
This builds on the rollout that has already commenced in Jamberoo and Kiama where connection has been completed or is underway at 7700 premises.
And along the way, the NBN rollout will create more than 500 in this region.
So get ready because the NBN is coming to the Illawarra.
It will be one of the first regions in Australia to be fully connected.
Enabling people to work from home.
Create businesses at home.
Connect their firms to overseas clients.
Undertake education or cultural activities online.
The possibilities are limited only by the imagination.
Like the expansion of Port Kembla, the NBN is an opening on the world.
A chance to reach out and grasp the opportunities that the Asian century is bringing to our nation.
Friends, if ever a region stands to benefit from infrastructure investment, it is the Illawarra.
I mentioned the expansion of Port Kembla  -  a visionary decision by the Carr government that has turned the Illawarra into this State's hub for vehicle importation.
Infrastructure that unlocks opportunity because it brings people, goods and ideas to where they need to be:
The new infrastructure of the NBN.
And the more traditional infrastructure of ports, roads and rail.
If there is one great unfinished story in the history of Australian infrastructure, it is right here in the Illawarra.
A rail line begun with high hopes almost 30 years ago.
A project that was regrettably suspended when construction was already well underway.
Friends, I'm very proud to announce that after this project has sat dormant for 23 years, the Gillard Labor government will take the next vital step toward the realisation of the Maldon to Dombarton rail link.
Because of the time lag, we'll need to review the planning and design work to meet today's engineering standards.
So we will allocate $25 million to get that work underway.
And that work will position this project to meet all the preconditions for major construction to make it shovel ready.
We are prepared to make this new investment because the Maldon to Dombarton line makes even more sense today than when it was first conceived.
Not only is coal mining undergoing a resurgence.
Not only is Port Kembla undergoing a major expansion.
The Maldon to Dombarton line now also fits intrinsically as part of a holistic freight strategy throughout the Sydney region and indeed right along the nation's east coast.
The line will link with the Northern and Southern Sydney Freight Lines, the proposed intermodal facility at Moorebank and the expansion of Port Botany.
So the Illawarra can continue doing what it does best.
Manufacturing.
Creating.
Exporting.
Making your own way in a challenging and uncertain world.
So friends, what does this all add up to?
A strong regional economy with jobs and opportunity for all.
In fact, RDA Illawarra's own vision statement puts it well.
A sustainable region that offers a higher quality of life, socially, economically and environmentally, through high levels of employment with a highly skilled, adaptable, productive and inclusive community operating in a diverse, vibrant and growing economy.
That's our vision for the Illawarra.
They're the values that bring us together today.
In fact, they're the fundamental values I've fought for my whole political life.
There are times when history puts those values to the test.
Like when Paul Keating faced the banana republic' moment in 1986.
When this Government confronted the GFC three years ago.
Or when this region heard the news of BlueScope's job cuts back in August.
And friends, we're going to meet that test.
We're going to meet it with courage and resolve.
We're going to meet it in partnership
Building on this region's proud past, to give the Illawarra the bright future it so richly deserves.
Thank you. 



On an autumn day in Cape Town 64 years ago, a remarkable address was given.
It was the speech of a young woman who knew a life of duty stretched before her.
A life she accepted with courage and with grace.
In that address, Princess Elizabeth pledged that her whole life whether it be long or short would be devoted to the service of the British people and the Commonwealth.
Your Majesty, You have kept that pledge with unbroken constancy of purpose.
And the life upon which you were venturing has turned out to be long, eventful and greatly productive.
So it is that we greet you on the sixteenth time you have honoured us with a visit to our shores.
Many heads of state and government are welcomed within these walls.
But in this home of Australian democracy, you are a vital constitutional part, not a guest.
Just as in this nation, you can only ever be welcomed as a beloved and respected friend.
Your Majesty is the longest-lived sovereign in British history.
And surely history's most travelled head of state as well.
You are also the first and only reigning monarch to venture upon these shores.
Not merely to visit  -  but to share and understand the life of this nation.
You have witnessed our evolution from a small agricultural economy to an open, modern trading nation at home in this region and the world.
A vibrant multicultural democracy that has welcomed people from every corner of the globe.
A nation that honours its First Peoples and speaks the truth about its past.
A nation that more fully embraces the rights and aspirations of all its people, women and men alike.
And it is perhaps a sign of our progress that Your Majesty was welcomed at Canberra Airport by a female Governor-General, a female Prime Minister and a female Chief Minister.
These have been remarkable decades indeed.
My eminent predecessor once spoke of a lady passing by.
Far from passing by, you have endured.
You have endured with dignity and abiding strength of spirit.
As heir and monarch, you have walked fully two-thirds of Australia's national journey with us.
Understanding with clarity and sympathy our growing maturity as a nation and as a people.
Visiting every corner of this Commonwealth.
And sharing great national moments like the opening of the Opera House, the Bicentenary and this very Parliament building.
Now you stand at the gate of a truly extraordinary year;
An anniversary experienced by only one other monarch in our long history: because in 14 weeks time, the people of Britain and the Commonwealth will mark your diamond jubilee.
We will celebrate that jubilee with sincere gratitude and joy.
We will honour a wise and gracious sovereign who has spent her life in the cause of duty.
And we will honour the consort who has stood so constantly
at your side, himself a true friend of this country in peace and war; an outstanding supporter of science, innovation, and the education and support of our young people; and man whose robust humour and commonsense have always resonated with the Australian character.
Your Majesty, we do not know where Australia's path of nationhood may lead in the times to come.
We are, as you once so rightly said, a country on the move and will go on being so.
But we know this for a certainty: your journey of service will continue all the length of your days.
Keeping faith with the pledge made in Cape Town so many years ago.
And keeping faith with us, the people you have so long served.
And who give you, in return, our lasting affection and our very deep respect. 



I welcome you all to Australia, to Western Australia, and to the magnificent city of Fremantle.
I acknowledge the young people in the working group who organised this forum.
Your efforts are very much appreciated.
Appreciated and timely.
Because young people are our source of hope and inspiration for the challenges of tomorrow.
The future of our world as well as the future of the Commonwealth will be shaped by you.
Looking around this room today, there is great cause for optimism about that future.
I see that optimism in your faces.
I think of the life journeys that have brought you here from over 40 countries.
You've come from so many backgrounds and circumstances, many involving adversity.
And I know how passionate for change each of you have become in your own lives.
There are delegates here involved in peace building, climate change networks, social enterprises, peer education, health work.
Each of you has a remarkable story to tell.
Like John Loughton from Scotland, who grew up in a community where crime and youth exclusion was high.
He had first hand experience of being bullied, drug abuse taking hold of the family, and growing up in a home where no-one had ever worked.
But instead of giving in, John used his difficult beginnings to create positive change.
He became an anti-poverty campaigner at the age of 10 - yes 10.
And he's here today because he believes in a Commonwealth where your life chances are defined by your ambitions and abilities, not by your background.
Al-Karim Khimji tells another extraordinary story.
He grew up in Canada and received vital skills and motivation from the Duke of Edinburgh's Award.
From there he took a very non-traditional path to work in micro-finance and development funding in Afghanistan and Egypt.
Al-Karim's high-achieving life has shown what young people can achieve when they have the chance to participate and engage.
I am also deeply inspired by a courageous young Indigenous woman from the great State of Western Australia, Madeline Anderson.
Growing up, Madeline saw first hand many of the issues affecting her community.
And she was inspired to develop a program that empowered young people to encourage their family members in breaking the cycle of poverty and disadvantage.
Today Madeline mentors young mothers completing their secondary education.
She also helps women who are affected by domestic violence and inspires them to develop into leaders in their communities.
Friends, these are stories of achievement.
Stories of hope.
And they reflect the boundless energy that exists in every corner of the Commonwealth.
They also reflect the fact that half of the Commonwealth's population is under 25 years of age.
Never have so many young people been alive at one time in the history of the world.
And never have they been more interlinked.
Our world is already being remade by the combination of young people and social media.
Young people are demanding their freedoms.
They are refusing to accept old excuses and old limitations.
And they are determined to make a difference in their own lives and their own communities.
Because our world needs a difference to be made.
We are not succeeding as we should in meeting the great challenges of our time:
Global warming.
Food security.
Financial stability.
Poverty alleviation.
Women's rights.
Progress is too slow on all these things.
And young people have every right to feel a sense of urgency.
So be active.
Let your voice be heard.
And be informed by the values we hold dear as a Commonwealth.
Those defining values of fairness, democracy, equality and opportunity for all.
We call these Commonwealth values.
But in truth, they are human values.
Values that draw from us dreams of a better future; that draw us together in idealism.
At age 50, I am more idealistic than at any point in my life.
Yes, more realistic about the means to get there and the constraints along the way.
But no less idealistic about the brighter future that is within our grasp.
So be idealists.
Speak with passion and commitment.
Because you represent the future, and the success of that future depends on you.
Thank you all for making the journey to Perth.



It is my great honour to be here this afternoon for the opening ceremony of the 2011 Commonwealth People's Forum.
I welcome all of our visitors from across the Commonwealth and especially those who will be participating in the People's Forum over the next three days.
The Commonwealth is one of the world's great associations, with a strong legacy and an optimistic future.
It is first and foremost a free association of nations, working together to promote democracy and the rule of law, in fair and open societies providing opportunity for all.
These values go to the heart of civil society, which is the lifeblood of the Commonwealth.
Because in the final analysis, the Commonwealth is its people.
In fact, I am told that The Queen recently dubbed the Commonwealth the original world wide web.
We are a family of two billion people from different races, languages and faiths.
From our diversity we gain strength.
We gain also strength from our pasts, because our journeys to nationhood have not always been easy.
So when we speak of our Commonwealth values, we speak from hard won experience.
And our experience makes us a force for good in the world.
Friends, civil society brings Commonwealth values to life on a daily basis.
You bring creativity and imagination to bear on some of our most difficult social problems.
I know that across the Commonwealth, NGOs number in their millions.
Here in Australia alone we have 600,000 not-for-profit organisations.
Each making a difference.
Each helping people in need.
Each a beacon of resilience and hope. 
The theme you have chosen for this forum is Driving Change for a Dynamic Commonwealth.
I am pleased that this theme links clearly with the reform agenda my fellow leaders and I will discuss here in Perth.
I also acknowledge your Civil Society Statement, an important snapshot of the fundamental concerns and priorities facing the people of the Commonwealth.
I thank you all for your hard work in preparing this Statement, including your wide consultations across the Caribbean, Africa, Asia, Europe and the Pacific.
In your statement you say that the time has come to review and refresh the Commonwealth - and you are right.
So I will be asking my fellow leaders to consider carefully the opportunity for reform presented by the Eminent Persons Group.
Its recommendations align with many contained in your own Civil Society Statement, including how we can improve human rights, good governance, economic development, and respond to climate change.
I believe we can bring about change.
For example, by welcoming EPG recommendations to strengthen the core values on which the Commonwealth rests.
By urging members to implement all major international human rights instruments.
By meeting development challenges like polio, which should have been relegated to the pages of history long ago.
By doing more unlock the tremendous potential of our citizens, including women and youth, who make up so much of the Commonwealth.
Our ambition is nothing less than to change the world.
And to believe that we can be part of that change:
-        in the nations and organisations we represent,
-        in the cities, towns and villages where we live,
-        and through the courage and conviction we show in our daily lives.
Friends, a vision for a better Commonwealth has brought you here.
I know you would not have travelled so far if your ambitions were not so high.
Good luck as you work through your impressive program over the next few days.
You will achieve great things here in Perth.
And I'm sure you will return to your home countries enriched and emboldened, knowing that when people call for change and ask where it will come from, we will be ready.
Because we know the answer: The change will come from us.
It gives me great pleasure to declare the 2011 Commonwealth People's Forum officially open.



We gather to discuss important matters  -  and the setting could not be more appropriate.
Perth is a beautiful city  -  as you all now know.
But it is more.
Perth is a vibrant multicultural city.
A centre for Australia's burgeoning minerals and resources industry.
A fitting symbol of the future of prosperity in the Commonwealth and the world.
Here among so many people from so many places, even some from beyond the Commonwealth, I am very strongly reminded of the distinctive things which we really share.
We share a distinctive way of doing things internationally.
Consulting and co-operating, in the common interests of our peoples, supporting international understanding and world peace. 
Events in the world and the issues I discuss with leaders of governments, with leaders of business and civil society, regularly remind me:
Not every country in the world shares this way of working.
So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth partners.
We also share a distinctive set of international concerns.
International peace and order. Liberty for individuals. Deep opposition to racism. Addressing climate change.
An ever-growing commitment to development.
So it's good to be here with so many Commonwealth friends.
The nations and peoples of the Commonwealth  -  nations and peoples of six continents and five oceans  -  are of course enormously diverse. 
Taking in one quarter of the UN's members, one third of the world's population and including some of the smallest countries in the developing world.
Yet these values we share, our distinctive way of doing things and our distinctive set of concerns for the world's people, unite us in a way that is truly wonderful.
Our association of sovereign nations shares a remarkable international friendship.
We've seen that friendship this week. 
CHOGM has drawn together not only heads of government, but artists and athletes, school children and of course business leaders.
All people in different phases of life, with different callings and professions, each engaged in enterprise which can make a positive difference in the world and at home.
You are truly very welcome tonight.
I know you've come to Perth looking forward to the opportunity to work and network to meet and talk as business leaders and friends, to find new ways to strengthen prosperity and spread it to all.
To make a difference.
As Chair of CHOGM, I want Australia to make a difference for the small and medium countries of the world. 
No-one should have a monopoly on global decision-making. 
No country should be left behind by human development and economic growth.
Australia's history and geography combine to give us a unique perspective: a perspective of both the North and the South. 
Ensuring small and medium states have a voice in international decisions is an important priority for CHOGM.
That is true in all the elements of international society.
I want you to know tonight that I am firmly convinced it is true in international trade.
True, that every country should have a say.
True, that every country should share in the benefits.
Australia recognised the value of free trade long ago.
I think it would be fair to say that opening up to the world was one of the best peacetime decisions any Australian government has made.
And I am confident that Australian business would agree.
Opening up to trade has improved the international competitiveness of our industry sectors and firms.
Opening up to trade has helped to drive economic growth and with it, better jobs and better opportunities for our people.
Growth and jobs is the enduring purpose of government and business leadership in the economy.
And our experience here in Australia has taught us a pragmatic conviction in a simple equation:
Trade equals growth which equals jobs.
Something we know is true in Australia ... something we know is true in the wider world.
But to deliver the terms of that equation demands new leadership from all of us in today's world.
Recovery from the global recession of 2008-09 in much of the northern hemisphere has been weak and stuttering.
While economic growth has been much stronger in Asia, continuing softness in the United States and Europe is affecting the global economy as a whole.
All of us here at CHOGM have an interest in achieving a sustainable global economic recovery. 
We all share an interest in jobs and growth.
In turn, we all share an interest in trade.
The global economy needs the shot in the arm, it needs the stimulus that greater openness and increased trade would provide.
New sources of economic growth need to be activated.
And millions of the world's poorest citizens can be liberated from poverty, while creating more jobs and growth worldwide, through trade.
So, simply put: we need to fix world trade.
But of course, as you and I know, realising our simple equation is not simple at all.
The Doha Round of the World Trade Organisation has to be part of the solution.
Yet global trade talks under the Doha Round have been going on for a decade now, with no sign of a breakthrough. 
Worse, there are disturbing early signs that the world is retreating towards closed-door policies. 
A new way for global trade negotiations needs to be found.
If we keep doing what we're doing, we'll keep getting what we're getting.
So if we want to see something different in the news from Doha, we can't just press rewind and replay.
And after a decade of discussion, just waiting for a better climate for negotiations is not an option  -  it certainly isn't leadership.
So if we can't just press rewind and replay  -  well, we can't press pause either.
No, if we want to get a better outcome at Doha, we need to stick a new disc in the machine.
The elements of a new approach have been laid out by Australia.
We do so as a friend  -  as a nation committed to the multilateral trading system and the World Trade Organization  -  and with a Trade Minister who has been tireless in his pursuit of a conclusion for Doha.
But we also do so with conviction that we need a new way.
First, it is time to consider breaking the Doha Round into more manageable parts and bringing them to successful conclusion as negotiations are completed.
We know that some issues are very close to resolution.
It makes sense to conclude and implement these.
For other, more intractable issues, such as market access, we need to consider alternative negotiating approaches.
We should also contemplate negotiating new issues, in parallel with Doha but beyond the existing Doha mandate, to ensure the WTO keeps pace with the demands of the modern economy.
Second, a commitment to refrain from increased protection along the way to the completion of the Round.
In May this year the WTO, OECD and UN Conference on Trade and Development reported a rise in protectionism greater than in any other period since the global financial crisis hit. 
And just last week the European Commission found the overall picture had not improved. 
G20 countries had applied yet more protectionist measures  -  131 in total. 
These signs of a return to closed-door policies should worry all governments, all businesses, who see the benefits of trade liberalisation, and to global economic recovery.
Third, we should make a down-payment for the world's least developed countries  -  this year.
In its founding and origin, Doha was explicitly intended to be a development round.
If Doha is a development round  -  then it must deliver greatly improved market access for the world's least developed countries.
Almost a third of them, Commonwealth nations.
At a meeting in Hong Kong in 2005, as part of the Doha Round, countries indicated a willingness to provide these countries access to their markets for up to 100 per cent of tariff lines.
Most countries have not done this, Australia has.
Since 2003, Australia has voluntarily been giving access to our market for least developed countries entirely free of tariffs and quotas.
At the time, the decision was taken by Australia as part of efforts to move the Doha Round forward.
In effect, we already offer all goods produced in the poorest countries entry to Australia free of tariffs and quotas.
I believe this is a path other developed economies should pursue  -  and it is one they could pursue now.
 And to encourage global action, Australia is prepared to keep leading the way in opening doors for developing nations.
Tonight I pledge that the world's least developed countries will have access to Australia's market free of tariffs and quotas for 100 per cent of the goods they export to our country. 
That is, Australia will continue the strongest possible commitment to market access for the world's poorest countries - irrespective of the settlement of other issues in the Doha Round.
In making this pledge, I am calling on other countries to make similar ambitious commitments ahead of the biennial meeting of Trade Ministers in Geneva in December.
To make their best possible pledges, whether it be for market access or in combinations of duty-free, quota-free access and direct financial assistance for trade facilitation.
These pledges should be unconditional; they shouldn't be contingent upon the settlement of other issues in the Doha negotiations.
Australia is also willing to play a leading part in the global fight against protectionism.
Tonight I therefore also announce that my government will make a commitment at the WTO Ministerial meeting to no increase in protection while the Doha negotiations proceed  -  a commitment to what we'll call a standstill.
This is an essential policy prescription if an enduring global economic recovery is to be achieved.
Again, I encourage other countries to do the same.
Economic growth and trade is the surest way out of poverty the surest way to create jobs and spread growth.
We owe it to these countries and their people to do the right thing.
Because they are our partners.
They are our friends.
And CHOGM 2011 brings us together as friends.
Friends who share certain values and ideas and friends who share a vision of the world we want to see.
A world of peace and order among nations and a world of liberty for people.
A world free of the scourge of racism and secure against the threat of climate change.
A world where development and prosperity are shared  -  where trade, jobs and growth leave no country behind.
We can bring that world a little closer through what we achieve here in Perth.
Together.
In partnership.
As a Commonwealth family.
As friends. 



Your Majesty
Your Royal Highness
Her Excellency the Governor General
His Excellency Mr Bryce
Secretary General
Fellow Commonwealth leaders
Premier Barnett
Ministerial and Parliamentary colleagues
Delegates from around the Commonwealth
Other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen
I extend a very warm welcome to all leaders and delegates to this great city of Perth.
A city so emblematic of the resilience and optimism of the Australian character.
A city that looks out along the arc running from Asia and the Subcontinent to Africa where so much of the Commonwealth's history has been written.
It is the story of an Empire with a complex past, that chose to reinvent itself as a free association of nations, drawn from all six inhabited continents, and from many backgrounds, faiths and cultures.
The strength and success of our fellowship is no accident.
It comes from a commitment to make Commonwealth values real and present in the life of each member nation.
And to ensure those member nations that fall short understand that their peers want to see change.
Unlike other global bodies united by practical concerns such as commerce or trade, we are also joined by a very different motivation.
We are a "Commonwealth of values".
Shared values of peace, democracy, racial equality, the rule of law and a commitment to social and economic progress.
Shared values freely embraced and consensually expressed.
Values we can put to work in addressing some of the most pressing concerns that face our world like climate change, financial stability and food security.
The Commonwealth is vital to addressing such challenges.
Representing 54 nations and one-third of the world's people, how could it be otherwise?
But we also must be a more agile Commonwealth, equipped to respond when our values are tested and to speak clearly when our voice needs to be heard.
At Port of Spain we re-affirmed the special strengths that come from our unique heritage but we also resolved to make the Commonwealth stronger.
Friends, 2011 is a fitting moment for reflection and renewal because it marks the 80th anniversary of our association.
80 years since our predecessors endorsed the Statute of Westminster in 1931.
That year saw Gandhi imprisoned in the struggle for India's freedom.
Australia marvelled at the batting feats of a young cricketer called Bradman.
And a baby named Desmond Tutu was born in a remote town in the Transvaal.
Recently Archbishop Tutu celebrated his 80th birthday, and it is amazing to think of the changes that have occurred in just one lifetime:
The Cold War has come and gone.
New challenges like Aids and climate change have emerged.
Marvellous new technologies like the Internet have transformed the way we live.
The world has changed, and a wise institution changes too.
So as the Commonwealth journeys towards its centenary, it is time for renewal.
To answer the question posed of our organisation  -  how do we best pursue our timeless values in a world of change?
Let us make CHOGM 2011 memorable for answering this question.
Memorable for being the Meeting that gave the Commonwealth the direction it needed at a time of global uncertainty and risk.
In so doing, we will be faithful to our values, and faithful to the people who have sent us here.
May we prove worthy custodians of the trust they have placed in us.
And ensure our Commonwealth values speak as clearly to future generations as they have to the past.
On behalf of the Australian people, I am deeply honoured to be your Host.
And I wish this for our meeting  -  that we each give our best to achieve the best for all of our nations.



Fellow Commonwealth leaders.
Commonwealth Secretary General.
President, Vice President and Honorary Secretary of the Commonwealth Games Federation.
Distinguished guests, Aussie athletes, ladies and gentlemen.
I am delighted to join the President of the Commonwealth Games Federation, Michael Fennell and all of you here present, to celebrate the unifying power of sport, evident here as I see such an amazing array of sporting talent in this room.
I hope many of you may have caught the sporting events associated with CHOGM held over the past week with thrilling netball and hockey matches showcasing the incredible talent that exists within the Commonwealth.
And our loss in the recent World Cup semi-final reaffirming that the overwhelming objective of Australia's foreign policy is to beat the All Blacks in the rugby!
But friends, for many people around the world the word Commonwealth'is synonymous with the Commonwealth Games.
Little wonder, given these Games have produced some of the great moments in sporting history.
From The Miracle Mile' at the 1954 Vancouver Games, where John Landy and Roger Bannister both beat the four minute mile.
To Dawn Fraser winning four gold medals right here in Perth in 1962.
Precious McKenzie  -  a 4 foot, 9 inch giant  -  winning the weightlifting gold in Christchurch in 1974.
I couldn't possibly comment on the legend that The Queen was late for an official engagement because she was so determined to watch McKenzie take the prize.
And the most recent Games in Delhi, when history was made by Botswana, the Cayman Islands and Samoa when they celebrated their first Commonwealth gold medals.
Our Games are a truly special international event.
Not because of medals won, but because of a shared history and the enduring friendships forged.
Our people and our nations love to compete.
We even take this sporting spirit to our bids to host the Games themselves. 
For Australia's part, we have a proud history of hosting Olympic and Commonwealth Games to a surpassing standard of excellence in which international friendship and the good of sport come first.
We are indeed ready and willing to host an outstanding Commonwealth Games in 2018.
But friends, the 2018 Games are a little way down the track.
In the meantime, we are all looking with excitement to 2014 when athletes from throughout the Commonwealth meet on the field of competition in Glasgow.
New heroes will emerge.
Great friendships will be established.
And old rivalries will be renewed.
This morning we have the opportunity to reflect on and reaffirm the strong belief we share in the importance of not only the Commonwealth Games but more broadly the power of sport to help turn around the lives of individuals and the wellbeing of nations.
Nelson Mandela once said that: Sport has the power to change the world. It has the power to inspire, it has the power to unite people in a way that little else does.
Sport can allow nations to overcome traditional barriers through goodwill and commitment which is why Australia is committed to working with our Commonwealth partners so that they can foster and develop their sporting participation, through programs such as:
 * 	the Australian Sports Outreach Program,
 * 	the Pacific Sports Partnerships,
 * 	and the Papua New Guinea-Australia Sport For Development Initiative.
I know that the sports men and women of the Commonwealth share our belief in the enduring power of sport to transform communities.
It is global language that every nation speaks and understands.
A language of effort and commitment.
A language of excellence, inner strength and endurance beyond all odds.
And for us in this unique fellowship of nations, sport is a reminder that the Commonwealth is not just something we are.
It is something we do - something we create.
Through our participation.
Through our goodwill.
Enriching each other.
And making this a common wealth' in fact as well as in name.
Thank you for showing your support here today.



Thank you very much and thank you for inviting me to join you.
Congratulations to everyone who's been involved in the important work of the B20. I certainly believe that it's very important alongside the G20 meetings, we have a vehicle to bring together the voice of the business community. So, congratulations to everyone for participating in it and I can see some Australians hanging around and I hope they haven't been giving you any trouble and that they've been making good contributions, I'm sure that's true.
What I wanted to do is proffer some thoughts about where we are in the lead up to this G20 and then some thoughts directly on the question of youth employment.
As we start this G20, I quickly have to recognise that we're facing the most testing time in the global economy since the depths of the global financial crisis and of course that testing time is being shown by market volatility, but it's being experienced by real people, as joblessness. You use the global statistics and they are truly startling, but even here in the Eurozone we're talking about 16 million people being unemployed and in the United States  -  and I see Andrew here  -  in the United States the unemployment rate above 9 per cent.
So, the issues that we are confronting, will cause people to talk about all sorts of complicated financial transactions and vehicles, but at the end of the day it matters to people because it manifests as joblessness for real human beings.
Here in Europe, Australia has been consistently raising its voice to say it is critical that European leaders come together to resolve the problems of European financial stability and the sovereign debt problems in Greece.
We certainly were supportive of what European leaders came together to do on 27 October and said the challenge was then to make sure all of the details were defined and that the plan was implemented. In the last 36 hours a new challenge has arisen, with the statements from Greece and I believe one of the things that will be a very big focus of attention during the next few days will be how that plan for Europe can be implemented, given the announcements that have been made by Greece.
And sitting here right now, I'm not sure we know the answer to that question, how the plan can be implemented and what else can be done to drive growth and life back into Europe's economy. But those questions need to be answered and answered quickly and I believe the answers will flow from implementing the work that European leaders did on 27 October defining these details and getting on with the job of implementing it.
I do think at the G20 meeting, leaders assembled can assist European leaders by bolstering political will to act, but I also think we can also assist in a practical way. The issue of increasing the resourcing of the IMF, I think is squarely in front of us. The IMF does need more resources in order to be ready and prepared in case there is a bigger spread of problems and certainly Australia is prepared to play its role in increasing IMF resources and I've already conveyed that in some discussions today and I intend to take that perspective into the G20 meeting itself.
So, that is a view about the immediate crisis that confronts us and that is going to be a pressure on everyone as we move into the next few days, but here at this forum you've been talking too about longer term drivers of growth and what can be done to stimulate employment and I wanted to touch on those briefly as well.
We do need to see across the global economy, countries both developing and developed nations focus on new sources of growth.
For developed countries it's very important that people get their house in order and make sure that their budget position is sustainable. I'm thinking here, obviously of nations like the US and Japan, where we do need to see fiscal sustainability and we need to see a focus on new sources of economic growth.
For developing economies and surplus economies there is a need to focus on lifting domestic consumption, whether that be individual private consumption, or whether that be consumption in the form of new social protections that flow to the population and of course we do also need to see a move towards market based exchange rates and that's another issue that presents in the context of the G20.
For all economies, whether developed or developing, we need to see the political will to keep pursuing structural reforms. I very much agree with the perspective that has clearly been developed around this table, that there does need to be advocacy of social protections, social protection floors across the global economy. This is important as a matter of social justice to people around the globe, but it's also important as a driver of demand in its own right, that by better sustaining populations people will better sustain the ability of individuals to consume and to prosper within their society.
The focus on skills that you have obviously come to is one I very strongly endorse. Human capital reforms are central to any economic strategy. They are central to our own economic strategy in Australia and in the long term there is nothing more important to the productivity and prosperity of any economy than the performance of its human capital and the investments that have gone into the skills and knowledge of its people.
In terms of driving new growth, we believe at the G20 and beyond there needs to be a very strong focus on the trade agenda. It is increasingly apparent that after many long years of trade ministers having many detailed discussions, that the Doha Round has hit gridlock. Our Trade Minister and Australia generally have been pursuing in global forums the need to move beyond that deadlock and if it appears, as it does now, that it is not possible to get a trade round which will have trade changes for everyone, then what we need to do is focus on what can be done  -  segmenting the round so that for those countries who are able to do some things, we at least get some things done, rather than being in continuous gridlock.
For Australia's part, we have unilaterally confirmed that we will give the less developed countries tariff and quota free access to our markets and we have unilaterally confirmed that we will hold to a standstill with the G20 auspiced on protectionist measures and we believe in the context of this G20 that we do need to see leaders grappling with the fact that the Doha Round isn't going to come to fruition and we need to find some new ways forward for freer trade and to make sure that we don't see a retreat into protectionism.
For the Australian economy, we are in quite different circumstances to our friends on Europe and in the United States. We did come out of the global financial crisis strong. We did not have a recession, that was partly as a result of the advantages of being where we're located in the world, of being a resource rich nation, demand for our commodities was sustained.  It also was the result of a timely and targeting government stimulus and it was the result of thousands, indeed tens of thousands, millions, of employers and employees striking cooperative working arrangements to sustain employment during the most difficult days of the global financial crisis.
So we have come out of the global financial crisis in quite a different position than many other economies. We have low debt, low unemployment. We have strong public finances with our budget returning to surplus in 2012-13. So we are in quite a different position to other economies.
Even being in that different position to other economies, we are seeing some differential effects in our own economy during this phase of growth. Because our resources sector is so turbo-charged, with more than $400 billion of investment in the pipeline, that does mean that our Australian dollar is very strong, putting pressure on other industries, particularly industries like manufacturing and that is requiring us to respond with economic policy that helps sustain those sections of the economy that are feeling this pressure.
As Prime Minister I am very determined that during this phase of our economic transformation, that we do maintain a diversified economy and indeed come through the resources boom with a more diversified economy than we went into it.
We are at the start of what will be a profound change in Asia, we have dubbed it the Asian Century, where we will see the rise of the Asian middle class, with everything for consumption and Australia's economic opportunity that that implies, which is why we want to make sure our diversified, resilient Australian economy can respond to those demands.
But with the patchwork we see at the moment, we do also see a patchwork in youth unemployment and it's true to say that there are some parts of Australia that have always had unemployment rates greater than the national average and have tended to have quite high youth unemployment rates and in this patchwork phase of economic development, we are obviously anxious that we could see more of that.
We are therefore focused very strongly on skills development for young people, we are in a stage of major transformation in our education system, we call it the education revolution, where as a government we have focused on improving quality in education at every level, from early childhood education for kids in the years before they go to school, through to improving the quality of school education, lifting both the number and quality and performance of apprenticeships, of young people getting trade and other skills, putting our universities on a pattern for growth, so that they are not constrained by government funding, but can respond to the demand patterns of young Australians and indeed older Australians through university education.
And we have regeared and are still in the process of regearing parts of our social security system, so that particularly for young people the obligations to engage in order to qualify for income support payments are very clear. We refer to this as the learn or earn policy', that there's no third way, there's no ability to just stay at home receiving benefits, people either have to be engaged in training, or they need to be engaged in the workforce. Being out on the sidelines, the economic margins, not earning at all and not learning is not an option open to people.
And in taking that approach we've been very driven by the research that if young people leave school early, if they spend the years immediately post-school unemployed, then that is far more likely than not to lead to a lifetime of disadvantage, if someone does not make a successful school to work transition and is kicking around unemployed at the age of 22, 23, 24, 25, then they are probably on a journey to being at best only intermittently engaged in the labour market for the rest of their lives.
So it's been a very strong focus of our policy work and I can tell it's a very strong focus of work around the table. So with those words, can I once again say congratulations to the B20 for doing all of this intensive work and I'm very happy to listen to and participate in the discussion
Thank you very much. 



Friends, just after noon yesterday, the government's Clean Energy legislation was passed by the Senate.
This is an historic day in Australian public life.
One of those moments where the federal parliament landed our nation on the right side of history.
When our nation strode forward to embrace the future with confidence.
We've had a quarter-century of scientific warnings.
We've had 37 parliamentary committee inquiries.
We've had a carbon price proposed by every government since Paul Keating.
We've had legislation presented to the parliament four times.
The job is now done.
Carbon pricing is the law of our land.
This has been a long journey.
The work of a whole generation.
When climate change first became a major policy concern in the mid 1980s, some of you in this room weren't even born.
If this has been a long debate, it has also been complex.
Perhaps the most complex policy debate in Australia's peace-time history.
This was a scientific problem in need of an economic solution.
Because climate change is the ultimate externality.
It is the result of millions of energy-use decisions over three centuries, each of which made sense on its own.
But together those decisions have come to pose a grave threat to the global environment and economy.
We are a community of reason.
So we listened when the scientists told us that the world is warming dangerously, and that the worst effects of climate change can largely be avoided if we act soon.
We are a nation of reform.
So we listened when the economists told usthat by usinga pricing mechanism to curb carbon pollution, we could capture the genius of the free market to drive change.
Through good public policy in Labor's tradition of rigour and reform, we've responded by creating a package that sets us on the path to a clean energy future.
It is now the legislated policy of this nation that our biggest polluters should pay, and should pay through a market mechanism.
A modern policy approach, with efficient abatement at the lowest economic cost.
An inbuilt incentive to innovate, linked to global markets and aimed at meeting evidence-based emissions targets.
The carbon price has a small beginning  -  less than one-third of the price impact of the GST.
Yet the scale of the transformation it unleashes will be immense.
Within the space of just 38 years  -  2012 to 2050, well within the lifetime of most of us in this hall, our nation will cut 9 out of every 10 tonnes of the carbon pollution we would otherwise have released into the atmosphere.
It is a change that will touch every home and workplace.
A new industrial revolution that will change the way we live and change it for the better.
I've had a glimpse of that future in my visits around this nation.
I opened a wind farm at Gunning that will power 23,000 homes.
I've seen a factory that makes paint which acts like a solar panel when painted onto steel and glass.
I've seen a new office tower in Sydney that produces 25 per cent of its own power on-site.
I've seen geothermal power at work, not in central Australia but in the streets of suburban Melbourne.
And these are just a down-payment.
These are what we have achieved under today's modest and fragmented policies.
Imagine what we can achieve after July 1 next year when the carbon price comes into force.
Today's leisurely stroll towards a clean energy future will become a sprint as we close the innovation gap with the rest of the world.
Friends, in getting to this point, we've seen some of the less favourable aspects of political life on display: fear-mongering.
The distortion of facts and the trashing of science.
The playing to short-term political advantage to the detriment of the national interest.
But ultimately reason has prevailed.
And while many Australians remain anxious about this change, they accept the cost of not acting is too great to accept.
Because not acting means more and longer droughts.
Rising sea levels.
More severe storms and cyclones.
Lasting damage to the Murray Darling food bowl.
To the Great Barrier Reef.
To Kakadu.
No nation can accept such threats.
We must act.
And we will act.
The time for words ended yesterday.
The time for deeds begins today.
It will be a time of creativity and innovation.
We will see new ideas and new products from our universities, the CSIRO, our company research labs and even from backyard sheds.
We will see our factories equipped with new technologies and new processes.
Our workers will be trained up with new skills.
We will create new jobs and transform old ones.
High skill, high wage jobs in the industries of tomorrow.
All up, the next forty years will see $100 billion worth of investment in renewables.
Six million jobs will be created.
Real gross national income per person will almost double.
And friends, this change will have all the characteristics of a true Labor reform.
Bringing together economic, social and environmental imperatives in a way that only Labor can.
Looking forward to the future.
Protecting jobs.
And making sure no-one is left behind.
So from mid next year, Australians will see pension increases and tax cuts in their pockets.
We will assist small business, boost manufacturing and build competitiveness in the steel industry.
We will look after the regions.
Yes there is talk of repeal.
Rash, irresponsible talk by those who have absolutely no intention of following that talk up with action.
Their sole intention is to cause damage by corroding certainty and seeing investment deferred.
They have convinced themselves that they will profit politically by maximising immediate harm to the nation.
But history shows that spoilers always fail.
We saw it with Medicare.
We saw it with universal superannuation.
Reforms loudly opposed at the time.
But when the chance for repeal come, our opponents did nothing.
They squibbed it.
Because they knew that Australians had come to understand these reforms and accept their value for the future of our nation.
Because they understand governments must walk the reform road and make the big calls.
The big decisions that demand courage at the time and which, when we look back, no one would seek to undo.
So in a bizarre parallel universe, there is juvenile talk of repeal and promises etched in blood, with fingers firmly crossed behind their backs as they are made.
In the real world, carbon pricing now moves to become part of the social and economic fabric of this nation.
The Carbon Farming Initiative has already passed the Parliament.
The Clean Energy Bills passed the Senate yesterday.
The legislation establishing the Australian Renewable Energy Agency is expected to pass the parliament this year.
And we will legislate next year to establish the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, following an independent review led by Reserve Bank Board member Jillian Broadbent.
But that is just the beginning.
The Government will rollout a number of transitional assistance programs in advance of the start of the carbon pricing mechanism.
These include the:
Coal Sector Jobs Package
Low Carbon Communities Program
Clean Technology Programs
Energy Security Fund
Energy Efficiency Information Grants for small business and community groups
We are also establishing a number of the key institutions which will oversee carbon pricing.
The Climate Change Authority, which will provide expert advice on key aspects of the carbon pricing mechanism, will be established by mid-2012.
Former Reserve Bank Governor, Mr Bernie Fraser has already been announced as its Chair.
The Energy Security Council, which will provide assurance and advice to the Government in the event that systemic risks to energy security emerge.Former head of the Victorian Treasury under Jeff Kennett, Dr Michael Vertigan has been appointed Chair of the Council.
The Clean Energy Regulator, which will administer the carbon price mechanism, will be established well in advance of 1 July 2012.
We have commenced the Contract for Closure Program to retire 2000 megawatts of the nation's most polluting coal fired power stations, with Expressions of Interest closing three weeks ago.
And of course, we will put money in the pockets of Australians to help meet the impacts of the carbon price.
Nine out of 10 households will receive compensation from a combination of tax cuts and increases to family benefits.
Almost six million households will receive assistance that covers all of their average price impact.
Over four million households will receive assistance that exceeds their expected average price impact, leaving their household budget better off.
And that assistance is just around the corner.
In seven months, the Clean Energy Advance payments will begin flowing to pensioners and families.
And from 1 July 2012, income tax cuts take effect, so that all taxpayers earning $80,000 or less will get a tax cut, and altogether, around a million individuals will no longer have to lodge a tax return.
Friends, this is reform for the future.
Reform we need to make to keep our economy competitive, to protect our environment and to do the right thing for coming generations.
Reform that is here to stay.
It is appropriate that 2012 marks the start of our carbon price because it also marks 300 years since the age of carbon began with the invention of the first commercial steam engine.
Those 300 years have brought higher living standards for humanity than all the preceding centuries combined.
We would not trade those centuries for anything.
Except for this: the same carbon emissions which created our modern way of life are now threatening to undermine it.
So a second industrial revolution is needed.
And carbon pricing is the key that unlocks the door to that clean energy future.
Like tariff reform and floating the dollar, it is a gateway reform.
The one big decision by government that unlocks thousands of individual decisions by Australian firms and households.
Their ingenuity.
Their creativity.
And their ability to see solutions where only problemsnow exist.
Friends, you here in this room and your colleagues around the nation will be the leaders of that change:
The clean energy and low emissions technology firms.
The carbon market trading companies.
And the professional service firms who will support you.
Just as Apple and Microsoft drove the IT revolution in the 70s and 80s, you will drive this revolution.
So by the middle of this century, we will be a different nation.
Cleaner.
Smarter.
Richer.
A nation where the three-century-old link between emissions growth and economic growth has finally been broken.
The age of carbon pollution will end for the same reasonwe don't ride in horses and buggies anymore.
Or do our calculations on slide rules.
Or send our messages by carrier pigeon.
Because of the infinite capacity of human beings to imagine a different world and bring it into being.
That is why the legislation passed yesterday afternoon is not just a plan to deal with climate change.
It's not just a plan for new technology and low emissions.
It's an act of faith in the Australian people.
A confident, creative people.
Up for the big decisions.
Unafraid of the future.
Ready to build a clean energy future together.



It is wonderful to be here today with so many good leaders and hard workers, leaders in the union movement, social and community sector workers of course my friends and colleagues Tanya Plibersek and Senator Jacinta Collins.
Many old friends and new friends, hard working Aussies all.
You don't need to be an expert on the social and community sector workforce to know this:
You are among the hardest working Australians.
You are mostly women.
And it is time you got equal pay.
All across our nation, you work in women's refuges and in disability support centres.
You manage family support services, you lead teams of professionals who counsel victims of sexual assault.
You're in charge of homes for homeless men and the mentally ill.
You're counsellors, social workers and therapists. 
Community development workers and specialist care and support workers.
More than three quarters of you women.
Nearly two thirds of you have an industry qualification  -  compared to just over half in other industries.
But your average full-time wage is just over $46 000 per year  -  compared to around $58 000 for all working Australians.
A gender-driven pay gap which sees, for example, a Disability Support Worker with a tertiary qualification who supervises five staff get paid less than $38 000 a year.
You have above average qualifications, you get below average pay.
This is something Labor's fair work system can fix.
On 19 March 2009, more than two and a half years ago, your Parliament passed the Fair Work Act into law.
A law which put Work Choices in the grave, a law which brought balance to Australian workplaces.
A law only a Labor government would enact.
We established Fair Work Australia.
We delivered ten national employment standards in law.
We created a modern award system.
With a new way to set the minimum wage which is fair to low-paid workers.
And fair minimum conditions like penalty rates and overtime that cannot be stripped away.
We gave people the right to be represented by their union.
The right to bargain in a system where employers and employees would get a fair go.
We created a new bargaining stream for low-paid workers who had been locked out of the benefits of collective bargaining.
We gave 2.8 million more Australians protection from unfair dismissal.
We ended Australian Workplace Agreements, the individual statutory employment agreements that had ripped off so many hard working Australians.
And we broadened the definition of pay equity to allow real progress in closing the gender pay gap.
Friends, these are things only a Labor government would do.
And Labor's agenda for working people has gone further.
Delivering paid parental leave for new parents to stay at home.
Lifting the childcare rebate for families who need help.
Lifting family payments for parents of teenagers.
Cutting tax for middle- and low-income families.
Increasing the pension and legislating higher super for better living standards for Australians when they retire.
Above all keeping the economy growing, supporting and creating jobs.
Over seven hundred thousand jobs have been created since Labor came to office, over 120 000 in the last year.
We have exposed the conservative lie that you have to choose: That you can have penalty rates and overtime, protection from unfair dismissal and parental leave entitlements  -  or you can have growth and jobs  -  but not both.
And we have brought those real benefits to working Australians' lives.
Each of these achievements was delivered with these goals in mind:
To ensure every Australian shares in the benefits that a strong economy brings.  To spread opportunity to all, to ensure our changing economy leaves no one behind.
Fairness at work is vital to Australian families.
We can never have fairness at work if work is not fair for women.
Or for the men who work alongside them in sectors like yours.
So when Labor came to office I was determined to make real progress in closing the gender pay gap.
A gap which is now so great, with full-time working women earning on average one fifth less than men full-time, that it is as if women work nearly seven weeks every year for free.
A gap driven, in considerable part, by the way our society and economy have traditionally undervalued female-dominated occupations.
For too long society has undervalued the work women do.
Federal equal remuneration provisions were first introduced in Australia in 1994. 
But those equal remuneration provisions were strictly limited to considering work of equal value.
By the time of the Fair Work Act sixteen applications had been made in the federal system, sixteen applications had failed.
It had become clear that Federal law set a test which had proved impossible to meet. 
So in the Fair Work Act I was determined to change this.
By 2008, some state legislation, like that in Queensland, already employed a wider test.
And so in the Fair Work Act we consciously adopted a wider test, mirroring those like Queensland's.
To deliver a right to equal pay for work of comparable value, not just the rigid old equal value test.
In 2009, Queensland's legislation saw a landmark decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission.
And encouraged by that decision, and by the Fair Work Act, you and your unions, led by the Australian Services Union, made this important gender pay equity application to Fair Work Australia.
Supported by the Heads of Agreement I signed with the ASU when I was Minister for Workplace Relations.
This year, our new laws and the case brought by your unions have allowed a sensible comparison between different kinds of work in different parts of the national economy.
In May, Fair Work Australia found that workers in your sector do not get equal pay with people who do comparable work.
And Fair Work Australia indicated it would seek further submissions to allow it to determine an appropriate remedy.
Understand: this equal pay test case is no unintended consequence of the new system.
This has given us exactly what we wanted, exactly what I hoped for.
The chance for a fair decision, based on fair evidence, by Fair Work Australia, that yes, the people who work in your female-dominated sector have long been underpaid.
And yes, you have been underpaid because you are mostly women.
This case creates an opportunity for governments and unions, employees and providers to put our heads together, to agree on a fair value and of course to agree on where the money will come from.
It's not an opportunity this Labor Government will miss.
This is the good news I have come here to tell you today.
Nearly twenty years since those first equal remunerations provisions were introduced.
Nearly three years since the Fair Work Act passed.
Two years since your unions brought your case.
Six months since Fair Work Australia found that you are not paid fairly.
And after hundreds of hours of detailed discussions between the various parties.
The Federal Government and the Australian Services Union now have agreement on a way forward.
A way forward to deliver fair pay for caring workers covered by this case.
Friends, today I can announce that the Australian Government will join with the Australian Services Union to make a joint submission to Fair Work Australia in the Social and Community Sector equal remuneration case.
That means together we will argue for rates of pay that fairly and properly value social and community sector work, for rates of pay which don't discriminate and which finally end decades of unequal pay.
Other unions will join us and we expect major providers will do the same, to support this before Fair Work Australia's Full Bench.
If, through its own rigorous and independent processes, the Full Bench now agrees to the remedy we propose, here's how it will work.
Social and community sector workers covered by this case will be paid new, fair pay rates, based on the convincing evidence of gender pay imbalance given in this case. 
When fully implemented, this should deliver pay rates comparable to those awarded by the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission in its landmark 2009 case.
And in the joint submission, the Federal Government will clearly state that we will fund our share of the pay rises which flow from the Full Bench's final decision.
More than 150 000 people  -  including 120 000 women  -  work in the sector.
Our decision will fund our share of very significant pay rises for these workers right across Australia.
We will make a regulation to ensure that eligible Queensland workers receive their share of these pay increases as well.
And we will propose that the fair pay increases start on 1 December next year  -  and be gradually phased-in over six years.
Our decision comes at a cost to the Federal Budget of over $2 billion over the full phase-in period.
The States and Territories should also do the right thing. 
To support properly valued rates of pay, to pay their share of the cost.
And providers can play a role in urging the States to pay their full share.
All Governments must meet their share of the funding responsibility  -  -  but our commitment is not conditional on the decisions other Governments now take.
Because we believe in equal pay - we know this is the right thing to do.
We will deliver our share of funding for caring workers covered by this case.
We will do our part for equal pay.
We will also fund these pay rises responsibly.
We will make the necessary decisions to find the financial room  -  under our strict fiscal discipline, the additional expenditure for the Commonwealth will be fully offset.
The States and Territories share funding responsibility as well.
As I have said, our decision does not depend on the States and Territories doing the right thing.
The Federal Government recognises the budget pressures the States and Territories face.
But we know you are working Australians who face budget pressures too.
You have waited long enough to get equal pay.
The evidence given to Fair Work Australia in this case is remarkable. The benefits if Fair Work Australia agrees are very great too.
One witness, I will call Natalie.  Natalie helps people who are mentally ill, children and young people needing out of home care and people living with a disability. 
She helps them learn to live independently when they move from long-term hospital-based care to community-based living.
Natalie is currently paid $41 648 per year.  When fully implemented, her fair pay will be around $55 000 in today's dollars.
Another witness, I will call Michelle.  Michelle has a law degree and a degree in youth affairs. 
She works full time at a community legal centre, managing the legal and financial counsellingprograms, supervising seven staff and numerous volunteers  -  as well as providing legal advice directly to clients.
Michelle is currently paid just $49,500.  When fully implemented, her fair pay will be around $66,000 in today's dollars.
We will deliver very significant pay rises to hard-working Australians.
Not just equal pay or fair pay, higher pay.
Higher take-home pay for tens of thousands of working people and their families.
At a time when in every family, every dollar counts.
This historic joint submission will now go before Fair Work Australia's Full Bench.
The Government and unions will ask the Full Bench to confirm that the agreement meets the legislative requirements.
We will ask Fair Work Australia to agree to fair pay for caring workers covered by this case and in turn to declare, that the days are coming to an end when the work of women is valued less because it is women's work.
Friends, the best way to keep our economy strong is to keep people in work.
The best way to keep our society fair is to keep work fair as well.
Labor showed in the global financial crisis that we can have a growing economy and support and create jobs, while protecting Australians' rights at work.
Labor's approach to fairness at work has been good for our country in the past.
And the plan I have announced today is an example of how it should be in the future as well.
Unions, employers and the Government working together.
Negotiating in good faith, based on the best evidence, working together to find the best way to reward hard work.
Accepting the decision of the independent umpire.
This is our fair work system functioning as it should.
As a guarantee of fairness for all.
As a driver of productivity growth and future prosperity.
So we sustain growth and so we keep creating jobs.
These new measures I announce today will be good for our country as well.
Because we are Labor, we will deliver fairness for Australian women.
Today is a great step forward on the path to equal pay.
And because we are Labor, we govern for all, we govern for working Australians. 
Today is a great step forward for tens of thousands of hard working people.
I know many working people struggle to make ends meet.
This is why Labor in Government has delivered real benefits to middle- and low-income families.
Tax cuts, pension increases, higher family payments, increased super.
And now, through this announcement today: fair and equal pay.
And I also know that nothing is more important to working Australians than work itself.
The dignity of work and the benefits of work.
Because the value of work is at the centre of every family budget and it is at the centre of Labor's decision-making and vision for the future too.
The future of our economy  -  of an economy of jobs and growth.
The future of our workplaces and families as well  -  of an economy that serves working people.
Where their Government is on their side  -  managing the economy in the interests of all.
In a country where working people share in the benefits that a strong economy brings.
Working Australians can only be sure of these good things when the Government is on their side.
Working Australians can only be sure the Government is on their side when the Government is Labor. 



Our economy is not perfect  -  there's pressure on many sectors from the strong dollar and pressure arising because of cautious consumers and competition from overseas.
But believe me, the leaders who I sat with at the G20 table last weekend would dearly like to swap these challenges for their own.  And many would view an unemployment rate of 5.2 per cent as a distant dream.
This meeting of the G20 came at a very important time for the international economy, especially for Europe.
And the meeting itself was made more demanding, more crucial, by the breakout of domestic political uncertainty in Greece.
Precisely because the G20 matters  -  and because of the very serious state of the European financial system  -  the outcomes of the meeting have been heavily scrutinized.
As a participant, I can say the G20 made progress in addressing the current eurozone crisis.
It set the ground for important steps to be made in the medium term to restore balanced, sustainable world growth.
But I can also say, there is still more work to be done and that work will be critical to restoring confidence to the financial markets of the world.
Before I sketch out the progress that was made in France in tackling the immediate crisis, and developments since the summit concluded, I do want to reflect on the wider context  -  on the perspective I brought to the meeting.
Because I did join the table with some satisfaction.
Proud to represent a country whose economic fortunes are so different to almost all other countries whose leaders were there.
In the meeting, I reminded my counterparts that while some of our talk may appear esoteric  -  as we talk intently about financial transactions, institutions and markets, discuss leveraging, and distinguish the solvency and liquidity of nations  -  our task outside the summit meeting room is to explain.
So that our peoples know that the ultimate purpose of our work is creating jobs for the people of our nations.
Delivering this message to that audience was made easier for me than almost any other leader  -  for the simple reason that here in Australia we have created over seven hundred thousand new jobs over the last four years.
In a period when the world has shed around thirty million jobs.
And of course unlike most other G20 countries, which are subject to disturbing discussions about sovereign debt, Australia has extremely strong public finances.
But alongside some satisfaction in our own economic strength at home, I participated in the meeting with a real sense of active concern for the future economic course of the world.
As you well understand, Australia has a strong stake in Europe getting its house in order  -  and maintaining the stability of the eurozone.
Because the Australian economy  -  and public revenues  -  are most definitely touched by the developments in Europe.
We live in a world where movements in financial markets in the North Atlantic are felt through the markets of Asia and beyond  -  a fact we have seen reflected just today.
Our real economies, through direct trade and investment, and the trade and investment of our major trading partners, are deeply interdependent too.
So, from an Australian perspective, it was vital that the G20 meeting delivered important steps towards dealing with the current eurozone crisis.
Any threat to the stability of the eurozone, in turn a threat to European banks, could decimate  -  not just devalue  -  Europe's domestic currencies, and cause havoc throughout financial markets.
So the G20 simply had to make progress  -  and it did.
Leaders retraced the plan outlined by European leaders on 27 October  -  and urged that rapid steps are taken by European Finance Ministers over the coming days.
European Finance Ministers must now detail how a larger European Financial Stability Facility will be financed and how it will operate.
The lack of clarity over Greece's political future is certainly troubling.
But the G20 meeting brought Greece back from the brink of a referendum that threatened to derail the October plan.
A development which the G20 did not foresee leading into the summit, but which was vital once Greece moved itself so close to the edge. 
And the very real consequences of Italy having to govern with a watchman at its door each quarter have rapidly unfolded this week.
A political reflection of the economic reality that strong steps had to be taken to get Italy back on track  -  and that they were.
With markets now questioning whether Italy and Greece can deliver on their commitments, the consequences of any indiscipline and indecision in Europe could not be clearer  -  nor the need more urgent.
Markets are looking for reassurance that there is the political will to find solutions to these problems.
The message to European governments could not be clearer too.
As I told European leaders in Cannes, it is time to turn words into deeds.
The G20 also laid the basis for IMF resources to be increased so the Fund can play its role as the bulwark of global economy.
As it has in the past in our own region during East Asia's own financial crisis of the 1990s.
The barriers to protect contagion from weak countries spreading through other parts of the global economy were fortified at the G20  -  by the absolute commitment to ensure that the IMF has the resources it needs.
This stands even as the eurozone needs to detail and implement its plan.
Strengthening the IMF is a significant outcome, one clearly flagged and strongly advocated by Australia in the weeks leading up to the G20, and embraced by other leaders at the summit.
And given some political discussion in Australia, the BCA's support was well received this week.
Following the work of eurozone Finance Ministers, we can all expect G20 Finance Ministers to meet to flesh out the arrangements for strengthening the IMF.
The G20 took important steps towards restoring sustainable global growth.
The G20 agreed that Doha is not delivering what the world needs.
I argued in the lead up to the Summit that if we can't just press rewind and replay on Doha, we can't press pause either - we need to stick a new disc in the machine.
That is what the G20 has agreed to do.
It also agreed to an action plan for growth and jobs.
Countries with surplus savings committed to increase social protections, to drive domestic demand and counter high rates of household savings born of the need for self provision. 
There was also a clear recognition of the importance of market-based exchange rate systems, which augurs well for Australia's trade-exposed sectors.
Meanwhile, deficit countries agreed to continue to pursue structural reforms, consistent with a clear and definite path to fiscal consolidation, especially across the US and Japan.
Finally  -  in what has fuelled an outbreak of competitive federalism amongst Premiers and Chief Ministers  -  Australia secured the rights to host the G20 in 2014.
This outcome recognizes Australia's economic strength and leadership ... a great opportunity for the Australian business community as well.
At Cannes, I spoke at a meeting of what is called the B20.
A gathering of international business leaders which develops recommendations to the assembled G20 leaders each year.
The group had a rich exchange over two days leading up to the leader's summit  -  and was addressed by a range of leaders, including President Medvedev of Russia, Prime Minister Noda of Japan and President Lee of Korea.
So in 2014, leaders of the world's businesses and governments will meet here in Australia, overlooking the shores of - well we'll see which river, harbour or lake it is in due course.
Friends, sharing up close the worries of other leaders and reflections on their economies and the global economy, reinforces my resolve that the task for Government and business is to walk the reform road together.
Our prosperity will not shape itself  -  our productivity will not grow itself either.
We must be determined to make the whole economy productive, to make the whole economy strong.
And that's what this Government is doing.
Through investments and reforms in education and training.
Much-needed investments in quality  -  and fundamental reform, by building productive economic infrastructure.
Above all, high speed broadband, allowing every business in the country to do business more cheaply and more quickly.
Building our clean energy future.
Carbon pricing now moves to become part of the economic fabric of this nation  -  business can now get on with the job.
Of particular interest to your Council of course  -  pursuing smart deregulation for a seamless national economy.
There's generally been effective cooperation between all jurisdictions to deliver these reforms, but I share the frustration of business with the pace of change.
There's clearly a role for business to make your case clearly to the States as well.
The delays in implementing harmonised work health and safety laws in Victoria and Western Australia are quite unnecessary. 
It's important that parties in all States deliver on reform.
You've also made clear your keen interest in progress with the development of a National Trades Licensing System. 
Vital for increasing labour mobility - another important implementation priority for the Territories and the States.
And of course, we are working with you to reform the system of tax.
Not just using our resource wealth to fund company tax cuts, build our pool of national savings and build new infrastructure  -  though better tax of mineral resource rents is important.
But finding new ways to give you the flexibility to make change work for your firms, to reward imagination and invention, innovation and ideas.
That was our goal for the Tax Forum and by any measure it, like the Future Jobs Forum which followed, was a success.
Both considered as a process and considered by what it has delivered.
The BCA's own contribution at the Forum, and I well recall Jennifer Westacott's discussion of the risks of our narrowing tax base over time, was valuable.
And the business tax reform working group, chaired by Chris Jordan from the Board of Taxation, now has the job to carry the torch for reform.
I'm grateful to the Australians who've volunteered their time to serve on the working group  -  and I'm looking forward to their reports. 
It's said that the monthly instalments of Dickens' The Old Curiosity Shop arriving by ship drew crowds of New Yorkers to the quayside desperate to know if Little Nell had lived or died.
I'm sure Chris and his team are expecting that tax commentators and advisers will await the working group's discussion of loss carry back, uplifting losses, and the value of losses when business change composition or ownership with just such excitement, but speaking for myself, and I expect for some others, I'll also take great interest in the other side of the group's advice.
Identifying options from within the business tax system to fund any proposals.
In a period of fiscal consolidation, that's literally the bottom line on reform.
Have no doubt: the Government will hold our fiscal discipline.
It is vital at a time of heightened global instability and intense market scrutiny of high sovereign debt levels.
The recent turbulence in global markets is due in very large part to the failure of too many Governments around the world to develop and then deliver credible fiscal paths back to surplus.
We won't make that mistake.
A strong and credible fiscal strategy like ours underpins confidence in our economy and supports job creation.
And because the fastest fiscal consolidation on record also gives the Reserve Bank room to move on interest rates, as we've seen with the most recent rate cut.
For the people in this room, rate cuts mean more customers coming through the doors with more money in their purses and wallets.
Last week's cut has already provided some much-needed relief for businesses and households and boosted confidence too.
The Government's continued commitment to fiscal discipline should ensure room for appropriate monetary policy flexibility.
It also ensures that we will continue to make some difficult decisions to protect our strong public finances.
My Government will stay on the reform road. 
It'll be easier to do that when business walks with us.
On your best days, the BCA has understood that too.
Knowing our door's always open to good ideas .and knowing that we respect straight dealing as well. 
That's how you've approached the Tax Forum and the Future Jobs Forum and it's a good thing.
Making contributions to a real and responsible reform conversation.
Ranging across a broad agenda, supported by quality policy research and new ideas.
Through authoritative, non-partisan contributions, to a serious discussion grounded in the facts.
Based on an understanding of the direction of public policy in this country and an engagement with the Government's overall approach.
Taking your part in our processes which  -  like the business tax reform working group, like the Tax Forum, and like the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century  -  reflect my preference for the methodical and respectful development of ideas.
I want business to play a key role in the intellectual work to shape Australia's future prosperity over the coming century.
That's the role you've played in making the case for tax reform this year.
That's the role you've often played in making the case for economic reform with a social purpose as well.
Understanding that a strong economy is an economy with jobs and growth, offering opportunity for all.
Understanding that a strong economy allows us to pay for the services and the safety net on which, as your Council put it recently, the Australian social compact is predicated.
And that this social compact is in turn the predicate for public support for continuing economic reform.
These are things we have done together well in the past and which I am sure we can do together well in the future.
Together, we should be optimistic. 
Not because change is always good  -  but because Australia is always good enough to make the best of change.
Together, we should be determined too.
Because in an Asian century, with a productive economy, working together for reform the prize for Australia is rich indeed.
A strong economy and opportunity for all, more jobs and better jobs.
Spreading the benefits and dignity of work to every corner of our country. 
Turning a mining investment boom into an opportunity boom.
Great opportunities are there for us when we work together well.
My Government will do its part to be sure we do that. I'm sure you will too. 



Your Excellencies
Mr Acting Chief Justice
Ministerial and parliamentary colleagues
Member of the Australian Defence Force past and present
Custodians of the Australian War Memorial
Friends of peace all
On May 5 this year, a frail old man died in Perth.
The sort of death that happens in nursing homes every day.
But this was no ordinary loss.
With the passing of Claude Choules, the final link to World War One has been broken.
Around 70 million people fought in that dreadful conflict.
Mr Choules was the last.
A mighty bond, worn down to a single slender thread, itself now broken.
An age ended.
Its sole surviving voice forever mute.
Claude Choules was there on this day, 93 years ago.
The day the guns fell silent.
The day that peace began.
But if November 11 was the end of war, it was the end of innocence too.
Never again the laughter of unclouded years'.
The armistice forged that autumn morning was a bitter, partial peace.
But then again, it always is.
Because human nature is weak and the summons to warlies never far away.
That is how this memorial to one war came to be opened in the midst of another.
And how hardly a day has passed since 1941 when Australians have not been abroad on active service, half of that time in combat operations.
The truth is we are a good nation in an imperfect world.
A people of peace so often called to war.
Fighting other nations, but really fighting deeper foes:
Tyranny, injustice, persecution and greed.
Never for national gain.
Never for purposes other than what we judged to be right.
Surveying these walls and the immense sadness of 102,000 names written on them, it is right to conclude that our nation  -  and especially the young people of our nation  -  have always accepted the cost and burden of war, as seen in Afghanistan this very day.
If we pay that price willingly, we never pay it lightly.
Because war is a profound responsibility for any nation to undertake.
Is it not surprising that men like Claude Choules and Charlie Mance who saw the worst of war became the most fervent sons of peace, and so often shunned observances such as this.
They knew what we only see through a glass darkly'.
Privy to the joyless irony of conflict:
that the aim of war is peace  -  and the price of peace is all too often war.
An unbearable paradox witnessed by endless rows of pale, identical gravestones, and mud-soaked fields that even now still yield up their dead.
There are many tributes to war  -  memorials, wreaths, poems and songs.
All of them reaching for the unsayable.
All of them falling necessarily short.
Perhaps the only memorial that fully touches the enormity of war is silence.
It was in silence that so many of our veterans wrapped themselves when they came back.
Having seen and done things too awful to ever bring into the sanctity of their own homes.
Or to share with people who could never understand.
The things of which there is nothing left to be said.
Things for which words and symbols fail.
And contemplation remains our best and only gift.
In the wisdom and dignity of our silence, therefore, let us not forget.
It is little enough to ask of us who gained so much, from those who gave so much.
So in our still and grateful hearts, let there be only silence.
That on this day, and on every day, in every month and season, we will remember them.
Lest We Forget. 



Today the Australian people pay our respects to all the citizen-soldiers of your city on a hill.
Meeting, here as we do, on a Hill of Sacrifice.
For the Australian people and for the American people this is a year of anniversaries.
Seventy years since 1941.
Since the infamous attack on Pearl Harbour, since that day which first brought Australia and the United States together in a Pacific war.
Sixty years since 1951.
Since the signing of the ANZUS Treaty which joined Australia and the United States in a solemn commitment, since first we joined together formally as allies, not just as friends.
And ten years since September 11.
Since the attacks on America which changed the world we live in but could not change the values which together we share, since for the first time our ANZUS treaty was invoked.
In this year of anniversaries, it is a very great privilege for me, representing every Australian, to be together with you as you remember the veterans of America's wars.
In this beautiful and hallowed American place  -  where so many of America's own lie in graves which they found too soon  -  you would be well entitled to say:
They died for us. This is a day and a place for ourselves alone.
But we Australians know that this is not your way.
Because we know that so many of these buried here died for us too.
When we were under attack in the Pacific, so many of these buried here were among those who came to our aid.
They fought with us, together, side by side, step by bloody step.
So today, when Australians remember our own fallen, we remember yours.
And I remember this, too:
That when the fear of an invasion of my country was finally destroyed, it was destroyed by sailors from your country, destroyed at the Battle of the Coral Sea.
It is a battle which is immortal in Australia, a battle which is immortalised in the beautiful Map Galleries here as well.
Today, Australians honour your fallen.
Australia does not forget.
And we remember the origin of this day itself.
I believe something of the peace-loving character of your people is shown in the importance you place on this day, November 11.
It is not the anniversary of the onset of a great conflict.
Not the commemoration of a great victory or great feat of arms, it is the day and the hour of the end of the Great War.
You remember your veterans in the moment to which each one of them dedicated their dearest hopes - you remember them at the moment when peace began.
Our two nations have been allies these past sixty years.
Our two peoples have been friends for longer still.
Through many dangers, toils, and snares, we have already come.
Australia will never forget the sacrifices you made for peace in the past.
Australia will always share the hopes you have in the future for peace. 



President Obama
Mr Harry Jenkins, Speaker of the House of Representatives
Senator the Honourable John Hogg, President of the Senate
The Honourable Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition
Honourable Members of the Australian Parliament
Distinguished guests
Mr President.
It's good to see you again after so long, it's been what, two days?
Now I'm not saying our Air Force is faster than yours, our Air Marshal Brown did ask me not to lay down any challenges on his behalf but the Royal Australian Air Force did beat Air Force One to Canberra from Hawaii.
Prior to leaving Hawaii my partner Tim did get a small lecture from the First Lady. 
Michelle instructed Tim to make sure we fed you up in Australia because she's worried you work so hard you forget to eat. 
So we've responded to her request by making sure you eat a hearty dinner and that there are several hundred witnesses.
Mr President, you come to Australia with the honours of a Head of State.
You come as well, as an ally and a partner and a friend.
And you come as a person for whom many Australians feel great personal warmth.
Not just for the substance of your leadership abroad and at home.
But for the style of modern leadership you display as well.
Australians, not given to overstatement, see you leading a great nation amid all the passions of politics in a democracy and we see in you a combination of clear vision and a deep calm.
And we admire your own unique journey in life and law, community and politics.
Australians who know your memoir Dreams from My Father can't help but experience the shock of the familiar as we read your remembrances of times past, of a life lived with roots in many places.
From Hawaii and Indonesia to Kansas and Kenya, from Boston to Chicago to Washington.
We know that in this respect, you embody the American dream of opportunity.
But Australians also recognise, in your wider reflections on identity and place, the value of a world view that looks outwards rather than inwards.
Like ours, a state of mind that is inclusive, rather than exclusive, that sees diversity not as a weakness but as a great strength.
Like ours, an acceptance of responsibility in the world, of an obligation to all, that goes with maturity as a people and a nation.
That is your story, that is our story, that is part of what our two people hold in common.
Part of our common cause for the common good.
Mr President
We have been allies for sixty years.
Comrades in arms for decades before then.
And friends for longer still.
In what is a year of anniversaries, we share a long history but we know it is a history defined, more than anything else, by our shared, restless, forward questing.
Defined always, then and now, by the things we do together to honour our national pledges, to be young and free, to be home to the brave.
Mr President  -  welcome to Australia.



President Obama
Mr Harry Jenkins, Speaker of the House of Representatives
Senator the Honourable John Hogg, President of the Senate
The Honourable Tony Abbott, Leader of the Opposition
Honourable Members of the Australian Parliament
Distinguished guests
Mr President.
In March this year I was the fourth Australian Prime Minister to speak in your people's representative house.
Like Prime Ministers Menzies, Hawke and Howard, each of us received as an ally and a friend.
Today, you are the fourth American President to speak here.
Like each of your predecessors, you come here as a friend and ally as well.
Mr President, welcome to our Parliament.
You meet us as your predecessors did.
A people enlivened by a spirit of confidence and resolve.
As friends, we recognise that same spirit in the nation you lead.
One you would no doubt express in those famous words-
Yes we can.
As allies, in this year of anniversaries, we recall that spirit in so much we have done together in the years we have shared.
A spirit we showed in 1941.
When a terrible Pacific war began which tested us both deeply and cost us both so much, but in which our will ultimately prevailed.
A spirit we shared in 1951.
When leaders from both our nations imagined and then brought about a new future for us in the world, as allies not just as friends.
And a spirit we felt deeply on September 11.
When we began our fight together to deny terrorism a safe haven, and to bring justice for terrorism's victims.
Justice which was delayed but which, this year, could not be denied.
Mr President
As allies, we look forward always and this is a year in which we have made plans for a future just as great.
A year in which we have drawn on the confidence and resolve we share knowing that together, we can prevail.
Confident we can secure our own nations  -  and co-operate for peace.
In Afghanistan. 
Where, together, we are seeing the mission through to transition.
In our region. 
Where the expanded co-operation we have announced will see our alliance remain a stabilising influence in a new century of regional change.
A new step agreed on during your visit, but more than a new step for our two nations, it is a renewal of our alliance itself.
Confident we can create jobs and restore global growth.
At the G20 and APEC, in our decisions to forge an ambitious Trans Pacific Partnership, in our discussions here on the prospects for trade and at the East Asian Summit this weekend.
Where we will work together to keep the doors of trade open so the whole of the world's economy grows, creating jobs for all the world's people.
Confident we can secure clean energy and combat climate change too.
Working together, taking our part in global action.
Encouraging tariff cuts on environmental goods, promoting energy efficiency and sharing plans for low-emissions technologies.
And each of us driving change at home.
Mr President
The resolve and confidence of our two nations has always served a high purpose.
Since its founding in 1951, ours has been an Alliance for a secure future.
But it has always been more.
Our alliance was anticipated a decade earlier  -  in the judgements of an Australian Prime Minister and the resolve of an American President.
And the partnership between us is still deeply imprinted with the personal character and public ideals of those two great men.
For it has never been simply a treaty to defend our interests or protect our territory.
It was then, and is now, a friendship dedicated to the values we share in the life of the world.
Mr President
In Perth there is a Library dedicated to the memory of my great predecessor, John Curtin.
Our great wartime leader, the man who looked to America free of any pangs.
There you find a book given to him during his visit to the United States in 1944.
Prime Minister Curtin and President Roosevelt met as leaders of two great nations at war.
But as two great leaders, they looked ahead to the peace.                                                     
And Curtin returned to his country with much more than a plan for security.
He brought back  -  and kept as a treasure  -  an illustrated book edition dedicated to President Roosevelt's four essential human freedoms as well.
Freedom of speech, freedom to worship, freedom from want and freedom from fear.
Freedoms for which so many diggers and GIs died.
Freedoms for which Curtin and Roosevelt were each still working on their own final day.
And in our work together in the world now  -  we are true to that great charter still.
To peace and security. 
For jobs and growth. 
With a clean environment and clean energy.
Mr President.
We welcome you here as you come as an ally, a partner and friend.
Mr President welcome to our Parliament. 



Thank you very much.
I start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in the spirit of reconciliation pay my respects to elders past and present.
I'm here to introduce President Obama to you, and I know that you are going to give him a wonderfully warm Darwin, Northern Territory welcome.
We're here for three reasons.
First, President Obama said when he came to Australia that he wanted to get out beyond Canberra; he wanted to get out and about and meet some real Aussies and no better place to do it than here in Darwin, here in the Northern Territory.
President Obama, a few characteristics of these real Aussies, having spent some time last year in Afghanistan watching the AFL grand final replay with them, they love their sport even when Collingwood wins. It's always a controversial call.
They like having a drink with their mates, but when they're deployed overseas we feed them this toxic brew called Near Beer. I'm sorry about that. They love their country, they work hard - they work hard in a spirit of mateship and accepting responsibilities. So, President Obama here to some real Australians.
Second, President Obama is here to say to the serving military personnel, to the people from our Australian Defence Force and to some Americans friends as well, thank you for what you do, thank you from me as Prime Minister of Australia and from President Obama. Thank you for everything that you do in our own nation, in times of natural disaster. Thank you for the hard work and training you do in this place. Thank you for the way that you hold up the standards of our country and hold our flag high, whether it's in East Timor, or the Solomon Islands, or the hard fight in Afghanistan, you are there doing what we need you to do.
You are there because you want to serve and we are so tremendously proud of you, and particularly tremendously proud of those of you who have been to Afghanistan and who are looking to go back; those who know that that fight has given us days of sorrow, as well as days of reward, days of progress; those of you who have shown fortitude and bravery, no matter how tough it's got.
Thank you for your determination, and we share your determination to see the mission through.
And last, but by no means least, President Obama is here because he and I have been working to strengthen the great alliance between our two countries, working to make sure that the alliance lives anew in this place, in the Northern Territory, by bringing 250 Marines here initially, going to 2,500 Marines over a staged process, so that shoulder-to-shoulder with our American friends we can train with them, we can be with them to meet the contingencies in our region.
We are conscious that when we talk about the American-Australian alliance, when we talk about ANZUS, really we're talking about you, because you are the ones who do the heavy lifting, you are the ones that make this alliance live, day in day out, through the work that you do.
We admire your sense of duty, we admire your courage, we admire your experience, we admire the fact that you face down adversity.
And the President of the United States of America is here to tell you that himself  -  ladies and gentlemen, one and all, President Obama.


It is my great pleasure to be here among the ASEAN family  - and indeed Australia was proud to become ASEAN's very first dialogue partner back in 1974.
It is my great pleasure to be here in Bali  -  this beautiful island where the very first ASEAN Summit was held 35 years ago.
It is my great pleasure to be here in Indonesia  -  a great strategic partner and friend of Australia over many decades.
The relationship between Australia and Indonesia has never been more important for our two countries.
And I want to thank and pay tribute to President Yudhoyono for his efforts in building the friendship that our two nations enjoy.
I am looking forward to participating on Sunday in what will be the first of annual summit meetings between Australia and Indonesia, reflecting our desire to work ever more closely and cooperatively together.
Friends, I recently turned 50 and I was thinking about the Asia I learned about as a young girl back in the 1960s.
It was a region of poverty, colonialism, ideology and war.
The reality, a few short decades later, couldn't be more different - for Asia, and for Australia's place in it.
The region is growing in prosperity, peaceful and strong.
And for my nation, these have been remarkable years of learning and engagement.
Years in which we came  -  not always easily  -  to see our place in Asia as a source of strength.
To celebrate the advantage of adjacency to our own neighbourhood rather than fear the tyranny of distance from our Northern Hemisphere origins.
It is true we come from many cultures; many different histories; many political traditions.
But our objective is the same: to strengthen and deepen our economic, political and security cooperation across the Asian region.
And to do so in what that very first ASEAN Summit calledthe spirit of mutual respect and mutual benefit.
Today we gather on the eve of another summit.
A defining moment for our region as the United States and Russia join the East Asia Summit for the first time in its short history.
President Obama has just visited Australia and I know he is looking forward to being the first US President to attend the East Asia Summit.
It is defining because it acknowledges the global significance of our region.
Because it acknowledges the shift in economic power to the East is not a temporary phase but a long-term development of lasting significance to the whole global community.
This is truly the Asian Century'.
And by Asia, we don't just mean China and India  -  but the whole of Asia.
This is a favoured region at the best time in its history.
Economic growth the fastest in the world.
Economic growth lifting millions of people out of poverty.
For all who exercise leadership in the region, this is cause for the greatest satisfaction.
To see the living standards of your people improve and to see your nations rise in the esteem of the world.
This is the region where the economic history of the 21st century will be written.
By 2020, it is estimated that 1.2 billion people will join the middle classes of Asia.
We are witnessing enormous economic and human transformation and that creates enormous opportunity.
That shift is already well underway, as any visitor to the streets of Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur or Bangkok will attest.
We are witnessing the growth of financial and legal services.
Higher education.
Technology and innovation.
It is a story of dynamism and sophistication.
But we also know that our emerging success story is not immune from the events of the wider world.
I am sure that at the East Asia Summit, leaders will want to talk about the Eurozone crisis and how it is affecting the region's prospects.
The Global Financial Crisis is not over.
Instead it has presented as a crisis in two parts.
The first phase was largely a crisis of liquidity in the private sector, triggered by the collapse of the sub-prime mortgage market in the US.
The second and current phase is a crisis largely surrounding sovereign entities and their capacity to meet their debt obligations. 
We are seeing more turbulence on global markets.
The need to act has become more urgent, not less, since the G20 in France. 
So we look to Europe for a swift and decisive response to problems of high debt and low growth facing the Eurozone.
New political leadership in Italy and Greece offers the Eurozone a further opportunity for the response the world needs to see. 
We urge them to seize this opportunity and implement the October 27 package in full.
Beyond resolving the Eurozone crisis, the most immediate challenge to the health of the global economy is securing  continued global growth.
That will require economies committing to macroeconomic policies to support recovery and this includes action from both the developed economies and the major emerging economies of the world.
Developed economies need to take steps to bolster growth in the short-term, whilst putting their public finances on a sustainable footing over the longer-term.
Emerging surplus economies need to rebalance their economies away from external demand and towards domestically-driven consumption, and allow for a greater role of market forces in setting the value of their currencies.
And all economies need to undertake necessary structural reforms to boost productivity and growth.
One of the harsh lessons of the Global Financial Crisis has been that economic problems no longer begin and end at national borders.
This was a lesson Asia itself learned through the Asian Financial Crisis of the late 1990s.
At the G20, leaders acknowledged the International Monetary Fund's central role as a key line of defence in the global economy and leaders affirmed their strong commitment to supporting the Fund to carry out its systemic responsibilities.
Friends, as global economic and strategic weight shifts from west to east, global institutional frameworks reflect this in turn.
At the 24th ASEAN-Australia forum in September in Canberra, Australia reaffirmed its support of ASEAN's mission to champion regional integration.
Expanding markets.
Eliminating barriers to trade.
Australia recognises this through a growing body of cooperative work with ASEAN across a broad spectrum of areas including: business and people-to-people links; education and health; climate change; and transnational crime, including drug trafficking and people smuggling.
With Indonesia, China, Japan, Korea, India and Australia counted among its members, Asia takes its rightful place at the G20.
And now, with Russia and the United States onboard, nearly half of the G20 sits at the EAS table.
Just as ASEAN has grown in stature and purpose since 1967, new institutions have emerged to meet the needs and challenges of the 21st century.
The East Asia Summit is one such institution whose wide membership is a response to the new era that has redefined how we view our world.
Perhaps our single most important understanding is in the area of trade.
We know that closed markets are never the answer.
Nor is this a time for the faint-hearted.
As with the financial crisis which we so successfully negotiated in 1997, this is a time to be resolute and embrace the future.
A time to invest  -  as my Government is  -  in the drivers of growth: skills, infrastructure, high-speed broadband, clean energy, tax reform, better health care.
To strengthen our banking and regulatory regimes.
To optimise our exchange rate settings.
To boost transparency, enshrine the rule of law and uphold the rights of our people.
Above all, this is a time to keep breaking down barriers and opening the doors of trade.
There is a simple equation at work here: trade equals growth, equals jobs.
Benefits that accrue even through unilateral tariff reductions, as Australia's experience over the past 25 years so amply demonstrates.
Making us more competitive.
Making us more productive.
And forcing us to look beyond our own shores because nations that trade are nations at peace.
Friends, I'm very proud of the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
And I warmly commend Indonesia on finalising ratification this week.
This is the most comprehensive trade deal that ASEAN has negotiated.
A gold-standard regional trade agreement.
By opening up our markets to each other, we are creating a trading group with a combined population of 620 million people involving some of the fastest growing economies on earth.
Around this time last year, President Yudhoyono and I agreed our two countries should work towards a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
Our Trade Ministers have used the time since to prepare the ground for detailed talks, consulting with our business communities and discussing economic cooperation designed to ensure the benefits of the agreement are widely spread.
Now we are both in a position to begin in earnest our work on the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
In doing so, we will emphasise the P' in CEPA  -  partnership  -  ensuring our agreement delivers real benefits to everyday Indonesians and everyday Australians.
Both our governments are determined that it will not only be large corporations that benefit from this market opening  -  as important as you are.
We want to ensure the benefits of greater trade are spread throughout our communities and throughout our regions.
Indonesia's population of more than 240 million makes it the fourth most populous country on earth. 
Its economy is already one of the 20 largest in the world, having achieved impressive real average annual growth of five per cent during the last decade.
Private forecasters predict Indonesia will grow to around the fifth to eighth largest economy in the world over the next 20 years.
The strong commercial bonds we have built are set to produce large dividends for both our nations.
Friends, the same thinking informed our deliberations at APEC in Hawaii last week.
Regional leaders affirmed that Asia and the Pacific will not wait for the rest of the world to move the free trade agenda forward.
The Trans Pacific Partnership stands to become a free trade zone bigger than the European Union.
But only if we avoid becoming mired in the quibbling and controversy that has beset Doha.
Now it's time for TPP supporters to make this Agreement a reality, translating the consensus and goodwill of last week into a concrete deal next year.
And, of course, our job doesn't end there.
We need to push for further structural reform.
Reform that will promote confidence and allow business to create jobs and drive productivity throughout the region and across the globe.
As governments and as businesses we must not respond to uncertainty by closing markets or turning away from reform.
Governments need to focus on trade and give business the conditions that encourage growth, including through entrepreneurship and innovation.
The driving force behind government measures is the desire to build resilient economies because it is resilience that provides the stable environment which promotes open trade and investment.
But sustainable economic growth is only possible where there is certainty, and the EAS provides a collaborative framework for regional stability and growth.
The key to growth in the region and the resultant jobs is economic openness.
The member nations of the EAS will use our position in the G20 to deal with structural imbalances.
At APEC to open the region as a whole.
And through a comprehensive agenda of Free Trade Agreements to deepen country-to-country economic ties.
We need effective regionalism through institutions with the right membership and mandate to address the full range of security, political and economic issues facing the region.
The EAS has made a strong start to what I believe will be a great history of cooperation between nations who have not always been friends.
We have learned from our history and moved on from it.
We understand the need for cooperation and convergence.
And we are beginning to see just what a more united Asia can mean for our region and for the world.
This is moment of opportunity and a time of hope.
Let's master its challenges and seize its opportunities.
In the ASEAN spirit.
As partners  -  as neighbours  -  as friends.
Together.



Mr Speaker, In my statement to the House last year on the war in Afghanistan, I set out to paint a very honest picture of the difficulties and challenges facing our mission in that country.
I did so, confident that Australians are a realistic people.
Our people of peace, so often called to war, have always known that human conflict brings days of sorrow as well as days of progress.
And Australians well know this war is no exception.
Australians well understand that days of progress and days of sorrow still lie ahead.
Of course, we wish it could somehow not be so.
It is right that in hard moments our hearts ache for all that is lost and all there is still to lose.
Of course, we know that in an imperfect world, there is no perfect way.
It is right that we do all that we can, with all that we have, to defend Australia and its national interests.
This is the world we live in. 
It has not become a perfect world in this last year.
Mr Speaker, the international strategy in which we take our part is sound.
Focussed on counter-insurgency and designed to deliver transition.
Led by President Obama since 2009.
Supported by the leaders of the 48 other countries who are members of the International Security Assistance Force.
Carried out under a United Nations mandate and with the support of the countries of the world.
A strategy which is consistent with Australia's aim in Afghanistan as well: that a functioning Afghan state is able to assume responsibility for preventing the country from again being a safe haven for terrorists.
Our mission in Uruzgan as part of the international strategy is clear.
Protecting the Afghan people.
Training the Afghan security forces.
And building the government's capacity.
Australia's national interests in Afghanistan are also unchanged.
They remain very real  -  very clear.
There must be no safe haven for terrorists in Afghanistan.
We must stand firmly by our ally, the United States.
Mr Speaker, yes, we are paying a high price for progress in Afghanistan.
But progress is being made.
Our national interests in Afghanistan have not changed in twelve months.
Our mission has not changed.
The timetable for transition to Afghan-led security by the end of 2014 has not changed either.
We will complete our mission of training and transition.
Mr Speaker, I believe that our Parliament and our people want to know more about the daily work of our troops  -  and our civilians  -  in Afghanistan.
Australians should have a practical and realistic picture of what our people in Afghanistan are doing on the ground.
The moving and now sadly familiar images of ramp ceremonies overseas and funerals at home are a very real part of the story of the war  -  but they are not the whole story.
We owe it to our troops, and to our nation, to understand the whole.
Defence has around 1550 personnel deployed in Afghanistan at any one time.
Over two thirds of them serve in Uruzgan.
Many of the Australians currently there arrived at the end of June and will be deployed until around March next year.
With rotations, nearly four and a half thousand Australian Defence Force personnel will spend time in Afghanistan this year.
Many will be on their second and third deployments ... some will have been to Afghanistan many times.
Combined Team Uruzgan is principally an Australia-US partnership, but it also includes some contributions from Singapore and Slovakia.
Most of our soldiers in the Team are part of the Mentoring Taskforce.
The Taskforce trains and mentors the Afghan National Army's 4th Brigade  -  to make it ready to take over lead responsibility for security in Uruzgan.
The Taskforce and the Brigade train and fight together.
Working hard to build the Brigade into an effective security force.
Removing Improvised Explosive Devices where they are found.
Searching out caches where insurgents hide explosives, Improvised Explosive Device components and weapons.
They have been involved in hundreds of incidents involving direct fire  -  hundreds of firefights  -  this year.
To support these operations, they maintain forward or patrol bases, across the province, in some cases as far as seventy five kilometres from our main base at Tarin Kot.
And they join operations outside the province too, cutting the so-called rat runs, the routes which provide support and supply to insurgents in Uruzgan.
This last year, the Afghan 4th Brigade has increasingly assumed the lead for the planning and preparation of operations.
And as that has happened, our Australians have increasingly concentrated on mentoring and partnering Afghan command and combat support functions.
Our Special Forces work alongside the Afghan National Police's Provincial Response Company. 
Together, they have been targeting insurgent leaders and bomb-makers.
Finding weapons.
Interdicting some of the movement of Taliban forces and supplies across Afghanistan.
Working alongside the Afghan National Interdiction Unit, our Special Forces disrupt the narcotics trade as well.
In September and again earlier this month, the Interdiction Unit captured hundreds of millions of dollars worth of narcotics and thousands of kilos of poppy seed stored in preparation for next year's growing season.
They cut vital money flows to the insurgency and Taliban when they did.
Another example of our work in building Afghan security capacity is our work at the Afghan National Army Artillery Training School.
The Afghan artillerymen we have helped train have now formed a new battery within the Afghan National Army.
And in early April they were deployed to Kandahar to commence counter-insurgency operations.
In Uruzgan Australians also work with the Afghan police to get them ready for transition. 
The Australian Federal Police currently has 20 officers at the Police Training Centre and our police have trained more than 1600 Afghan National Police officers in local policing work.
This is our people's daily work.
Protecting the Afghan people and training the Afghan security forces.
Every day, Australians are working to strengthen institutions and deliver basic services as well.
In Kabul, led by our Ambassador, our diplomats work with the Afghan Government and our international partners to prepare for transition in Uruzgan province.
We have 12 AusAID staff in the country at any one time, working in Kabul, Kandahar and Uruzgan.
In Uruzgan, Australia leads the Provincial Reconstruction Team.
Officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and AusAID work hard in what is a vital and perhaps under-recognised role.
These fine public servants serve our national interest well.
Australia is amongst the top ten bilateral aid donors to Afghanistan.
Our programs fund primary schooling. 
They train farmers to increase crop yields and improve their livestock.
They offer small loans to help rural households develop their own small businesses and economic independence. 
They help remove land mines and teach locals about the risk of mines.
They distribute saplings and plant trees.
Every day this work makes a difference in Afghan lives.
Our soldiers, police and aid workers do their work as part of a political and development strategy for the province as well.
Civilian administrators and aid officials  -  including Australians  -  are helping government work better in Uruzgan and in Afghanistan as a whole. 
They have a difficult task.
Helping to recruit and train effective public officials, including in key provincial positions.
Assisting the Provincial Government to deliver basic services like health, education and rural development.
Playing a constructive role to lift the power and prestige of elected government.
All difficult  -  all vital over time.
Because the international strategy is one which understands that no insurgency is ever defeated by military force alone.
To understand this daily work of our people, we must understand too that their work forms part of a nationwide strategy with international support.
And the international strategy supports the Afghan Government's efforts for reconciliation.
We support reconciliation and the reintegration of insurgents who are prepared to lay down their arms, renounce violence and terrorism and respect Afghanistan's constitution.
The international strategy also understands that Afghanistan exists in a regional security context where all its neighbours must do their part.
This year brought a great victory against terrorism.
The hiding place of Osama bin-Laden was found and Osama bin-Laden was killed.
Justice delayed, but not justice denied.
Yet this great success, revealing as it did bin Laden's presence in Pakistan, underscored the complexity of the war in which we are engaged.
Pakistan, its military and people, are on the frontline of terrorism and have been victims of its violence themselves.
In that country, perhaps as many as thirty thousand civilians and five thousand military personnel have died in terrorist attacks in the past ten years.
We do co-operate with Pakistan on counter-terrorism.
And the international community is there to assist as well.
All that is true. 
What is also true is this.
It is time for Pakistan to do more to counter terrorism and extremism.
Particularly on its border with Afghanistan.
That is in the interests of Afghanistan, Australia, our coalition partners, it is in the interests of Pakistan itself.
Mr Speaker, this was the daily work of the Australian military and civilians in Afghanistan this last year.
And it was not isolated work.
Across Afghanistan this last year, Coalition and Afghan troops put considerable pressure on the insurgency. 
Sustained operations through the year weakened the Taliban's leadership and disrupted its ability to recruit and resupply.
In 2010, the momentum of insurgents had already been halted and then reversed.
In 2011, the insurgents were unable to retake any ground from the control of the International Security Assistance Force.
These gains need to be consolidated. 
Despite our successes, the Taliban is not yet defeated.
But there is progress on the ground.
The 4th Brigade is becoming more capable and professional. 
So is the Afghan National Army as a whole.
Its ability to combat improvised explosive devices has significantly improved  -  more than 120 Afghan counter-IED operators are in the field with another 70 in training now.
Some of their training has been from Australians.
Afghan medics are about to deploy to patrol bases to train Afghan soldiers in skills that will enable them to stabilise combat injuries and prevent non-battle injuries.
They've been trained by Australians.
The Afghan National Police's crime scene and evidence collection procedures have improved.
Thanks to Australian training too.
And progress can be seen in the country as a whole.
Important tactical victories have been won fighting Al Qaeda and degrading jihadist networks.
Maintaining our momentum against the Taliban  -  cutting into their ability to control territory and provide sanctuary for terrorist groups.
And the process of transition has begun.
Several provinces and districts have now moved to Afghan-led security control and further provinces and districts are to be announced soon. 
We understand that security progress is not enough.  
Progress in human development and political reconciliation is vital too.
Afghanistan is a poor country today: a place where most people are extremely poor and where many lack access to clean water, health and education and basic services.
But this is not somehow inevitable or inescapable.
It is a product of war and dictatorship and peace and progress can allow Afghanistan to develop over time.
In the 1960s Afghanistan was a poor country but a growing one.
Its wealth was comparable to that of countries like Malaysia and Portugal  -  countries which have found a path to prosperity in the decades since.
By 2002, much had been lost.
But since 2002 much has been gained.
School enrolments are up from around one million then to over seven million today, including over two and a half million girls.
Basic health services once reached 10 per cent of the population ... they now reach around 85 per cent.
Almost 10,000 km of rural roads have been rehabilitated, employing hundreds of thousands of local workers and building critical infrastructure.
The economy has grown strongly ... averaging 11 per cent growth each year since 2002.
Uruzgan is still a poor province and Afghanistan is still a poor country.
These lost decades can never truly be regained  -  the Afghan people's goals for development, and our work with them, are very realistic.
But Afghanistan is unrecognisable from the place Australians first deployed to ten years ago.
This is what is happening on the ground.
In security, in training the Afghan 4th Brigade, in delivering basic services, progress has been made during 2011.
Mr Speaker, our caution is real. The progress is real too.
So now let me turn to the Government's plans to complete our mission of training and transition, our plans to ensure that progress continues during 2012.
Throughout the coming year, we will continue working closely with the Afghan government, our ally the United States and other international partners on the future of our Uruzgan mission and the course of transition there.
This ultimately depends upon a careful, realistic and professional assessment of the progress of the Afghan 4th Brigade.
Our best professional advice is this: the overall training task is on track.
The 4th Brigade is demonstrating progress towards operating independently.
One of the Brigade's Kandaks, or battalions, is now close to being able to conduct fully independent operations with advisers.
The others are making steady progress with more expected to be capable of conducting independent operations next year.
This is the big picture of the 4th Brigade.
But every member of the House understands the grave significance of the attacks on our soldiers by individual members of the Afghan National Army.
If I can echo the Chief of Defence Force's words, it is critical that we show restraint and reserve our judgements until the investigation of these incidents is complete.
We do not yet have grounds to conclude that these attacks represent a pattern or were directed with a purpose.
What we do know is this.
These attacks killed Afghan and Australian alike.
Our partners in the 4th Brigade, our Afghan partners, are shocked and horrified at what has occurred.
The Afghan National Army is a force of some 300,000 soldiers ... a force making steady progress like the nation it serves.
Whatever their purpose, we are determined not to allow these incidents to erode our trust.
We must not allow attacks like these to strike at the core of our training and mentoring mission in Afghanistan.
Mr Speaker, all our best advice leads us to conclude that the 4th Brigade is on track to assume the lead role on security in Uruzgan by 2014.
And we are making steady and careful preparations for transition now.
Australian forces have already handed over 11 patrol or forward operating bases to Afghan lead.
Mobile mentoring teams will continue to assist our Afghan partners at their operating bases for periods as required.
When our primary training and mentoring task in Uruzgan is complete  -  when the Afghan authorities have assumed lead security responsibility in the province  -  then Australia will adjust our contribution.
The timing to complete transition in Uruzgan is not yet decided. 
But given the progress we now see, it may well be complete before the end of 2014.
And once our mission to train and mentor the 4th Brigade is complete, we will draw down the number of ADF personnel in the country.
We are realistic about the 4th Brigade's progress.
And it's that realistic assessment, by the governments of Australia and Afghanistan and by ISAF, which will decide the timetable for transition in Uruzgan.
We will not allow a security vacuum in the province.
This reflects the international plan across Afghanistan.
In March this year President Karzai announced the first tranche of Afghan districts and provinces to start transition to Afghan-led security responsibility.
As security conditions improve, 2012 will see Afghan authorities take on lead security responsibility in more provinces and districts.
The Afghan government is expected to announce the second tranche of provinces and districts for transition soon.
Transition is a process  -  and in these areas it is expected to take around 12 to 18 months.
By the time transition in the second tranche is completed, Afghan national security forces will have lead security responsibility for around half of the country's people.
As subsequent tranches are announced through 2012 and 2013 the remaining parts of the country will enter transition.
And the Afghan National Security Forces should lead and conduct military operations in all provinces by the end of 2014.
Mr Speaker, over the next three years, Australia will complete our mission of training and transition.
Australia will not abandon Afghanistan.
With Afghan authorities in charge of their own security, the nature of the international effort in Afghanistan will change.
International military forces will reduce in number.
The forces that remain will focus on training and support for the Afghan National Security Forces and on counterterrorism.
Australia's contribution in Afghanistan will continue to be part of a wider international effort. 
We will be engaged through this decade at least.
Naturally much remains to be decided.
For now, the centre of our efforts is directed toward successful transition.
But now is also the time when we will begin to develop the right strategy and approach for beyond 2014  -  for post-transition.
2012 will be an important year.
Working closely with the Afghan government, international community and military planners, we will form our plans for transition and beyond.
What we can say already is this.
The international commitment, including that of our ally the United States, remains substantial.
A substantial commitment in human and in dollar terms.
Today, the US has around 100 000 troops in Afghanistan, reducing to around 90 000 at the end of this year.
Most of the surge troops, which lifted troop numbers to deliver the international strategy, will remain for lost of 2012.
This time next year, there will be around 68 000 US troops in Afghanistan  -  as part of an international force of over 100 000.
By the end of next year our contribution of around 1550 people will be part of a force of over 100 000 uniformed personnel.
The United States is in negotiations with Afghanistan on a long-term Strategic Partnership  -  intended to provide a transparent political framework for long-term cooperation  -  to continue targeting terrorists and support a sovereign Afghan government. 
While the shape of the US commitment in Afghanistan post-2014 is yet to be decided, this work being done by the US on its long-term strategic partnership  -  and work being done by NATO  -  informs our thinking. 
And the May 2012 summit in Chicago of member countries of the international force will be critical in developing this thinking further.
Mr Speaker, what this means is that we have reached an important stage in our national policy on Afghanistan.
I can advise the Parliament that the Government's post-transition planning has formally begun.
Building on the announcements made by the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Foreign Affairs during this year.
During my visit to Afghanistan last month, President Karzai and I discussed formalising a long-term framework agreement for the future of the Australia-Afghanistan partnership.
This kind of co-operative, country-to-country approach is an important framework for our long-term plans. 
We seek an enduring relationship with Afghanistan beyond 2014 as Afghanistan takes on responsibility for its own security and governance. 
Taking in a broad range of bilateral activities, including a sustained development assistance program and support for Afghanistan as a fledgling democracy. 
We have all worked hard to support democratic institutions and process.
The next Presidential elections in 2014 will be a test of those.
So continued electoral reform is important too.
Australia will work closely with the Afghan government and international partners to continue electoral reform and support successful and transparent presidential elections in 2014. 
Good government in the country may be the work of an Afghan generation.
That, of course, is the responsibility of the Afghan Government and people.
But we can help.
While in Afghanistan, I also officially opened Australia's new Embassy in Kabul.
A bricks and mortar symbol that our relationship with the people of Afghanistan will endure.
After 2014 we will continue to maintain links with Uruzgan, a province in which we have invested so much. 
But our role will also have a national focus.
Substantial development assistance and an AusAID presence, including Afghanistan-based official aid personnel.
We also expect to continue defence training to continue building the capacity of the Afghan National Security Forces  -  and for the Australian Federal Police to keep training the Afghan National Police.
We must remain vigilant against the threat posed by al Qaeda and the groups it has inspired.
Al Qaeda and its affiliates still hold ambitions to conduct acts of terrorism in Afghanistan, the region and around the world.
We will continue our efforts in Afghanistan to ensure that the country never again becomes a safe haven and training ground for international terrorism.
Whether there is still a counter-terrorism role for the Australian Defence Force, in concert with the US and other international partners, will depend both on the security situation and on our discussions with our international partners.
The Government will keep under consideration a continued Australian Special Forces presence in Afghanistan beyond 2014.
We will take a firm line on our national interest that terrorism find no safe haven in Afghanistan. 
Mr Speaker, I am deeply aware  -  the Government, the Parliament and the nation deeply feel  -  the burden which is being borne by the Army, by the Australian Defence Force and by the Defence community as a whole.
In the years since 1999 we've asked much of this generation of our Defence Force personnel.
We ask much of their families.
We ask much of the communities they come from and the communities where they live.
And for these good people, this has been a very hard year.
As a nation, we are determined.
We know we have done good things.
As a nation, we know their price.
We know the good things we have done have come at a high cost.
There have been days of sorrow and we do not forget.
Eleven Australians have died in Afghanistan this year.
The 1st Combat Engineer Regiment lost Corporal Richard Atkinson and Sapper Jamie Larcombe in February.
The 2nd Commando Regiment lost Sergeant Brett Wood in May and Sergeant Todd Langley in July.
In May, Lance Corporal Andrew Jones of 9th Force Support Battalion and Lieutenant Marcus Case of 6th Aviation Regiment both died of wounds.
The Incident Response Regiment lost Sapper Rowan Robinson in June. 
2nd Battalion, The Royal Australian Regiment, lost Private Matthew Lambert in August  -  and then last month the Battalion also lost Lance Corporal Luke Gavin.
On the same day Captain Bryce Duffy, 4th Regiment, Royal Australian Artillery, and Corporal Ashley Birt, 6th Engineer Support Regiment, were killed.
We do not forget.
Mr Speaker, I believe that the best tribute we can pay to them is to live by their example.
The example set by those who have died and by those they leave behind.
Of their service without fear.
Even in their mourning they are an example to us: these are people who stick together, these are people who see things through.
I am proud of the respect Australians show to our Defence Force  -  to those serving, to those who have died.
I see that on ANZAC Day and I see it on Remembrance Day, I feel it most when we hold our breath at the news that we most dread, news of new casualties from the field.
We have lost 32 Australians in our decade in Afghanistan.
They are not our only casualties. 
Our wounded  -  and their families  -  have suffered terribly as well.
More than two hundred Australians have been wounded in action in Afghanistan.
Forty eight this year.
They include eighteen soldiers who were involved in improvised explosive device attacks.
Five aircrew who were wounded in a helicopter incident.
And another ten soldiers wounded in the two recent incidents at patrol bases.
They suffer.
Amputations, fractures, gunshot and fragmentation wounds, hearing loss.
What is called mild traumatic brain injury  -  something we will see more and more often as we learn more about how to detect and understand percussion damage from explosions.
Lacerations and contusions, concussion and traumatic brain injury, penetrating fragments and multiple severe injuries.
Many will not serve again. 
Some will not walk again.
Not one will be forgotten.
Our country will recognise and respect our wounded as well as our dead.
Our country will take care of these Australians as they have taken care of us. 
We will see our mission through, we will see our people through as well.
Mr Speaker, this year, I flew from Jamie Larcombe's funeral at Kangaroo Island half way across the world to Washington DC. 
I spoke about him there.
Because I wanted to be sure that his service was honoured, and through him, that of all his mates.
Not just their service and their sacrifice, but their virtues as well.
Their confidence and their resolution.
Their professionalism and their courage.
Their determination to see their mission through. 
They are a sight to see.
Ours is a beautiful country  -  we share a continent of many great sights and last week I took President Obama to see one of our finest.
Fifteen hundred of our young people in uniform in an Air Force hangar on a steamy Darwin day.
And I never thought I'd say drinking a non-alcoholic beer was a highlight of my year.
But a good time depends on the company you keep.
And if it had to be near-beer last month, it was worth every drop for a chance to be near some great young Aussies in the canteen at Tarin Kot.
The job they are doing for us has not changed in twelve months.
They have made progress.  
They have hard days ahead.
So do we.
Ours is a realistic people. 
A people of peace, so often called to war.
We will do what is necessary.
We will defend our national interests.
We will deny terrorism a safe haven in Afghanistan.
We will stand by our ally, the United States.
We will complete our mission of training and transition.



Sydney in the year 2000 was an unlikely setting for a modern-day fairytale.
A beautiful young woman meets a handsome prince, and they live happily ever after.
Of course, there were no carriages or castles.
This was a distinctly 21st century romance:
Meeting amid the lights of a big city.
Exchanging thoughts by email.
And flying back and forth in jumbo jets.
In any case, fairy tales exist only in story books.
Because royalty in these democratic times means hard work.
The choice made by Mary Donaldson  -  like that of her contemporary Catherine Middleton  -  was bold and perceptive.
You knew that in marrying an heir to the throne, you had embarked on a journey of service.
A journey that would last your whole life.
As Australians, we know this from the life of our own Queen, as Danes do from yours.
It is a commitment to duty and leadership.
A commitment that has brought you here among us today.
And so I welcome Your Royal Highnesses as representatives of the Danish nation.
A nation known throughout the world for its values and humanitarian commitment.
A nation that leads the world in policies so crucial for our times like clean energy, urban development and food security.
Concerns you have come to explore with a receptive partner in dialogue this week.
Indeed, I welcome Denmark's commitment to reduce carbon emissions through a carbon price by 40 percent by 2020 and boost the share of renewable to 50 percent of energy consumption.
I know that as Australia undertakes its journey towards a low carbon future, we have a great partner in Denmark.
We are strengthened by your example and your expertise.
It is a partnership that extends beyond governments to the private sector.
And I am delighted that Crown Prince Frederick will journey on Friday to Macarthur in Western Victoria where Danish company Vestas and Australia's Leighton Holdings are building a wind farm, the biggest in the Southern Hemisphere, and another down-payment on our obligation to protect this planet for future generations and build the jobs and industries of tomorrow.
But friends, This could never simply be an official visit based on policy discussions, however worthy they may be.
It is a homecoming.
A return.
A return to the place that will always, with Denmark, be high in your loyalty and love.
For Crown Princess Mary, I know you want your own children to know something of the places that shaped your own upbringing and circumstances.
For Crown Prince Frederick, I know you seek to deepen your understanding of this land which has so unexpectedly become a part of your own life story.
For both of you, and for your children, Australia will always be your other home.
Where you will always feel that sense of warmth and comfort so aptly described in Danish culture as hygge.
Where family and friends await you.
Where formality is never required.
Where our door is always open and you never need to knock.
We are indeed delighted to have you as guests  -  so uniquely connected as you are to this land and its people.
You Royal Highnesses are welcome.
Honoured.
And very much at home.



We would not be here but for the events of 28 April 1996  -  events that will remain in our nation's memory always.
On that day, we saw unmitigated evil from one man.
And extraordinary courage from another.
I refer, of course, to Walter Mikac, whose wisdom and generosity of spirit has brought us together today.
In some very dark days, Walter came to see that too many children grow up knowing fear in their lives, and that he could do something about it.
In response, the Alannah and Madeline Foundation has given new hope to thousands of children, and will give hope to thousands more in the time ahead.
In the past 15 years, the need for our children to be safe has not changed.
But technology has.
The digital world has changed the landscape of childhood dramatically and forever.
Gone are the days when bullying stopped at the school gate.
The spread of electronic devices means bullies can now follow their victims everywhere and in a sense, technology has run ahead of the systems, rules and ethics required to manage the situation.
That is where eSmart has such value.
Because we want children to be as safe in the cyber world as they are, or should be, in the physical world.
I'm delighted that the Australian Government invested $3 million in support of the pilot program, which is now available to public schools in Queensland and Victoria.
I congratulate the Foundation on this result, and I am deeply honoured to be your National Patron.
I'm also deeply honoured that Her Royal Highness has agreed to be International Patron.
I spoke at Parliament House earlier this week of the life of service that Mary and Frederick have embraced.
Their support of the Foundation shows that spirit of dedication in abundance.
The support of the Crown Prince Couple means that more children will be able to enjoy their childhood free from harm.
It was something Alannah and Madeline never got to do.
But it's a gift we can at least give the children of today and tomorrow.
I know it is a cause dear to the heart of Crown Princess Mary.
She is a gracious leader and an inspirational friend.
And it is my very great privilege to welcome her to speak with us today. 



Ten years ago last Tuesday, my friend Bob Carr opened the Visy plant at Tumut.
It was Visy's first big venture into clean energy based on the sustainable re-use of manufacturing by-products.
Today we welcome the second.
Across that decade, Visy's commitment has remained unchanged.
What has changed, however, is the absence of a great Australia, Richard Pratt, and today we remember him with affection and respect.
There is much of Richard's spirit in this plant.
His sense of the future.
His sense of uniting environmental imperatives with commercial opportunities.
His sense of his family and his company as good corporate citizens.
And all those things remain true today.
Friends, I often speak of a clean energy future and I know it can sound like an abstraction sometimes.
But I would simply say to the critics and the sceptics: Come to Coolaroo and see for yourselves.
This is what the clean energy future looks like.
The intelligent application of technology to the challenges facing our planet.
Achieved in a way that fosters investment, profits and jobs.
That's why I say I'm an optimist about our nation's ability to embrace a clean energy future.
Because the signs are here already.
At Coolaroo and Tumut.
At the geothermal facility I saw in the streets of suburban Brunswick.
The new solar energy facility in Newcastle.
The wind farm that Crown Prince Frederick inspected yesterday at Macarthur  -  the largest in the Southern Hemisphere.
The new gas-fired power stations set to go up in Queensland.
All of these projects are a down-payment on the clean energy future we can build together as a nation.
Yes today projects like Coolaroo are the exception.
In a clean energy future, they will become the norm.
They will be places of opportunity for Australians.
Our tradies and engineers will find work on such projects.
Our kids will learn about them at uni and TAFE.
Our whole economy will be re-tooled as we see $100 billion invested in clean energy over the next 40 years.
I'm hugely optimistic about that future.
It means innovation.
It means investment
It means jobs  -  high skill, high wage jobs for our regions as well as our cities.
Above all, it means keeping our planet safe and clean for our grandchildren and their grandchildren.
With the carbon price, we're embarking on a great journey together as a nation.
A transformational journey.
A reform as big as any we've seen in the postwar era.
Such decisions are never easy at the time.
But who would have it any other way?
Who want anything less than a government taking the big decisions for a nation's future ensuring we land on the right side of history.
That's what we've done.
Now that the work of legislation is complete, the work of our business sector begins.
Because it is your ingenuity that will make our carbon future a reality.
That's why we chose a market mechanism.
And indeed only yesterday the OECD released a new report which is the latest piece of expert advice calling for action to reduce carbon pollution to avoid dangerous climate change.
Importantly the OECD confirms that putting a price on carbon is the most effective policy because it creates dynamic incentives for investment in cleaner technologies and infrastructure.
The hidden hand' of the market made us prosperous in the three centuries since the Industrial Revolution began.
The same hidden hand' will help us overcome the unintended consequences of the Industrial Revolution that take the form of climate change.
Firms like Visy are already on the way.
Others will come to learn that acting on carbon is not a drawback but an opportunity.
I'm confident about this because we are a creative and adaptable nation.
Australians can do great things.
We've done them before  -  we can do them again.
This facility is proof.
I welcome it.
I look forward to seeing more of the same across our great nation.
And I take pride in declaring the Visy clean energy plant officially open. 



PM: Well can I welcome everybody to this first meeting of the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce, I know for some it hasn't been an easy journey to Canberra today, I understand that there was some flight delays so I thank people for getting here. Our job here today is to focus on the jobs of Australians, so we've got work to do focussing on Australian jobs.
We know our manufacturing sector is a diverse sector and there are some days of pressure on manufacturing as a result of our high Australian dollar, but I'm very determined as Prime Minister that we work with our manufacturing sector to ensure that we come through these days of pressure, that we have a diverse manufacturing sector that we take with us into the future of this nation.
So the work we're going to do around this table, focussing on manufacturing, focussing on Australian jobs, is very important to the nation's future. We come together at a time when the Government has been strongly focussed on manufacturing and engaged in working with each of you in various ways, but the purpose of bringing everybody together is to make sure we understand your up to the minute insights as to what was happening in manufacturing and to make sure that we are, throughout all of the instrumentalities and agencies of government, working as hard as we can together on manufacturing.
So this is a moment to roll the sleeves up  -  Government, business and unions working together for the future of Australian jobs in manufacturing.
I think whilst there are days of pressure at the moment, we also need to remind ourselves that these are days of opportunity and the future has great opportunities for Australian manufacturing. We as a Government are working hard on Australia's role in this the Asian Century, where our nation will get new opportunities as we see the growth in Asia and particularly the growth of the middle class in Asia. More than a billion people who will want the kind of things that we want and that will include elaborately transformed manufactured goods, it will include the best of Australian fashion, it will include a lot of things that people around this table make today and many things that we will innovate and make tomorrow.
So these are days of opportunity too. 



Thank you Jenny, it's so good to be so warmly welcomed by our President, elected by our members.
Delegates, here we acknowledge Australia's first people, we acknowledge the traditional custodians of the land on which we meet.
And I look forward to the great day when we will acknowledge them in Australia's Constitution as well.
Delegates, it is good to be with you all again.
In the sixteen months since we stood together in that toughest of Federal election campaigns, our Party has governed and governed well.
We all shared the hard work of those campaigning days.
And we share the achievements and opportunities of these days of government.
As I have travelled our country since, I have seen our achievements reflected on so many Australian faces  -  and seenthe opportunities we want to spread to all Australians.
I saw them in the faces of the education-hungry young women I met at UnitingCare Ambarvale in May.
Young mums getting help with childcare, with skills, help finding a job, leaving a life of exclusion behind.
That's why this year our Labor Budget gave better help to Australians to get a job and to make sure it pays.
Achievements reflected in the face of a hard-working woman I met last month in Melbourne's west.
She suffers an acquired brain injury but she's never been a victim, started a business in her own home  -  marketing gourmet dog biscuits over the internet!
Now selling them to Harrod's of London for thirty five pounds each.
That's why this year, we took the decision to lay the foundations for national disability insurance, fairness at last for two million Australians, people with disabilities and their carers  -  it will be a defining Labor reform.
Opportunities reflected in the face of a woman I met in Darwin last year. 
A cancer survivor worried by a sore leg that won't heal, now getting the care she needs.
Because her dermatologist in Adelaide can examine her leg on a high speed video link on-line.
That's why we're rolling outhigh speed broadband.
Tasmania led the nation, beginning the replacement of the hundred-year old copper wire network, and now this year inBrunswick and Armidale, Townsville and Kiama, the National Broadband Network is an investment in the future which is operating now.
Achievements and opportunities reflected in the face of a resilient teenager I met in The Canberra Hospital.
A sixteen year old boy getting a hip joint operation faster because we're cutting waiting times. 
That's why this year we delivered for health  -  not just much-needed extra funds, but the long-lasting reforms to give our people better care.
And delegates, achievements and opportunities I have seen reflected in so many faces of our clean energy future.
I've met workers at a Brisbane tip generating power from methane, traditional apprentices with clean technology skills in Brunswick and wind farm technicians in Bungendore.
Workers at one of our cleanest baseload power stations at Dalby and staff who told me about pioneering technology at Kogan Creek.
The faces of the new jobs being created in our clean energy economy.
That's why this year.
After a debate lasting the best part of two, even three decades together, this year, we turned words into deeds and next year, Australia will have a price on carbon.
Great Labor achievements  -  great Australian opportunities.
And delegates, together we've done more.
Labor is the Party of jobs. 
And you know the value I put on the benefits and dignity of work.
A value I've never seen reflected so clearly as on the days when I have been lucky enough to visit Australia's gas fields and mines.
And all the places in our great resource states  -  Western Australia, Queensland, and now South Australia  -  where our young people are trained in the trades they need to make the most of the mining investment boom, to win their own jobs and to make the boom last.
As the Party of jobs, we govern for jobs.
So in the worst global recession in seventy years, over conservative opposition in the Parliament and beyond, we brought our economy through, stronger than any developed country and your Labor Government, created more than seven hundred thousand Australian jobs.
Labor is the Party of growth. 
And you know my passion for education  -  growth's long-term key.
It is a passion I've seen more than shared, I've seen it exceeded, by the kids, the parents, the teachers  -  and by a great principal, Margaret at Goodna State School, in Queensland's south east.
Where our national partnerships are lifting teacher quality, improving the children's reading and writing and rebuilding this local school as well.
That's why your Labor Government doubled education funding.
And delegates Labor is the Party of fairness. 
The fairness I believe we express above all through the respect we show each other as Australians.
Fairness and respect that your Labor Government works hard to extend to every Australian every day.
As we did when we decided to make a new, fortnightly payment to support surviving Australian prisoners of war  another victory in Labor politics for that great fighter for fairness Tom Uren.
As we did when we took the decision finally to give Australian women paid parental leave.
And when we took the decision to give caring workers equal pay.
We did it because we know that fairness begins in the workplace.
Delegates, we always have from our first days in office in Australia.
Watson's Labor worked so hard for conciliation and arbitration  -  to protect working people.
It took longer than that first, four-month term for Labor in national office  -  but Watson's Labor got it done.
And in doing so they set the test for every one of their successors.
That urgent, ultimate test they set for Labor in office is still the same: did you do the right thing for rights at work.
Friends, this Labor Government did.
Your Labor Government put Work Choices in the grave.
And only victory in 2013 will bury Work Choices forever.
Delegates, we meet today as Labor.
We all know the Labor way.
The way of jobs, of growth, of fairness.
The way of education, of hard work, of respect.
The way of the future.
And we meet as a Party which knows  -  that the Labor way is the Australian way. 
Our great movement's shared identity  -  and our grand Party's historic mission  -  combine as simply as this: we are Labor for Australia.
To govern for Australia is a great privilege for us  -  it is a great responsibility as well.
We love this movement  -  its traditions and ideals  -  but we have always seen it as a movement in service to the nation we love more.
We have always governed by putting the nation first.
The responsibilities of Government are the responsibilities of hard choice.
Curtin knew that when he raised conscripts for military service overseas.
Chifley knew that in the industrial winter of 1949.
Whitlam knew it when he ended the bitter debate over state aid.
Hawke and Keating knew it every day they governed.
And we know it now.
We showed it this week, as we made the hard decisions to bring the Budget back into the black.
We will show it again this weekend, as we make the hard decisions to prepare our nation for the future too.
Delegates, in these coming days, I want us to have a fair dinkum Labor Party conference.
We didn't join Labor in our youth because we had no opinions.
We didn't come here for a coronation or a campaign launch.
We came here for debates, we came here for surprises, we came here to have votes.
This is why I called the review of our Party last year.
And why I asked three fine Labor servants  -  John Faulkner, Steve Bracks and Bob Carr  -  to serve our Party once more.
To bring forward proposals to strengthen us  -  to be a Party of members because I knew we needed change.
That's why I also stated very clearly in September how I believe the next stage of Party reform should begin.
And at this Conference, I believe we can go further.
We can set a recruiting challenge.
Eight thousand new members next year and I want this Conference to sign up to the target this weekend.
We can adopt a community organising approach.
Backed with real resources, giving our Labor members and activists the tools they need to organise and fight for progress in their communities.
So as we grow, we grow in connection, including trialling community preselections, primaries, in some seats. 
And we must lead in the new world of campaigning on line.
We must have a serious digital presence through which Australians who share our values can engage with our ideas.
A base from which Labor campaigns can be organised.
The proposal to build a much stronger Labor on line presence is a vital proposal for the future.
We can move to modern structures.
Recognising that the old branches alone are not the future, embracing new forms of online membership and opportunities for supporters to become more involved.
Allowing members to organise around policy areas that reflect their interests and ideas.
And offering new opportunities to participate in policy development through genuine forums which include parliamentary, union and directly elected representatives.
And above all, we can create a richer experience for members of the Labor Party.
A genuine opportunity for all Labor people to take part in the Party's political life.
More opportunities to have a say and a direct vote in important decisions.
Starting with a National President, elected by members, to serve a full, three-year term.
I know change needs fresh thinking and strong leadership.
But you know it needs something else as well.
No parliamentary leader  -  no executive or committee  -  can dictate the moment at which we become again a Party of members.
As Leader, Ican create the opportunity  -  only you can take it.
Delegates, in the debate tomorrow I urge you to seize this moment for reform.
A Party of members will always be a Party of passions.
And I know we are more than able to express our passions in unity and with respect.
Because the respect we share  -  the trust we have in each other  -  join us in a bond that no debate, however passionate, can untie.
Because we meet as Australian Labor people.
Because we meet to debate the way ahead  -  for our country and for our common cause.
And because we know that our cause and our ideas our plans for jobs and growth and fairness, these things must be fought for. 
Argued here, yes, then fought for as well.
Fought for in politics against determined conservative opposition, fought for in every street, suburb and town.
Together, we must seek to govern, because only Labor can govern for all.
Delegates, I said 2011 would be a year of decision and delivery, Inever said it wouldn't be hard.
And I knew that in 2011 our Labor Government would have to persevere.
Showing the courage of your convictions does take courage.
But delegates, I knew something else.
I knew that in 2011 we would not be alone.
Because I always knew that the volunteers and the members, the activists and the organisers  -  all those who fight for Labor in our time  -  would prove more than worthy of the Labor generations who went before.
You were with us in the hard days of the last election campaign.
You were with us in the hard days of Government this year too.
Labor generations past have claimed great achievements as their own as 2011 ends, you can be proud of what you have done.
And together in 2012, we will do much more.
In 2012 we will cut taxes, lift family payments and lift the pension.
In 2012 we will cut company tax, lift super and build new infrastructure.
In 2012 we will create tens of thousands of jobs.
Delegates, I believe Australians are naturally confident.
We face the future and we see a chance to build, a chance to grow, but I also understand that Australians ask hard questions about their own future too.
Will the mining boom last?  
Will all our people get a fair share of our mineral wealth? 
What will sustain our economy in the days beyond the boom?
Will we build on the great advances that have helped our people live longer? 
Will our senior generations have the choices to work and to live a full life as they age  -  and will they have security of accommodation and care when they need it?
Will Australians with disabilities, children, adults, seniors and their carers, two million in all  -  be able to live a full life?
And perhaps the question that lies at the foundation of it all.
Will we remain economically strong in the Asian Century  -  growing our wealth and spreading fairness too?
What is the future of Australian jobs?
Delegates, I look forward certain that we will answer these questions.
Because we do know the future of Australian jobs.
That future is not jobs for their own sake, not hard work without reward.
But jobs with skills which will be in demand for years  -  jobs in industries which will grow for decades to come.
The farmers of tomorrow won't only farm the wheat to feed us, they'll farm carbon and trade the credits in the world.
The plumbers of tomorrow will have the skills we've always relied on and more and more they'll apply them to transform the energy and water efficiency of our factories and our homes.
Just as the panelbeaters who work our metals today will work in new supply chains tomorrow, for the global manufacturing that will flourish in the Asian Century.
And the caring abilities of our nurses and doctors will be applied in entirely new ways, offering diagnosis and advice on-line and from afar.
This is what working life will really be like in a high-tech, high-skill, clean energy economy.
And these are just some of the future jobs we can already see.
We will create new jobs in our whole economy, from tourism and hospitality, to retail and finance, construction and mining will change as well.
And there are jobs coming which we can hardly imagine today.
Entirely new occupations  -  created by tomorrow's entrepreneurs  -  using the new skills and new technologies we're investing in now.
These are the jobs of the future for which we govern.
And we govern for them now.
We are on track to create over three hundred thousand more during the next two years.
Today we would not swap places with any economy in the world.
It's often said, but rarely is it so true: we did this not by chance, but by choice.      
We govern for jobs  -  by governing for growth.
And we govern for growth by saying yes.
Yes to the skills, to the infrastructure.
Yes to keeping the doors of trade open, to walking the reform road in office every day.
And for that still to be true tomorrow, we still have work to do. 
This is the key to Labor's economic approach: Labor says yes to Australia's future.
To trade training in high schools, to extra university places.
To better roads and ports and to high speed broadband.
To a nation strong and respected in the Asian Century.
And while we govern for jobs through growth, we govern for jobs for fairness.
Fairness, when we extend opportunity to all  -  so everyone has the chance to get ahead.
Fairness too, when we ensure no Australian is left behind.
When we govern for jobs, for growth, for fairness, that is when Labor governs for all.
Delegates, Labor has always governed for all.
This is how we began. 
As men and women coming together in trade unions  -  giving the ordinary person power in the workplace he or she would never have alone.
Aiming to give working people security  -  to end want for all who work.
In the second half of our existence, we aimed higher.
Aiming for a fair distribution of opportunity in a modern economy.
Above all, through an education system that would give working-class kids a chance.
That historic work is not yet done  -  but we must lift our eyes again.
Because we know just how much has changed in these long years  -  we can sense already just how much will change in the future.
And it is because we have always looked with confidence to the future that we are confident to look to the future now.
Confident to show our people the future we see and seek.
Australia is a special country  -  and we can do something special here.
We can set a goal for which few peoples in the world can realistically hope.
Australia can be both prosperous and fair.
Sharing the wealth and the benefits of hard work with all.
Showing the world that a prosperous nation can be a fair nation still.
And silencing the many voices who say it cannot be done.
There are still those who say we must make a simple choice between growing jobs and being fair.
Friends, because we are Australians, because we are Labor people, we know that they are simply wrong.
We have proved the world wrong many times before today.
We are the people who share and stick together.
We are the people who hold on to mateship and the fair go.
We know that to have jobs, we must have growth.
We know that to have fairness, we must have jobs.
So we grow and as we do we spread the growth.
We create jobs  -  and we demand that every job be a job worth having.
We know ours is a people who work hard  -  and we deeply believe all deserve a share in the benefits of their hard work.
This is the Labor way.
This is the Australian way.
We follow it simply because we are us.
And this is Labor's historic task too: to be Australia's Party, to lead in the Australian way.
Our historic task, to carry forward a torch which first burned decades before we ever knew the words the light on the hill.
We always sought to govern and we always governed for all.
We still do.
Delegates, Australia can do this.
We can do this when we say yes.
Yes to jobs, to growth, to fairness.
Labor says yes to Australia's future. 



Australia came into the 1970s with a new vision for our nation and its place in the world beyond the sterile polarities of the Cold War.
It was a vision that brought us closer to our own region.
Closer to an awareness of what we could achieve through active middle-power diplomacy.
Australia's intelligence capacity needed strengthening to operate effectively in the new climate.
And it was from a period of scrutiny that the Office of National Assessments came into being.
Of course, those developments reflected the deep concerns felt by my predecessors, Gough Whitlam and Malcolm Fraser.
But they also bore the unmistakable stamp of another great Australian, Robert Marsden Hope.
He was a brilliant judge and barrister  -  a man of learning and culture.
A civil libertarian; a friend of the Indigenous community.
Described by colleagues from the NSW Supreme Court as a man with an acute mind', a great depth of knowledge' and a passion for justice'.
And remembered in one obituary as one of the nation's more notable achievers.
Robert Hope brought his exceptional gifts to the task of giving our nation an intelligence system equipped to meet the challenges of a complex and changing world.
An intelligence system which, he said, would be entitled to the confidence and respect of the nation.
I think it's fair to say that Justice Hope, and all who worked with him in the 70s and 80s, succeeded beyond all expectations.
Robert Hope's vision was of an intelligence system that is separate from policy making, that draws from many sources but centralises assessments.
A system that assures the Australian public it is working with integrity and propriety.
Indeed, Justice Hope didn't talk about a system.
He talked about an intelligence community; of agencies working collegially to deliver effective advice that best served the nation's interests.
The focus on modernisation positioned Australia for what was to come in the following decades:
The fall of the Berlin Wall.
The rise of Asia.
The growth of technology.
The spread of terrorism.
Over its 33 year history, this agency has advised six Prime Ministers.
From Fraser to Gillard, you have won our trust and our admiration.
In an increasingly complex world, ONA's rigorous analysis, and ability to cut through the noise' has never been more crucial.
These assessments help the government to put our policy decisions in context and make sense of the world.
It is hard to imagine the prime ministership in the 21st century without the work of ONA.
Hard to imagine not having Allan's advice around the National Security Committee table.
Hard to imagine not having ONA's assessments to inform and illuminate our decision making.
Friends, none of this would have been possible without the foundations laid by Robert Hope.
The fact that the intelligence community remains much as he proposed it bears testament to that fact.
Justice Hope left us 12 years ago, but his place in our nation's story will not diminish.
He is honoured by the naming of a park here in Canberra, and a memorial prize at the University of Wollongong where he was founding Chancellor.
But today we pay him further respect with the naming of this building.
It is a place rich in history  -  once home to the Patent Office, the ACT Supreme Court, the Commonwealth Police and the Attorney-General's Department, to name just a few.
Perhaps most significantly, it is one of Canberra's most graceful old buildings, the very type of heritage that Justice Hope spent so of much of his career working to preserve as the founder of the Australian Heritage Commission and the Register of the National Estate and the inaugural chair of the NSW Heritage Council.
I think this is a tribute he would have appreciated most deeply.
A building once slated for demolition, now proudly restored, indeed inscribed in the Register of the National Estate that Justice Hope created.
And a delightful milestone as move towards Canberra's centenary in 2013.
Friends, in all of these things, we see the best of Australia.
Achievements that reflect our ability as Australians to get things right. And underscore the primacy of good public policy in charting the nation's future:
The development of this city as a worthy capital for our country.
The preservation of this building and the heritage legislation that made it possible.
The creation of ONA and the reform of our intelligence community.
And, of course, the life of opportunity and service led by Justice Hope, in whose name this building is now stands.
So I wish the staff of ONA every happiness in your new home.
I know not much makes you happy - reading your assessments but hopefully you take some delight in this. I was joking as I came down here, Allan, that I've never picked one of your reports up that says It's sweet, don't worry about it'. My office joked back with me that one's being prepared for Christmas but I doubt that that's true.
So I wish you every happiness in this building, if not every happiness in everything else that you do.
I thank you for the very great work you do on behalf of our nation.
And I have the very great pleasure in being here to declare this building, the Robert Marsden Hope Building officially open. 



Can I say to the crowd assembled here  -  I love this time of year.
I love it because it means I get to come home to South Australia. I get to come home and spend some time with family and friends, a very precious thing to do.
But I've also made it part of my annual calendar, as I come home to South Australia, to attend here, for Proclamation Day.
Such an important time of reflection on the history of this great state.
A time when we look back and a time when we look forward.
And friends, when we do look back, when we remember the Proclamation of South Australia, I think we see it as a day of endings and a day of beginnings.
For the traditional owners, it was the end of a way of life that they had treasured for centuries.
For the settlers it was a final closing of the door on old skies and old friends.
For both, it was a new beginning.
Full of risk.
But full of promise too.
The Proclamation tells us that they set out to create nothing less than a great and free colony."
As the Premier and Mayor have detailed in their speeches, the founders succeeded and they succeeded in abundance.
Those nine ships of our own first fleet didn't just bring settlers and cargo.
They brought the best of our human values:
Optimism.
Faith in the future.
And willingness to unite great ambition with relentless hard work.
As Australia's first female Prime Minister, I was delighted to be reminded that there were 78 women in that fleet.
A woman, one of them a historian, who told us that they believed themselves to bea worthy sisterhood.
We rightly celebrate our founding fathers like Hindmarsh and Gouger; Torrens and Light.
Let's celebrate too those unnamed founding mothers and sisters too  -  because there would have been no South Australia without them.
If we have achieved good things, and we have, it's only because they achieved even better things in circumstances unimaginably harder than our own.
Friends, there is perhaps another clue to this State's success in the cargo of those ships: the state's first printing press.
Yes, they brought a printing press because they intended us to be a people of reason and learning - a free people in a new land; liberated from the poverty and the ignorance of the old.
175 years later, their achievements stands  -  and it stands strong 
They created South Australia out of hardship and sacrifice.
And no community has ever been made of better materials.
And so on this day of gratitude and homecoming, we make our own proclamation:
That we will honour their great deeds with great deeds of our own.
Proud of the past and unafraid of our future.
Always ready to make those founding hopes our own.
Thank you for welcoming me on Proclamation Day.



We, the leaders of the nation and the State, honour you in this place.
This region made sacred by courage and loss.
A place where one year ago, we were reminded that for all its blessings and rewards, this can be a harsh and unyielding land as well.
As Australians, we never fear nature's challenge.
That's not who we are.
We are a nation that endures.
A people who return and rebuild.
Even before the total number of lives lost was known, images were being inscribed deep in our nation's heart.
Images of horror and destruction.
And images of valour and sacrifice as well.
For me, those images will always be represented by the flag given to me by the Defence Force chopper pilots who saved so many lives on that dark and dangerous night.
The flag was still wet and muddy yet it couldn't be more precious because it spoke to them  -  and to the nation  -  about courage and endurance.
What it means to be Australian.
And how people across Queensland somehow found the inner strength to face the death and destruction that engulfed them.
That flag has returned home to the people of the Lockyer Valley; a permanent reminder as time passes.
Indeed it's hard to believe a year has passed.
Ten days ago the world welcomed in 2012.
But I know for many of you, January 1st was no festivity  -  the wounds are still too raw for that.
If there is any occasion for contemplating the past and the future, it is perhaps this day  -  January 10.
Your very own New Year.
A New Year without illusions as to how deep the hurt remains, and how far along the path of reconstruction we still have to go.
Marked not with champagne and celebration, but with remembrance and resolve.
Remembrance of those who have gone.
And resolve to somehow build new lives out of the wreckage of the old.
Much has been lost in this valley and in this State:
Precious loved ones.
Treasured possessions.
And a familiar way of life.
But in the face of tragedy, much also abides:
The grace of community.
The strength and generosity of each other.
And a determination to never forget what happened here.
Not after one year.
Not after ten years.
Together we remember.
Together we will rebuild. 



PM: Thank you very much to Mark and Patrick for presenting this report to me.
Can I start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and in a spirit of reconciliation, paying my respects to elders past and present, Matilda thank you for the welcome to country. Ron, thank you for once again having us in this wonderful institution.
Can I also acknowledge my ministerial colleague Jenny Macklin and every member of the panel who has worked so hard on this report.
I'd like to say a few words to the panel firstly  -  I know we did not send you on an easy journey.
We drew people from all different walks of life, we added to you people from across the political spectrum and of course Rachel and Rob are here today, Ken couldn't be with us, and we asked you to work together to prepare this report.
We were very specific about what we wanted done. We wanted you to bring forward a proposal that could contribute to a more unified and reconciled nation, that could be of benefit to and accord with the wishes of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples, be capable of being supported by an overwhelming majority of Australians from across the political and social spectrums and be technically and legally sound.
It was a pretty big mission.
So thank you very much for your labours right around the country and having done it in such a consultative way and having found the unity to give this report to me today, I genuinely do thank you for that work.
Today this report goes from being the property of the panel, to the property of the nation and that is appropriate, because for constitutional change Australians have to understand and be persuaded of the case for change. It's our nation's Constitution, out people's Constitution, not our Constitution.
And we know that Australians have been slow to change their Constitution, that out of the 44 referendum proposals put, only eight have succeeded. But we should take hope from the fact that of the referendum most successful when presented to the Australian people, it was the 1967 referendum, when people decided that they wanted to say yes to change.
And I acknowledge the young Freedom Riders here today, who are out there once again living that journey and getting people to say yes to change. Thank you for what you're doing.
And of course we learned when Kevin Rudd delivered the apology on behalf of the Stolen Generations, that that moment had meaning; it had great meaning, because around the nation Australians said yes to that moment.
They wanted the apology said, they wanted it said for them and Kevin Rudd delivered those beautiful words.
So now we are looking to the Australian people again, to get involved and to find it in themselves to say yes to change.
So I'm here today to say to all Australians they should get on the You Me Unity website, they should familiarise themselves with the contents of this report, they should start discussing in their homes, with their neighbours, in their community meetings, in their workplaces, in their trade unions, in their churches, this case for change.
They should consider it deeply, because it's so important to the Australian nation. And as the Australian community considers it deeply, it falls to us, to the political leaders of the nation to make sure that we consider it and respond well too.
It is going to take the deepest and strongest sword of bipartisanship, it is going to require each and every one of us involved in politics, whether it be in the Federal Parliament just down the road, whether it be in State Parliaments, indeed whether it be as local government members or other sorts of community leaders, to find it in ourselves to be our best selves, to advocate this case for change, with the maximum degree of unity.
But I am an optimist. I'm taking it as a good open that as I walked in today I met a small girl and she told me her name was Hope. I think that's a good thing and having met that small girl called Hope I think we are joined here today in a hope for the future.
So, as Prime Minister, I am here to receive the report and I am here to say that as a nation we are big enough and it is the right time to say yes to an understanding of our past, to say yes to constitutional change and to say yes
to a future more united and more reconciled than we have ever been before.
Thank you very much.



PM: Thank you and welcome to one and all, I'd like to welcome my Parliamentary colleague Senator Kate Lundy who is here, who does so much great work for us in the area of multicultural affairs and citizenship. Adam who is here, of course the chair of the National Australia Day Council, and all of his Council colleagues. I've had the opportunity to say hello to each of them, and I really don't know how you make the decisions you make, a very, very tough with so many Australians who deserve acknowledgement.
To the 2011 Australians of the Year, to Simon, to Ron, to Jessica and to Don, and to Jessica in particular, thank you for ensuring I've eaten my first Fruit Tingle in I think, it would be 25 years. Some interesting bet between sister and brother and sister lost but there we have it.
To the 2012 Australian of the Year finalists, thank you for joining us today and thank you for everything you do for the nation. To the 1967 Australian of the Year, Judith Durham, who was awarded with her fellow Seekers, it's great to have her included in these events today and she will be singing a little bit later and I'm sure we're all looking forward to that.
Welcome to The Lodge. This is of course my home, it's been the home of Prime Ministers for 85 years, it stands on the traditional lands of the Ngunnawal people and I acknowledge the Ngunnawal people and pay my respects to their elders past and present in a spirit of reconciliation.
This is my home but it's so much more than that, it's a place for all of us to honour, visitors and residents alike, our own homes, my home in Altona, our own homes can be bought and sold and rented at will, but here the Australian people are the landlord and that makes this place a important expression of our democracy and by extension the freedoms that make our democracy possible.
And it is today and tomorrow that we will reflect on those freedoms and everything that they mean to all Australians.
Of course there are many other places to reflect, in Canberra and across the country, one of them is on the southern shore of Lake Burley Griffin, a memorial to the Australians of the Year. A series of simple concrete pillars with a photo and a name of each, and beyond the row of pillars already filled there are blank pillars, almost as far as the eye can see, for the Australians of the Year to come, including those to be announced tonight. And they point us I believe to the kind of nation we can be, that as a young country our best days still lie in front of us, and there's nothing in our nation's life, whether natural disasters or the challenges of an unknown future, that we can't handle together.
The Australian of the Year winners and nominees are amongst those who will navigate us to a future with your inventions and your ideas, the new ground that you break in the arts and literature, the social programs that heal and unite our nation, the care you show for children, and the honourable service you provide in the armed forces, the professions, the law and public administration. Indeed I am very touched by the depth and diversity of the group that is with us today.
To paraphrase JFK this may be the most talent ever gathered in The Lodge since Gough Whitlam dined here alone, we have artists and scientists, indigenous leaders, community advocates, academics and educators, philanthropists and volunteers and sportspeople just to name a few.
You are people of achievement who make us so proud, the sort of individuals of whom Australian parents can I hope my child grows up to be just like that.'
I'm proud to lead a nation that encourages this kind of work in our society and that has amongst its number people like you. And I'm prouder still that in the 52 years of this award our nation can produce year after year a slate of extraordinary nominees, year after year, decade after decade, without fail. And that I think should give us a great reassurance for the future.
Now I know none of you embarked on your life journeys alone or secured your achievements alone, and you're joined today by some of the people that have helped you on the journey, partners, friends, family members, you are all very welcome here today too and thank you for everything you've done to support the finalists who are here with us.
When we do announce the winners and that will happen a little bit later, I know that we will have some worthy recipients for the nation, and I believe that everyone who is acknowledged in that way should accept that honour without any form of modesty - people have done such remarkable things - but everyone who is here this morning has done remarkable things.
So this is your day and your moment to savour, please enjoy this time at The Lodge, please ensure you wander through the grounds and get to see all of it and I am very much looking forward with a great sense of anticipation to the moment that we will honour each of you later tonight and we will announce our Australians of the Year, people who have led brilliant and selfless lives.
Thank you for joining me here at The Lodge this morning. Thank you very much. 



Tonight we celebrate Australia Day by celebrating those who reflect the very best of our great nation.
Because we are a great nation.
And we are a great nation because of our people.
That is our true wealth:
The 23 million people who love this country deeply, sometimes at the cost of their lives.
It says a lot that alongside fireworks and BBQs and all the things we will do tomorrow, we celebrate Australia Day day by choosing four individuals who reflect and inspire our nation.
They've been opera singers and artists.
Football players and scientists.
Our most recent recipient, Simon McKeon, is a businessman who has used his success to help others.
They are remarkable men and women, every one of them.
And they point the way to a creative, confident future for our nation.
If there is any quality common to all our Australians of the Year, it is courage.
Jessica Watson embarking on her dangerous voyage.
Fred Hollows restoring sight to those without hope.
John Farnham risking everything on a comeback.
Alan Stretton rebuilding a shattered city.
They had courage.
The courage to imagine a better nation and to face the future without fear.
We don't all have the gifts these extraordinary Australians possess.
But each of us in our own way  -  can share and emulate one thing: their courage.
Because it's not in our nature to be afraid  -  it never has been and I know it never will be.
So let's celebrate the great nation we are, and the even greater nation we can become together.
Happy Australia Day! 



It gives me immense pride to bring to realisation the commitment I made one year ago to institute a National Emergency Medal.
And there could be no better occasion to do so than on the day when we pause to reflect on what it means to be Australian  -  January 26; Australia Day.
In a diverse country, this day necessarily means different things to different people.
But if there is one common trait that we can unite in respecting above all others, it is courage and resilience in times of trouble; when everything we express in our poems and songs is put to the test and the Australian spirit shines most brightly.
Today we award these Medals to a group of Australians who inspired us with their courage and service during two of the most devastating summers of natural disaster Australia has ever witnessed: the Victorian bushfires of 2009 and the Queensland floods and cyclone of December 2010 and January 2011.
Some of our darkest days that were followed by some of our finest hours.
The long hours without rest or sleep.
The stories of men and women who went to work to help others not knowing whether their own homes would be standing when they returned.
Of those who risked injury or even death to help others.
Or brought comfort to those who had lost everything they owned.
I've been speaking a lot to survivors as we recover and rebuild.
Their talk is never of how much compensation they received or how much they appreciate their new house.
Without fail, they speak of the people who reached out to them in their time of need: family, friends, neighbours and so often strangers, whose assistance extended far beyond the bounds of convention or obligation.
In other words, they speak of you.
Ordinary Australians who in difficult times did extraordinary things.
Of course, those who are worthy of honour never seek it.
And medals are only ever tokens of inner values and qualities that can never fully be measured or even understood by those who were not there.
Alone, they are pieces of cloth and metal worth only a few dollars.
But what they symbolise is beyond price.
These medals obtain their value from you who receive them.
From who you are, what you have done and the things you represent.
Today's recipients were nominated by the heads of major non-government and government organisations which deployed staff and volunteers in response to the natural disasters.
I thank the National Emergency Medal Committee for crafting a set of eligibility criteria that are both appropriate and credible but also generous.
And to any Australian who feels a friend or a colleague merits this award, I strongly urge them to lodge a nomination because this is an award for the many, not the few.
An award that springs from a nation's gratitude.
But also from our very real sense that your actions displayed the depth of your love for this country and its people.
That is why the decoration of this medal is itself so eloquent  -  a green and gold ribbon, with the image of our national flower, the wattle, on its face.
Because heroism and community service are an expression of citizenship and what it means to be Australian.
This medal is therefore a message from your country that what you did was more than just a job well done.
You carried the hopes and goodwill of the nation with you.
You reminded us why we are proud to be Australian and how we are a people who never fear adversity whether from the vastness of our continent, the fury of our climate or the uncertainty of what the future may bring.
That story is written across every page of our history.
As long as our nation has men and women like this, it will never cease being written.
And your names now have an indelible place in those pages.
So please accept the National Emergency Medal as a symbol of our thanks.
We are a brave and resilient nation.
But we are grateful nation too. 



Mr Rob Mitchell MP, Federal Member for McEwen.
Mrs Sophie Mirabella MP, Federal Member for Indi.
Councillor John Walsh, Mayor of the Murrindindi Shire Council and your Council colleagues,
Other community leaders,
And above all, to our medal recipients, who enrich us with their presence here today
Three years on from Black Saturday:
The trees are growing back.
Buildings are going up.
And life, from the outside, seems to have returned to normal.
Except it hasn't.
After the loss and destruction experienced in this region, life will never be the same again.
Some have moved away and sought to forget.
Others have stayed and forged an uneasy truce with nature.
Most will carry the loss and scars for the rest of their days.
Whatever path each individual and family takes, the path for our nation is clear:
We must stand by them for however long it takes.
And we must remember.
One of the things I hear most often in communities hit by disaster is this: don't forget us.
Don't forget us when the cameras move on, or the focus shifts to more recent tragedies.
And I'm here as Prime Minister to say loud and clear  -  we haven't.
As the calendar turns over to the third anniversary, the bonds of support and solidarity are very much alive. 
Today we convey that message in a new and powerfully symbolic form: with the award of the new National Emergency Medal.
The government asked the Queen to institute this medal because there was nothing in the Australian Honours system to recognise much of the service that was performed in these fires or in last year's floods and cyclone in Queensland.
Awards do exist for the most conspicuous bravery and some have been awarded here in Victoria already.
But there was nothing in the system that recognised the other forms of courage and service that a disaster brings forth.
Not only acknowledging those who fight the fires or supervised evacuations on the frontline.
But also those present day after day to feed and support them.
To offer clothes and accommodation to families who have lost everything.
Or ensure they get the government payments they need.
There is more than one way to serve our community during a natural disaster.
Contributions differing in function  -  but all partaking of the same spirit:
Of giving your time and skill for those in need.
Being there when it counts.
This, too, is service worthy of a nation's recognition.
And it gives me great pleasure to convey that recognition today.
Along with the group I presented in Canberra yesterday, you are the first recipients of the National Emergency Medal in our nation's history.
And I know from the generous heart of the Australian people that you won't be last.
Because the spirit that impelled you to serve was not some passing fad or impulse.
It was the deep love that we as Australians hold for our land, its people and its future.
And so in the shadow of Australia Day here in the landscape where the deeds of your generosity were inscribed I proudly present these medals to a very deserving group of recipients, from a very proud and grateful nation.
Accept them with honour.
And wear them with pride. 



	It's good to address an audience and a forum which does such great work to promote friendship and co-operation between two great countries, Australia and Israel.
	Decades after the desert was first made to bloom, Israel is a place where ideas still bloom.
	And this Chamber is a place where ideas bloom too.
	Friends, in 2012 Australians will be watching the economic situation of Europe closely.
	It's only by understanding just how serious and complex the European problem is that Australians can truly understand our own position of strength in the world economy,	the important opportunities we have created for ourselves  -  and the part every Australian can play in the work of coming years.
	As Australians see the problems of Europe, we see the importance of fiscal discipline.
	And as Australians increasingly come to know that our own fundamentals are strong by comparison, we know that we would not change places with any economy in the world.
	Now our job is to help Australians understand that it is this strength which is driving the transformations in our economy.
	And in turn, to understand that our nation is strong enough to bend those transformations to our own purposes - from a strong base, we can build a new economy, one which is even stronger, one which is full of opportunity.
	A new economy which is prosperous and fair, creative and skilled; where mining and manufacturing flourish and services grow; where the government manages the economy for working people, for the future.
	And as Australians imagine this new economy we want to build together, we know that for everyone to have a share in the new economy, everyone must have the skills the new economy needs.
	I sift a lot of economic commentary and advice  -  and I can tell you that, for once, the economists almost all agree  -  Europe still faces very serious economic difficulties.
	And of course, this is no longer only a Greek problem, nor is it contained in a periphery or in the south.  The January decision by Standard and Poor's to downgrade the sovereign credit ratings of nine of the euro area's 17 members included some traditionally thought stable and strong, like Austria and France.
	The ultimate proof of economic policy failure, mass unemployment, is blighting millions of European lives.  More than 23 million men and women are unemployed in the EU, five and a half million people under the age of 25.  In Spain, the unemployment rate is over 20 per cent.
	I do recognise that the July, October and December agreements last year in the euro area, the G20 November summit bringing the international community on board, plus the fiscal and financial reforms of new governments in Greece, Italy and Spain, all represent important progress.
	Over the Christmas period, the European Central Bank assisted by lowering interest rates and providing cheap finance to European banks, enabling them to refinance.
	And the reaction to the Standard and Poor's downgrades was not as severe as may have been expected  -  suggesting markets had priced in this additional risk already.
	But we can expect daily choppiness and immediate reactions to overnight news to continue to colour the mood of market commentators and participants  -  there will be more ups and downs in global markets for as long as it takes for Europe to get its house in order.
	In recent days, Europe's leaders largely signed off on a new treaty on greater fiscal discipline and cooperation.  They also largely agreed on a permanent rescue fund to tackle the on going debt crisis, as negotiations on the restructuring of Greek debt continue.
	Economies like Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy are each in different degree subject to the same policy double-bind: a long term fiscal repair task which plainly cannot be delayed but which does run counter to the urgent growth challenge.
	This demands measures to deliver long-term fiscal sustainability while those countries with the capacity also provide short-term support for economic growth.
	We cannot afford these nations to continue a negative downward spiral: sharp fiscal contraction, economic recession, falling employment, shrinking revenue, rapid decline in living standards sustained over years.
	That's why Australia has been at the international table in 2011 and we'll be back there in 2012, arguing for sustainable long-term finances and policies which restart European growth, arguing against fiscal austerity alone and at any cost.
	Arguing for a balanced European policy response.
	And that means restructuring Greece's debt; ensuring sufficient funds to refinance governments and recapitalise banks; progress now on domestic micro-economic reforms which spur growth; long term fiscal discipline across the Union  -  and delivering on measures for long term fiscal co-operation.
	Along with co-ordinated global action, where countries outside Europe play their part in providing the International Monetary Fund with the additional resources it needs.
	Australians have a deep interest in seeing these steps carried out.
	Strong Asian growth  -  with China expected to grow over eight per cent and India over seven this year  -  means that the overall outlook for Australia's trade partners does remain solid.
	But this does not make us immune from the problems of the European economy.
	If anything of value can be retrieved from the wreck of failed economic approaches in Europe pre-2008, it is the lesson to the world: fiscal discipline matters.
	There is debate about the appropriate pace of European fiscal repair now and how that relates to the growth challenge  -  and I've made it clear where Australia stands in that debate.  Where there's no argument is that European fiscal policy has been unsustainable.
	Australia's position is fundamentally different.
	When the global financial crisis hit we funded the best designed stimulus package in the world.
	A sophisticated set of targeted and temporary measures which kept our country out of recession and which grew employment in the hardest global environment  -  with a commitment to restrict spending and return to surplus as revenues recovered.
	That strategy remains.
	My firm conclusion is that handing down a Budget surplus in May is the right call in the present economic circumstances.
	The current international instability stems in large part from real concerns about sovereign risk  -  and perceptions of risk in various national economies can change quickly, indeed they have on occasion in recent times.  So our fiscal policy must be disciplined and must be seen to be disciplined as well.  It's in our interest to keep ourselves well ahead of the pack.
	A strong sovereign credit rating also underpins strong bank credit ratings.  A very important boost to the availability of credit for Australian business and to economic activity in Australia flows from our fiscal discipline.
	Critically, the Australian economy is growing.  Putting the budget into surplus when domestic economic growth is around trend means that we are well positioned to deal with further global financial and economic uncertainty and crises if that should occur.
	And it increases the scope for our independent Reserve Bank to ease monetary policy when conditions require.
	Fiscal discipline is the right call for the long-term as well.
	Australia has always had a relatively high reliance on overseas capital.
	The best way to ensure the continued vital inward flow of investment is through sound economic institutions and policies.   And the one big, ongoing, discretionary decision that reinforces that best  -  the most powerful single signal a government can give to investors  -  is a strong and disciplined fiscal framework.
	While global conditions make it harder, we are strongly placed to deliver a surplus for 2012-13.
	Handing down a Budget surplus this May will be good for the Australian economy, good for growth and good for jobs.
	Achieving a budget surplus will reinforce the strength of the Australian economy.  A strength which has brought investors flocking to our dollar, turning a once-in-thirty-years currency peak into a year-long high plateau.
	It's a striking development in our economic history that in a period of global uncertainty, the Australian currency is holding its value.  This comes even as markets harbour expectations of future easing of our monetary policy settings, expectations which might normally be expected to see the currency trend lower.
	There's growing evidence that the best explanation for this is confidence.
	It's well known that Asia's demand for our mining output  -  together with the domestic investment to expand our mineral capacity  -  has lifted demand for our currency, with its value up almost sixty per cent against the US dollar since 2009.
	There's another driver: investors looking to the Australian dollar as a substitute for betting directly on growth in our region  -  especially in China.
	This reflects Australia's strong position in what I call the Asian Century.
	We are one of the economies best placed to capitalise on the global economy's shifting weight to our region.
	So we've seen a global drive to hold Australian-dollar denominated investments: huge overseas institutional investors, both public and private, loading up on Australian assets  -  and a record surge in investors buying our government bonds  -  the reward for our fiscal discipline in uncertain global times.
	Add the relative woes of European economies  -  touching even traditional currency strongholds like Switzerland  -  and for the first time in history Australia is being referred to as something of a global safe haven.
	What is certain from all of this is our dollar is likely to remain relatively high for years to come.
	Natural advantages of resources, people and location  -  decades of economic reform  -  building economic strength.
	Economic strength driving a strong dollar  -  and a strong dollar driving economic change.
	Lifting the value of what we earn and what we own, while yes, lifting the price of what we make and what we sell as well.
	There is a flipside to this story.  We know that some sectors are doing it tough.
	The level of the dollar  -  and the pace of its rise  -  has broken some business models and forced economic restructuring.  It's already been behind some closures, while employers will also keep a watching eye on Europe.
	These are powerful, economy-wide transformations, perhaps best thought of as growing pains.
	Our success is driving the dollar.  In turn, the dollar is driving change and in doing so it's making our economy leaner and stronger, forcing us to move more of our effort  -  more money, more equipment, more people  -  into the parts of our economy where we can create the greatest value.
	We've said for years, for decades, that given a choice between competing on quality or competing on price, we'd compete on quality; that we'd take the high road to high-value, high-wage, high-skill employment, that we want to create jobs based on making and selling the best products and services we can.
	And we've said too that we want our consumers to have the benefit of low-cost high-quality goods, wherever they're made.
	Well, the strong dollar is locking in that high-value, high-quality approach for us.  We never really wanted to compete on price alone  -  but now it's just as well, because at parity with the US, we just can't.
	It's as if the world is turning up the speed on the treadmill while we're exercising.    It's an adjustment, it takes work, it builds strength, it's an adjustment up, not an adjustment down.
	And we can make it work for us.
	While economic transformations are never easy, this time we have an advantage we have rarely had before.
	The tough changes in our economy in the 1980s and 1990s came off the back of deep recessions in 1982 and 1991.  Big reallocations of capital and labour  -  many workers forced to look for new ways to support their family  -  at times of double digit unemployment and real concentrated hardship in many regions and towns.
	By contrast, the growing pains we feel in parts of our economy today come when unemployment is just over five per cent, when our economy has created over seven hundred thousand jobs since late 2007, when there are shortages in many skills, when prospects for work for skilled workers are genuinely bright.
	Every year, three hundred thousand businesses close down  -  and three hundred thousand new ones start up  -  every year.
	And every year, around a million workers change jobs  -  a quarter of them changing industries too.
	That's the modern Australian economy, and I know no serious advocate for any sector or industry who wants to stop the world changing.
	The challenge is to include all our people in the opportunities change creates.
	We can see an opportunity to build a new Australian economy.
	And we can see more: an opportunity to build the new economy together, to include every Australian in its growth.
	Our people do not want to be forced to choose between mining and the rest; nor do they want to choose between a strong future for manufacturing and a strong economy as a whole.
	They know their hard work has given Government a strong hand and they are looking to us to play the right cards.
	Yes, to ensure the benefits of our strong economy are shared by all Australians.
	Yes, to make the mining investment boom last, yes, to keep the whole economy strong - but more than that.
	In this decade, Australia can build a rich, fair economy  -  where working people get their share of the benefits  -  where strength is sustained into the future.
	A high participation, high productivity economy.
	Where everyone shares in the benefits of our hard work.
	Where fly-in, fly-out work doesn't fly over jobless households and past communities left behind.
	A high skill, high tech, fast broadband, clean energy economy.
	Where our energy exports fuel clean growth in the world and our energy use at home is cleaner and more productive.
	Where we sell computer games to Korea and diagnose disease over distances of thousands of miles.
	An economy with advanced industrial production, wherefuel-efficient cars made here are sold around the world.
	Not just one which maintains employment at major vehicle producers, though those jobs matter greatly.
	But one where vehicle manufacture anchors employment in the whole chain of supply.
	The component makers. The toolers, the metal manufacturers, the suppliers of plastics, chemicals and glass.
	An economy with the technical and scientific capabilities required to make cars  -  which sustains those capabilities through the economic cycle.
	Andthat's why this Government is working with the Australian car industry to lift its capacity for innovation and design.
	Smart and sustainable co-operation between government and industry is the model which has been pursued by reformistLaborGovernments in Australia for decades.  With no better example than the Button car plans of the Hawke-Keating era.
	There is no case  -  no case  -  for a half billion dollar cut to automotive industry assistance in the current economic environment.
	Nothing could better illustrate the real stakes at play in Australian politics than this debate between the parties over Government support for jobs.
	My Government is putting jobs first.
	And this new economy will be more adaptive, flexible and able to seize new opportunities than ever before.
	In the new Australian economy firms will see the moment of change as a chance, a chance to move up the value chain, to expand their discovery and production of premium goods and services.
	More specialisation, more world-leading research and development, so the ingenuity of our enterprises generates jobs of every kind, from design and manufacture to assembly and sales.
	More innovations in traditional areas of comparative advantage like mining and agriculture, ideas which become leading technology used around the world.
	Australia's best are businesses more than able to compete and win in the world.
	Building a new Australian economy means making many more businesses as good as that.
	Australian workers and industries can aim for and achieve every degree of sophistication and success of the clusters of great manufacturing in places as diverse as northern Italy or Israel, California or parts of Germany.
	Just as our international educators can offer tertiary educations the equal of Oxbridge and the Ivy League to a half a billion strong Asian middle class who'll want nothing but the best for their kids.
	Just as our financial houses can become the investment brains of that same Asian middle class as they seek choice and security in retirement as well.
	The promise of this new economy is there for every business and every person in every sector who is prepared to make it work.
	Australian LaborGovernments promise not just to manage the economy or to build its strength  -  but to manage the economy in the interests of working people  -  to build its strength for the future.
	So we see not just an opportunity, but an obligation: to spread the opportunities of the new economy to everyone.
	It is an ambitious goal, and to deliver it, the Government will pursue an ambitious program of investments and reforms in 2012.
	We will roll out fibre for high speed broadband to over sixty sites across the country.
	Twenty thousand more students will start university this year than last, up by a fifth since we came to office.
	We will hand down a Budget surplus in May.
	Carbon pricing will start on 1 July  -  driving change in energy use, funding innovation in clean energy and help for households.
	The minerals resource rents tax will start on 1 July as well.
	Funding tax cuts for small businesses and over time funding cuts for all businesses, higher super for all workers and new infrastructure in the regions.
	New business tax arrangements to reward innovation will be the subject of extensive work by the Business Tax Working Groupleading toa final report on the future of the business tax system in December.
	And through 2012, a new approach to collaborating with industry will be taking shape: through the new portfolio of Industry and Innovation  -  allied to the structural transition funding in the Clean Energy Future package  -  and the work of my own Manufacturing taskforce.
	These are big milestones on the reform road this year  - policies which lift productivity and build the new economy.
	And a new economy, driven by change, needs workers every bit as innovative as its firms whose skills grow as quickly as the sophistication of the technology they use every day.
	That's not just for scientists and laboratories: it's for advanced manufacturing and mining, agriculture and logistics, and it's in the shops and workshops we visit every day.
	If you doubt that, next time you get your car serviced, have a look at the machine they use to check the suspension  -  for that matter, have a look at the computer they use to total up your bill.
	To keep up, everyone needs strong basic skills and the ability to learn throughout life  -  skills that not everyone needed last century  -  and soon enough, to get ahead, everyone will need advanced skills.
	There will be new jobs not done now  -  and there'll be jobs that exist today that are done in new ways and demand new skills.
	Farmers with the skills to trade carbon credits.  Plumbers with the skills to transform the energy and water efficiency of our factories and our homes.
	Panel beaters with the skills to work in the new supply chains for global manufacturing.  Medical professionals with the skills to diagnose and prescribe on-line.
	This is why I've asked the Minister for Skills, Senator Evans, to bring forward a major proposal for a sweeping overhaul of the vocational training system in Australia.
	In coming weeks, we will be releasing details of proposals for reforms including income contingent loans.
	At the next Council of Australian Governments meeting, these reforms will be put to the States and Territories, whose co-operation will be necessary to deliver this reform.
	Under the plans now being developed, thousands of vocational education and training students would no longer have to pay upfront fees, while others would be guaranteed a significant fee subsidy of up to $7,800.
	This means benefits for students studying foundation and entry-level courses for technical and service sector careers in areas such as health and hospitality, business and communications, construction, transport and other areas.
	They would be guaranteed a government-subsidised training place  -  meaning many more Australians who want a place will get one.
Our plans also mean benefits for students working on a Diploma or Advanced Diploma, for courses like Engineering, Computing and IT, Architecture and Building, Community Services and Social Sciences, Health and Medical Sciences, Business.
They would no longer have to pay upfront fees, but would have access to HECS-style loans to cover their fees instead.
Getting rid of up front, out of pocket costs  -  saving thousands of dollars at the time they need it most  -  paying the costs back only when they can afford to.
Something which has been available to university students for decades.
I want the kids who learn these vital skills to have the same right to a low-cost loan as kids who study economics or law.
And I want TAFEs offering those kids high-quality training to have the same right  -  to offer as many places as there are kids who will take them  -  as the universities do today.
Cutting the upfront costs of training and improving student choice.
Guaranteeing every Australian the skills they need.
Because millions of Australians will need new skills to make the most of the new Australian economy we are building.
And because to build the new Australian economy, we will need millions of Australians to have new skills.
The equation is simple. 
Skills bring jobs, and skills bring job security.
The more skills you have, the better placed you are to grow your firm, to keep your job, to earn more over time.
And the better placed you are to find good new work if your job changes too.
Good news on skills for working Australians:
This is Labor's skills guarantee  -  a training ticket for your economic future.
With an economy which has the adaptive capacity, the modern infrastructure, the innovative firms  -  with people who have the adaptive capacity, the modern skills, ability to learn  -  then we can make the transformation to the new economy work for us.
I was recently reminded, while reading about the cricket of all things, of the famous oath of the American Civil War General Ulysses S Grant, who said he would fight it out along this line if it takes all summer.
There's something of that determination and clarity in my Government's approach in 2012. 
Today, interest rates and taxes are lower than when we came to office and we have created hundreds of thousands of jobs.
We will govern for a strong economy  -  and our success will be the country's success.
We understand the big changes at work in Australia.
We understand the opportunities they create.
We know Australia can be the winner in the Asian Century.
We can choose to give working people a fair share of the resources boom and today's economic strength  -  or allow only some to feel the benefits.
We can choose to get ready for the future  -  or stand still.
We can choose to face up to the hard decisions now  -  or take the easy way out today and leave all the hard decisions to our children.
We can choose to stick together and win through  -  or squabble amongst ourselves and lose out.
My line is very clearly drawn.
This Labor Government will make the right choices.
We will build a new Australian economy.
We will get working people a fair share.
We will get the country ready for the future.
We will see our nation stick together.
We will see our nation win through.  



 PM: Before I get to the substance of my address today, I just want to advise you of something that happened as we were coming in for lunch. And that is a decision was released by the Full Bench of Fair Work Australia literally just a few minutes ago.
The decision awards more pay to people who work in the Social and Community Sector.
It's a historic decision because it means more money in the pockets for workers who care for those who most need our help. Many of them are women, and many of them are low paid, working hard to make ends meet.
This case, an equal pay case, finally gives them the recognition that they deserve.
This audience of course will also recognise that there's an economic dimension as well to this decision for the years that lie ahead  -  in those years we will need to attract and retain more workers in the services sectors of the economy and especially in caring' work which has historically been dominated by women.
Properly valuing caring work and providing decent wages in these service sectors will also help make our economy and our society more resilient.
So it's a good day for some workers who very much deserve proper recognition and they've got it today. 



PM: It is always great to be at Manuka Oval even if it is a day when we're looking at a rain-swept oval rather than one that a game is being played on. It's a lovely place and I have come to enjoy it a great deal as a football ground but it actually makes an even better cricket ground.
And of course the Prime Minister's XI is an institution in cricket in Canberra and we have seen the fact that crowds were prepared to come out today not even knowing if it would played. It is a great tradition over summer.
It is no surprise that the grand stands here at Manuka are named after the two Prime Ministers most responsible for this tradition as Ian has explained, Menzies and then Bob Hawke. Of course my predecessor Bob Hawke has done a lot for Australian cricket in his time though I'd have to say, over this summer, I think he has probably put the cause of responsible alcohol drinking back 40 years.
You've got to love the way in which we Australians engage with our politicians and engage with our news. Hawkie got more press coverage for downing that beer in what looked to me to be pretty record time than I got in announcing $95 million in cricket infrastructure at Adelaide, Sydney and Hobart.
Next time I make an announcement, expect me to do it with a beer in my hand and to be trying to equal Bob's best. But that's cricket, isn't it. A game that brings us all together, that reaches out to people around the nation, wherever they are in the nation, whatever their social status. There is no political barriers to engaging in cricket. Everybody loves it. And you don't have to be an expert to enjoy the game. I'm absolutely living proof of that.
So whilst today we haven't had the opportunity to see any cricket, we have of course over the summer enjoyed a lot of cricket. Whether it has been in pubs and backyards or whether it has been at our great grounds around the nation, people have enjoyed their cricket over the weeks that have been.
I'd have to say there has even been a bit of cricket at The Lodge. Tim has been out there playing a bit of cricket. Rueben the dog is learning to field. Though he gets the getting of the ball, itt is bringing the ball back that we are struggling with but Rueben the dog is out there doing a bit of fielding. Though I'd have to say Tim possibly did push it a little bit too far last night with Brad when my team came around for a function.
I think Brad was just being polite when he finally agreed with Tim that the little thing mown in the front of The Lodge equals the Adelaide Oval. That's nowhere near true but Tim somehow managed to persuade Brad of it during the course of the evening.
So it has been good to be able to spend some time with the players even if we couldn't watch them play. Brad, of course, a great local boy, a great local player and I thank him for having stepped up to the role of captain, even if he didn't get to lead the team out on to the field.
Cricket in Canberra has perhaps never been healthier. The Cricket ACT board and staff have done a magnificent job in making sure that this great game continues to prosper here. They do that at the grass roots level all the way up to the Bradman oration and particularly the oration at the Australian War Memorial, I think, was something many will long remember. It was a unique event for Australian cricket and rightly was reported around the world.
So, a big thank you to everybody who has made everybody who has made today possible. To the two teams who waited so anxiously to see if they'd get out there and have a go, it wasn't to be. And as I said last night, two great teams from two great nations. The friendship between Australia and Sri Lanka is a strong one. I joked last night that amongst all of our other common bonds, we love beating the Indian team. I think that is shared between us. But the bonds between our countries are much, much, much more than that and, having the two teams ready to play today was part of those bonds between us.
So, let's look forward to a beautiful sunny day next time we gather here for the Prime Minister's XI, but in the meantime, I hope you enjoy lunch.
Thank you very much. 



Thank you very much. It is a great pleasure to be here this morning with my ministerial colleagues Simon and Peter.
But there are more of us here than that - I'd like to particularly acknowledge my parliamentary colleague Dick Adams, who is with us. Dick is someone who learned to read in adult life and I think he is a terrific ambassador for our nation on what it means to become a reader when you are an adult. Thank you for being here Dick.
We're also joined by local members for the ACTGai Brodtmann and Andrew Leigh, by Kate Lundy, my Parliamentary Secretary.
We're joined to by Graeme Innes, the Disability Discrimination Commissioner, by Margaret Allen, Chair of the National Year of Reading Founding Partners, by William McInnes, who has spoken to you, by National Year of Reading Ambassadors and many other distinguished guests and friends.
Anne Marie  -  it's lovely to be back here.
Since I was here for the Literary Awards, the National Library has opened the blockbuster exhibition of treasures from the State Library of Berlin and a permanent gallery of our own literary treasures.
But really the greatest treasure of all is this National Library's wonderful staff and I know we've got some in numbers here with us this morning.
This is the home of books and reading for our nation and so it's always a delight to be here.
And I'm also delighted to be back here sharing a stage with Boori Monty Pryor, one of the winners of the Prime Minister's Literary Awards from 2011.
Boori is a great children's author.
And as an Indigenous Australian, his presence is also a reminder that story-telling has been part of life on this continent for millennia, and so today I honour the First Peoples of this land on which we meet with great warmth and friendship.
I also acknowledge Jennifer Byrne, who I think has got possibly the best gig on television, though I'd say potentially the second best gig is being David or Margaret on the movie show. How good a job would that be?
Margaret, you know I'm very envious of it, but I'm also very envious of Jennifer's job.
Jennifer is bringing reading to Australians in a new way through the power of TV.
Friends, we are all here for one reason and that's because we love books and we want all our fellow Australians to do the same.
Over the holidays, I was delighted to able to be able to immerse myself in a wide range of books.
I particularly loved being transported to the 1920s in the pages of Frank Moorhouse's Grand Days, a modern masterpiece.
I know for many Australians, getting to read a book means reading a Tim Winton or Peter Carey and we all share that sense of anticipation when a new one comes out. We just want to grab it.
It also means reading or re-reading classics like Jane Austen or Charles Dickens, and if you want a tip, if you ever want a conversation on Austen, Tanya Plibersek is your woman.
For others it is contemporary writing, or maybe it's a great magazine like The Big Issue, and I've been able to pick up a copy today. The Big Issue doing so much for social justice and social inclusion.
Of course the way we read varies too, for some it means Braille or audio books.
It could be a tablet  -  but I'd have to say given I have my Cabinet documents on an iPad, I don't read for pleasure using one. I like the book, it enables you to read it in the bath, I'm always worried about taking the iPad anywhere near the water and you also have that delicious sense when you finished it that it's telling the story of your reading through the pages, particularly through splashed pieces of mango and the like over summer.
So I like to have a book as an artefact, but it doesn't really matter how you read, it just matters that we do.
I want Australia to be many things: a prosperous nation, an innovative nation, but I certainly want us to be a reading nation.
It's true we have a strong record of buying and borrowing books in this country, but there are many gaps, too many gaps in our efforts.
Around 4.5 million working-age Australian adults don't have the high level of core, literacy and numeracy skills they need to succeed at work or study.
Now illiteracy is a tragedy, it's as simple as that.
A tragedy compounded by the fact that it is so unnecessary.
In a rich country like ours with universal education, we can do better.
To be able to read is a form of enfranchisement just like having the vote.
It's a passport to full participation in the life of the community and I want every Australian to know the joy and pleasure that comes from books and reading.
I want them to get all of the practical benefits too.
So I welcome the National Year of Reading and I am delighted the Australian Government has been able to support it.
The National Year of Reading has identified three goals which will help us turn Australia into a nation of readers:
First goal, for all Australians to understand the benefits of reading as a life skill and a catalyst for well-being.
Second, to promote a reading culture in every home.
And third to aim for families, parents and caregivers to share books with their children every day.
We will see every library  -  large and small  -  open their doors to invite the public in.
We'll see media campaigns to help people become more confident in talking about and enjoying books.
There is funding for adult literacy, because it's never too late  -  never too late - to discover a love of reading and the productive skills it brings.
And we'll be working with Indigenous communities where we know literacy is so important for better life outcomes.
In short, we'll be reaching out to Australians wherever they live because the gift of words is too precious to be withheld from anyone.
I therefore welcome this year-long celebration of books and reading.
I thank all the librarians, teachers, booksellers and other supporters for your help in making it a reality.
And I proudly declare the National Year of Reading officially open.
Thank you very much. 



Mr Speaker, in the long story of relations among the peoples of our nation  - the story of our struggles with each other and of our struggles to reconcile  -  there have been some good days which we will not forget.
Days when a glimpse of a better time came briefly into view.
We have cherished them.
We cherished 27 May 1967, when Australians voted Yes.
To empower the Commonwealth to bring the resources of the whole nation to bear to address Indigenous disadvantage.
Perhaps the greatest was here, four years ago.
13 February 2008, when Kevin Rudd said Sorry.
Sorry on behalf of all of us, for the grief, suffering and loss, for the pain, suffering and hurt, for the indignity and degradation.
A day we cherished, when we saw our nation as we wish it could always be.
Now we look forward to another such day  -  to the day when Australia's Indigenous peoples are recognised in the Act which constitutes the Australian Commonwealth.
And we look forward to the work that we will do together on all the days that lie between. 
Every day, our conscience demands we work to Close the Gap.
Mr Speaker, that work, every day, is what this Government has done.
By embracing the targets of the Closing the Gap campaign, this Government deliberately leaves itself nowhere to hide.
Closing the Gap is a practical and empirical project and it is a project that should move us deeply, work which will make such a difference in so many individual lives.
We aim to halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five by 2018, so more Indigenous babies live.
To ensure access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four-year-olds in remote communities by 2013, so more Indigenous children are ready on their first day of school.
To halve the gap in literacy and numeracy achievements for children by 2018, so more Indigenous children know the love of books.
To halve the gap for Indigenous students in Year 12 or equivalent attainment rates by 2020,so more Indigenous young people are ready for life and a job.
To halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians by 2018, so more Indigenous adults know the dignity and benefits of work.
And we aim to close the life-expectancy gap within a generation  -  that is, by 2031, so every Indigenous Australian has the chance to grow old.
Measurement is central to this project of Closing the Gap.
Because the Closing the Gap targets are not meant just to challenge us to do more  -  they are designed to hold us accountable to our ambitions.
It is through the annual assessment of the independent COAG Reform Council that is published in June each year  -  and through the annual Closing the Gap Report which the Government releases today  -  that we are brought to book.
The targets we have set are specific and measurable tests of our improvement.
Last year I reported that measurement of progress towards these targets, including by the States and Territories, also needs to improve.
However we can already track progress in reducing under-five-year-old mortality each year.
We have effective measures of access to early childhood education and our measurement of achievements in reading, writing and numeracy is sound.
Direct measurement of life expectancy and year 12 attainment relies on the Australian Census data, which is only available every five years.
So we track overall mortality on an annual basis  -  and this forms a reliable proxy from which we can track improvement in life expectancy.
And we track trends in apparent school retention each year, which acts as a guide to year 12 attainment.
Our employment target is measured using the respected National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Social Survey and the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Survey, direct measures of progress which are available every three years  -  supplemented by the five-yearly census.
But when we began the work of closing the gap, we knew that we needed better information about Indigenous health, education and employment.
This is why the 2009-2010 Budget invested almost $50 million extra over four years, funding new work by national data agencies and the States and Territories, to give us data which is more detailed and reliable, more comprehensive and easier to compare  -  particularly between Census years.
This year I can report that measurement has improved.
Central to the effort to measure progress is the Census  -  and last year's was better than any before.
$20 million of that extra funding was allocated to improve Census data collection methods.
Local Engagement Managers and mobile teams built early rapport with Indigenous communities.
They organised the delivery and collection of census books differently and they developed new ways for people who aren't literate in English to answer census questions.
They worked especially hard in the most remote areas and among the most disadvantaged.
Indigenous communities themselves already tell us the 2011 Census was an important improvement on the past.
We have improved other measurement besides the Census.
To improve data on access to early childhood education, the Australian Bureau of Statistics has led the development of the new National Early Childhood Education and Care Data Collection. Importantly, this collection includes data on early childhood education in early childhood centres. 
We now have nationally consistent data on smoking during pregnancy and we have agreed data to track the timing of the first antenatal visit  -  so we will be able to say how many Indigenous women get advice from a health professional at the right times during their pregnancy.
New key performance indicators will help us better understand the contribution of Indigenous specific primary health care services.
All this is thankless, detailed, time-consuming work  -  performed by dedicated professionals in statistical collection and analysis. 
But because of it, Mr Speaker, I am confident we can say that we are better placed than ever before to measure effectively our progress to Close the Gap.
Today's Closing the Gap Report shows that the foundations for overcoming Indigenous disadvantage are in place.
The Report shows that we are seeing progress  -  we are making gradual gains. 
The Australian Government remains the most confident of meeting two of the six targets.
The target of halving the infant mortality rates for Indigenous children under five by 2018 is on track.
We are also confident we can ensure access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four year olds in remote communities by 2013.
For the third, we are also now generally on track to meet the target to halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievement for Indigenous children by 2018.
This assessment is based on results from the annual National Assessment Program  -  Literacy and Numeracy, NAPLAN.
We can see measurable improvement in the 2011 NAPLAN results.
Significant gains occurred between 2010 and 2011 in the percentage of Indigenous students at or above the national minimum standards.
For example, for Year 3 Numeracy, up by 7.0 percentage points  -  and Year 9 Reading, up by 7.7 percentage points.
In fact in seven of the eight areas in which we can assess progress in reading and numeracy since 2008, the gap has narrowed.
And in six of these eight, the improvement over four years is fast enough that if it continues we will meet the target by 2018. 
In year seven and year nine numeracy progress still needs to accelerate.
We continue to see improvement in two more of the six targets, and with faster improvement over time, we believe these can be reached.
The Report shows that apparent retention rates to Year 12 are improving for Indigenous students  -  up from barely thirty per cent in 1995 to just over 47 per cent in 2010.
Faster improvement will be required to halve the gap in Year 12 or equivalent attainment rates by 2020. 
We will need to keep expanding places for post-school training and education.
We will need to keep working with Indigenous young people to ensure they find the opportunities which exist in the education and training system.
Faster improvement will also be required to halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians by 2018.
Indigenous employment has increased sharply in Australia in recent decades, reflecting a long period of almost uninterrupted economic growth  -  and an active and engaged approach from corporate Australia. 
Never in our nation's history has business been more prepared to play its part.
Just under 90,000 additional jobs were won by Indigenous Australians from 1994 to 2008.
The Indigenous unemployment rate fell from 31 per cent in 1994 to 23 per cent in 2002 and to 16.6 per cent in 2008.
In urban areas, the majority of Indigenous Australians of working age are employed  -  this was not the case 20 years ago.
Closing the Gap on life expectancy by 2031 remains the most challenging target of all.
Progress towards the other health, education and employment targets all provide strong foundations to help us lift life expectancy.
And the life expectancy target is the longest term of the six  -  it is a twenty-five-year target.
While the challenge is very large we do know that some progress is being made. 
In Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory the Indigenous mortality rate declined by 36 per cent from 1991 to 2010  -  and there was a significant narrowing of the gap in mortality rates with non-Indigenous Australians. 
And we know what the main causes of Indigenous mortality are  -  chronic disease and accident and injury.
So we are working to limit their incidence and reduce the harm they do.
Hundreds of extra Indigenous health workers are working to attack scourges of cancer, diabetes, heart disease and mental illness, as well as targeting risk factors for chronic disease such as smoking, poor nutrition and lack of exercise.
Mr Speaker, four years into a twenty-five-year project, this much is true: health outcomes, employment outcomes, education outcomes are improving, they need to keep improving and to improve more quickly.
This much is also true: foundations are in place, work is underway , we can measure encouraging improvement now.
This is our progress towards Closing the Gap.
Mr Speaker, one of the great myths of Indigenous disadvantage is that it persists despite decades of expensive public responses.
The reality is quite the reverse.
Report after report has shown that decades of under-investment in services and infrastructure are unquestionably a major cause of disadvantage, especially for the very young.
No Australian family, however hard-working, self-respecting or self-reliant, is expected to fix broken sewerage pipes at the end of their street or repair street lighting outside their house.
These are things Governments are responsible for  -  the basic, universal services all Australians are right to expect.
So the Australian Government has heard the call to change.
We have delivered billions of dollars of additional investment in the building blocks of better lives.
In early childhood and in schools  -  in health and healthy homes  -  in economic participation, in safe communities, in leadership and governance.
I have seen the difference this is making even in places where problems seem as intractable as they have been in the town camps of Alice Springs.
And so many Indigenous people have heard the call to change too.
They have taken on new responsibilities, not only to improve their own circumstances but to share the example with their young.
I have met the people who are making these changes in their own lives.
They know that no Australian Government, however active or ambitious, can get any child out of bed for school in the morning  -  or make any parent ask visitors to leave at a reasonable hour so the children in a small house can sleep.
These things are the responsibilities of every Australian family.
Another great myth of Indigenous disadvantage is that the nation must choose between two reconciliations  -  symbolic and practical.
That we must choose between a reconciliation which respects the rights and responsibilities of culture and land  -  and a reconciliation which respects the rights and responsibilities to education, health and jobs.
This is also quite false.
It runs against what we all know to be true in our own lives  -  that things of the spirit are inextricably linked with the things of day to day life.
A life of plenty without respect and acceptance is still a life half-lived  -  as is a life of poverty with respect and acceptance.
Human beings need to nourish and sustain body and soul.
The reconciliation we seek between us is not something which can be sorted or classified like a list of policy priorities.
We seek precisely the kind of harmony and concord  -  a national unity  -  which can never be whole or complete under conditions of poverty and unfairness.
And we seek precisely the kind of practical benefits in people's lives  -  better education, employment and health  -  which can never ultimately work without sharing responsibility and self-respect.
I think of my visit to the Northern Territory during the dry season last year.
There, in the spectacularly beautiful Alice Springs Desert Park, I handed back to traditional owners the title to their land under the Aboriginal Land Rights Act.
I saw people overwhelmed and emotional about the handover and what it represented  -  I remember Alice Ngalkin signing the deeds while her friends and family took photos to mark the event. 
A moment of great symbolic power which I shared with deep respect and which on that day brought me so much closer to the Indigenous people there.
And in the atmosphere of respect which we had built between us  -  the local Aboriginal elders and I then sat down to talk.
And they told me as frankly as anyone could, with both sentiment and deep conviction, what they believed I need to know about the practical problems they face.
They spoke about the need to listen and to trust.
And they said that the education system has failed Aboriginal people and it is critical to addressing disadvantage. 
They said that the way the emergency responsestarted in 2007 caused shame and hurt and they wanted to stay with us on the new journey. 
And they spoke about alcohol and its harms  -  the need to be tougher. 
They didn't pick sides in some dialectic or debate  -  but because of the trust we had shared that day, we could speak together in respect about what they knew was wrong and what they knew would work.
And that week, on the Gove Peninsula, I saw the traditional owners of the land and the representatives of a mining giant sign an agreement.
Signed before a gathering of thousands of people from all over Arnhem Land and from all around Australia.
We all met there for a striking ceremony performed on what was long contested country  -  where those most potent of all symbols of the struggle for land, the Yirrkala bark petitions, were inscribed in 1963.
And we met to celebrate an agreement which secures the future operations of the bauxite mine, alumina refinery and Nhulunbuy township. 
Which delivers Indigenous people real economic benefits fromthe mining investment boom, with economic development, jobs, better housing and community facilities.
Mr Speaker, in the Desert Park and on the Peninsula  -  among Australians who treasure progress and respect  -  I have seen and felt the presence of the reconciled nation we can become.
Where secure title to the big tracts of traditional land gives traditional owners a long-term economic future and a share in the jobs and opportunities the land can create.
And where secure title to a home in a town or community gives parents the security to raise and educate their children in a safe environment.
Where by saying sorry for the wrongs of the past and by recognising Indigenous people in our constitution, we build respect between all Australians.
And where that respect allows us to speak honestly with each other as we decide, together, what works where.
Not to the detriment of basic local service delivery  -  never accepting the soft bigotry of low expectations or attempting to explain away violence against women.
But yes, bound together as individuals and as a nation by shared symbols of respect and practical action  -  listening to each other properly, about what the best evidence tells us about what will make the greatest difference.
Whether the conversation is between a minister of my Cabinet and the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples, or between a departmental official and a parent who works part-time as a local teacher's aide, we listen to each other  -  and then we get on with the job.
This is the relationship between our people which I seek.
Mr Speaker, perhaps the ultimate manifestation of respect is constitutional recognition of Indigenous Australians. 
The proposal before the country now has been years in the making.
Over decades, many ways to recognise Indigenous Australians as our first peoples, to affirm their full and equal citizenship and to remove remaining traces of racial discrimination from our law have been proposed.
In August 1937, William Cooper sent a petition with 1,814 signatures to Prime Minister Joseph Lyons requesting that he forward it to King George VI, seeking direct representation in Parliament.
In June 1988, the chairs of the Northern and Central Land Councils presented the Barunga Statement to Prime Minister Bob Hawke. 
It called upon the Australian Government and people to recognise key Indigenous rights and to negotiate a Treaty recognising our prior ownership, continued occupation and sovereignty and affirming our human rights and freedoms.
And my party's national Platform has been pledged to support constitutional recognition since 1998.
Then in October 2007, then-Prime Minister John Howard raised the hopes of a nation, pledging that:
If re-elected, I will put to the Australian people within 18 months a referendum to formally recognise Indigenous Australians in our Constitution  -  their history as the first inhabitants of our country, their unique heritage of culture and languages, and their special (though not separate) place within a reconciled, indivisible nation.
It was a gracious and deliberate statement which effectively began the contemporary process that leads to today.
And four years on, the movement for constitutional recognition is strong and growing.
It grew through 2008, when the Cabinet met in east Arnhem Land and was solemnly petitioned to continue with this process.
And in 2010 I announced the appointment of an Expert Panel on Constitutional Recognition of Indigenous Australians to do the hands on work of developing options for constitutional change.
I didn't send the Panel on an easy journey  -  and they performed mightily. 
Last month, the co-chairs Patrick Dodson and Mark Leibler delivered the Panel's Report on Recognising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples in the Constitution to the Government.
I have thanked them publicly already and I do so again here today.
Mr Speaker, for constitutional change, Australians have to understand and be persuaded of the case for change.
This does require all-embracing political bipartisanship. 
But it requires more.
Political bipartisanship, while necessary, is not sufficient.
We need more than the consent of the governed to an agreement between parliamentarians  -  we need a genuine community desire for change.
Our Constitution is our nation's founding contract  -  our people rightly guard it with care.
Support for constitutional recognition must genuinely have the people's support.
That is what happened in 1967.  Yes, bipartisanship  -  but more.
A deep feeling in the Australian community leading to millions of Australian people deciding to say yes to change.
Earlier today, the Minister for Indigenous Affairs and I announced funding for a community conversation, to be sponsored by Reconciliation Australia.
To build support for what is already the subject of bipartisan agreement: the principle of constitutional recognition.
And to build understanding of the ways in which constitutional recognition might be achieved.
The Expert Panel's report provides a firm foundation for this discussion.
This is an opportunity for the Australian people to get involved.
To get on the You Me Unity website, to learn about what's in the Panel's report, and what happens next.
To find practical information and solid ideas and to discuss them  -  in their homes and with their neighbours, in their community meetings and in their workplaces, in their trade unions and in their churches.
The Government is committed to this change  -  we are committed to building public support for this change  -  and in the many conversations which follow in the Australian community, we will take a leading part.
It is through the sum of that myriad of conversations, of people listening and speaking with respect, that we will truly know that our people are ready to say yes to this change.
Mr Speaker, the day we said Sorry was a great day in this nation's history ... the day of constitutional recognition will be another.
Closing the Gap is an accumulation of all the small victories on all the many days that lie between.
The young man, first in his family to learn a trade, with skilled work on his traditional lands. 
The young woman, first in her family to earn a degree, holding a job in the city.
The basic public services that surround them, delivered at the standard every Australian expects.
The keys to a couple's first home  -  and the life of dignity and pride they live within it, raising children who are ready to take their place in a reconciled nation.
The respect shown to them by people in the community where they live. 
The detailed measurements which tell us this is so.
When more Indigenous children are ready to learn on their first day of school  -  we will know we are closing the gap.
When brilliant Indigenous school leavers are as sought after by the big firms as brilliant Indigenous footballers are sought after by the big clubs  -  we will know we are closing the gap.
When fewer Indigenous men between 35 and 45 die of disease  -  we will know we are closing the gap.
Today, we know we have a long way to go.
But we also know we are Closing the Gap. 



In early 1942, our nation had been engaged in hostilities for two and a half years, but this was the moment the reality of war hit home.
February 19.
Our date of infamy.
Australia's Pearl Harbor.
Today we stand safe on freedom's vantage ground and look back on those events with gratitude and respect.
Gratitude and respect that the passing of seven decades has only served to increase.
The Japanese Imperial force that attacked Darwin was much the same force that attacked Hawaii nine weeks earlier.
It was a massive armada of 242 planes and Darwin didn't stand a chance.
It took just five bombs to destroy the USS Peary.
She went down as a brave ship does  -  with all guns blazing, even as the water began to cover her deck.
The historian Peter Grose called it a doomed yet magnificent reply to the Japanese assault.
A feat that deserves an honoured place in the military history of the United States and in the story of our two nations.
The USS Peary holds that place, securely and lastingly.
A place her crew earned with their courage and with their lives.
Therefore the placement of this gun is no accident.
It points directly to the spot where the USS Peary rests on the floor of Darwin Harbour.
Not a wreck but a war grave.
As precious in its own way as the lawns and granite tablets beneath which their comrades rest in Hawaii.
Friends, these Americans died alongside many Australians.
They were among the first of thousands who would serve and die together in the 40 months of bitter warfare to come, bonded in a brotherhood of shared sacrifice.
As our personnel fought side by side, so did our nations.
And thus from these disastrous events came some lasting benefit:
The distant pre-war friendship between Australia and the United States became a firm and lasting alliance.
The course of Japanese history was turned towards democracy and peace.
And together our countries helped build, through the United Nations, a world order more just and secure than what had gone before.
These were prizes dearly bought.
So today we gather to ensure that the value of the sacrifice made in this city is never surrendered.
We commit ourselves to always see and hold the good
To honourably inhabit the freedom for which these brave Americans offered the gift of their lives.
Speaking in Australia at the height of the war, Eleanor Roosevelt said that victory comes as a result of the full and free gift of all that we have within us.
These gallant men gave all that they had  -  in full and free measure, as Americans always do.
They were far from American soil.
But they were not strangers.
Here they rest in Australia's embrace  -  at home with us and in peace  -  forever. 



Nineteen forty-two was the darkest year in Australia's history.
And if that darkest year had a darkest day, it was February 19.
It was the unimaginable day.
Beginning a series of raids around Northern Australia that together marked the first time our land has been attacked in war.
In two waves, 242 Japanese planes appeared in the air over this small but strategic township.
A young sailor Harry Dale said: They all glistened silver in the sun, like they were painted with silver frost.
But those planes brought only destruction from the bright skies.
Our distance from the hatreds of old Europe was no longer a protection.
Our peacetime complacency had become a potent setback in war.
Admittedly there had been some preparations but they were not enough.
Darwin ended the complacency.
This was the Battle for Australia.
The battle of every citizen for our nation's survival.
This was a fight for home and country.
For all we loved and held dear.
That would touch every family and every home.
Yet even as the bombs fell, fate was ordaining our response in the jungles of New Guinea.
So within months, the Japanese advance had been halted and the certainty of their defeat assured.
Less certain was our future friendship with Japan. But today that too is assured.
As the Allies surged north, Darwin remained a military post busy with troops and supplies.
And when peace came, residents returned to a broken town that took years to rebuild, only to be struck by another foe from the north, Cyclone Tracy.
The strength and resilience of Territorians is foremost in our hearts today.
Their dignity in the face of adversity will never be forgotten.
The bombing of this city was a terrible day in a terrible war.
A disaster tinged with defiance.
Like Gallipoli, it was an early set-back that spurred the nation to ultimate victory.
Territorians have always known it.
And we have made this a national commemoration so that the whole country will know it too.
This day is inscribed in the story of our nation forever.
Reminding us how precious is the freedom we enjoy.
How high a price has been paid to preserve it.
And how we must never, ever forget. 


This is an occasion to reflect on what we've achieved together.
We've got more to do but we achieved something huge together and that is getting equal pay for the 150,000 people who work in the social and community services sector, 120,000 of them women.
The work you do, I think every Australian is proud of and admiring of you  -  it is remarkable work in some of the toughest circumstances.
You see those things that many other Australians want to avert their eyes from; families in crisis, children who have been neglected, people with drug and alcohol problems, people with mental health issues, domestic violence.
There you are, providing all of your care and support, and as Prime Minister I wanted to see that properly paid and properly recognised, and I'm proud that we've achieved that together.
We have the opportunity today to tell the reform story  -  I know it's so known to you, but we do need to reflect on how we achieved this and the steps that made it possible.
Because this was no overnight sensation, this wasn't getting up in the morning and deciding that you wanted something done by the 6 o'clock news, this was years and years of patient work which we did together.
First we had to get rid of WorkChoices, because we knew that was destroying (inaudible).
So, we fought the 2007 election campaign and then we were in a position to get rid of WorkChoices.
And throughout 2008, as the Minister I worked with you, worked with people around the country to try and make sure that every part of the Fair Work Act was right.
And one big decision we had to make was what was going to be the equal pay principle in that Fair Work Act.
We knew all of the principles in the past had let women workers down, so we made a deliberate decision when we wrote the Fair Work Act to go to the best equal pay principle that there was in the country at that time, and we picked up the equal pay principle from Queensland because we knew that was the best way of getting women workers equal pay.
Then we got the Fair Work Act through in 2009, and that wasn't an easy struggle.
It took a lot of work, a lot of opposition from the Liberal and National parties, we didn't have control of the Senate, I had to negotiate and make sure the Act got through and I was very proud on the day that it did.
And then you brought your case, following the Fair Work Act.
In filing your case, starting all of those arguments before the Fair Work Commission, before Fair Work Australia to explain what you did and why it was underpaid.
That was a lot of work for you too.
Then, in March 2011 we brought together representatives  -  your representatives  -  representatives of employers and representatives of government to work as a reference group to see what else we needed to do to support the equal pay case.
Of course as Minister I'd already struck an agreement with you and we were going to work together but we needed to keep driving that work forward.
And then in May last year Fair Work Australia said yes there was a pay issue here, that it needed to be resolved in the interest of justice.
At the end of all of the work that we needed to do together, then we needed to come together and work out how we're going to bring this to finality.
What are the pay rates going to be?
And how's government going to find the money it needs to give you the wage justice you deserve?
And so late last year we entered into that agreement, where we said we'd support you, many employers said they'd support you, we'd get the final decision in the case and we would make $2 billion available to top up wages so you could have equal pay.
And wasn't it a fantastic day in February this year, when Fair Work Australia (inaudible).
This is a proud story of people working at their best.
Government doing what it needs to do.
You representing members right around the country, this great union.
Never giving up, never giving up on equal pay.
Fighting the struggle year after year.
And then of course it's also a story about employers who wanted to see their workers properly paid.
It's been a lot of work, it's taken a lot of time. We've made a lot of decisions, you know, there's been papers, submissions, court cases before Fair Work Australia, Cabinet decisions; a lot to do but we got there in the end.
And that is because we worked together in a patient and methodical way.
I want to thank you for that.
It's my vision of Australia's future that we no longer see unnecessary pay gaps, unfair pay gaps between men and women.
It's not good enough to say that something is women's work and therefore to be valued less. We've started on a very big journey of change; we've started with you, thank you for walking that journey in the determined way you did.
I'm very proud to be with you today and I'm looking forward to saying a big hello to everybody over morning tea.



Well it's a great pleasure to be here to launch George's book.
You've got to come and help a man whose surname is shortened to Mega', what a fantastic surname he has. He was just pointing out to me with one more vowel it would have been genius' on the end too but that wasn't to be.
So it's great to be here to launch George's book. I think George passes the Gillard test of journalism, which is he doesn't write crap. And on a day like today let me say that with more passion and force than usual. Not every anecdote here is retold as those involved in it remember.
But you don't launch a book by Megalogenis because you agree with every word of it. You launch it because you are interested in every word of it. Because George is a born myth-buster, empirical and sceptical, without succumbing to contrarianism. Still, my assessment of George's new book is that he's only half-right. Sorry about that, George.
The two big myths about Australia were best articulated fifty years ago. One, about our national economy: that we're just a lucky country. Two, about our national leadership: that we're run by second-rate people. George busts one of them  -  but I'm afraid he's still in thrall to the other.
InThe Australian Moment he smashes up one of the greatest myths of our time  -  that we've lived on our luck. He calls that one out right and I couldn't be happier that he's done it.
You know, all those cartoonish lines you read elsewhere, about our future being a quarry and a beach, all that silly self-deprecation about having dumb luck with our resources. I've never been so impatient with that kind of lazy opinionising as I am in 2012.
In reality, so many countries manage their mineral wealth badly that in the developing world they call it the resource curse and in the advanced world they call it the Dutch disease. National success in managing resources isn't dumb luck. 
This truth, that Australia isn't lucky, that we're actually good at national economic policy, runs through the whole of George's story, until he comes to this terrific question at the end. In his words:
Are we in danger of becoming a great country?
Well my answer today is you bet we are.
Here's Australia, with a great people, with a good government, doing the hard things, and doing them well. Making the most of a boom in mining investment, sharing the long-term benefits, pursuing the long term reforms, with economic numbers anyone else in the world would do anything to grab, with more Australians in work than ever before. This is a country where we make change work for us.
We've built a strong economy in the past thirty years  -  and we're building a new economy for our future right now.
But here's the rub, and here's where George and I do part company as analysts. Having busted the lucky myth, he's still taken in by the second-rate myth. So George says himself that Australia is the West's last best role model. High praise  -  that's George's words.
And I agree with that  -  our unique synthesis of equality and prosperity makes Australia a nation where we prove that fair countries can be rich and rich countries can be fair.
But still, George says the last serious election was nearly twenty years ago, in 1993. Well I'm afraid George, I just don't buy that. In specifics, because I know there were some big issues at stake in 2007  -  like WorkChoices  -  and 2010  -  like the NBN  -  and that there'll be big issues at stake in 2013.
But it's really the general reflection on the state of Australian leadership that I want to rebut. If we're so good at managing the economy  -  maybe our politics and government isn't quite as intellectually arid as all that.
You see we're not run by some wise old owl playing the clarinet in the bath or some solo genius zipping back and forth from Bungendore in a sports car while the political class wastes its time on doorstops. I think we've got a smart, hard-working people, tough businesses, and yes, a class of economic officials that the world envies.
But we've got politicians who make decisions and get the job done. Taxing mineral rents  -  doesn't just happen, it takes decisions. Building high speed broadband  -  takes decisions. Pricing carbon  -  takes decisions. And big ones at that.
And while I know you are not a born nostalgic, George, there is just a touch of lollies were sweeter when I was young in that way of looking at the 1980s and 1990s. Now, the boomers have got Gough and their kids have got Bob and Paul and I don't begrudge anyone fond memories of the politics of their youth. 
And my government isn't perfect, any more than theirs were. But reading George's account of Australian politics, I am reminded of something I often draw from conversations with Hawke and with Keating.
We in Labor rightly look back to the 1980s and 1990s as a period of great government, great reform. But the rear vision mirror should never be rose-coloured.
The truth, as we read here funnily enough, when you see the facts laid out by George, and as the leaders of that period tell you themselves, at least in private, what they say is that it was a very human business back then too. Sometimes they made mistakes, missed soft landings, had big regrets; sometimes they had triumphs, did good things for all.
At times they overcame determined conservative opposition, like on super, at times the opposition supported reforms, like on tariffs; they sometimes brought people with them, sometimes they pressed ahead with unpopular plans.
Through it all they built two models, two enduring Labor models of a strong fair economy and of a forward-looking politics. A nostalgia for their period is a contradiction in itself. So yes our economy is strong, but no, it's no coincidence. Because we are well led. We've had leadership, not luck.
Take the Deputy Prime Minister. Wayne Swan's been Australia's Treasurer for nearly five years, Labor's Treasury spokesman for almost eight, saw us through the Global Financial Crisis, is seeing us through Mining Boom Mark II, was the Euromoney Finance Minister of the Year in 2011. If this is the Australian moment, and it may well be, Wayne got us here as much as anyone. Swanny should probably have more mentions in your book than Margaret Thatcher. But I might be biased.
Where I have no doubt is that we're doing exactly what our great predecessors did. Working with business, and we'll have more to say about our deregulation agenda with the BCA shortly. Making the big investments, delivering the big reforms, making the big changes work for us. Yes, we're working with industry, working with manufacturing, working with cars.
And for the heresy-hunters who want to say that this is anathema to the Hawke-Keating tradition, well, go to George's index, look up tariffs, see what actually happened. The Government I lead won't turn the clock back. What we will do is build a new Australian economy. So, George is half-right, but in fairness, that's better than being entirely wrong.
And it is a good book  -  a clever, funny and compelling read in George's typical style. First, there's new facts and new analysis galore. This is the person who told John Howard, to his face in an interview, that it was under his Prime Ministership that for the first time the majority of migrants to Australia came from Asia. Now that's not bad to claim in the book.
Second, he builds on the facts and analysis with great colour. When he climbs these little mountains of empiricism he always plants a flag of expectation on the top. So he doesn't just do the analysis that tells us, for instance, that the generation born after 1964 is and I quote-
The first group in which women are better educated than men, and the Australian-born children of immigrants are better educated than their local peers.
He calls this group-
            Generation W, for women and wogs.
That's nice. In fact George I regret that I didn't make the birth cut-off, having been born in 1961. George of course then does the high politics as well 
He has an argument to put about the fifty or sixty politicians in conscious tension with one another, and if it's a bit tough on the profession of politics overall, in its detail it's rarely conventional wisdom 
Finally, with George, you do get the economic big picture. In the end, what George does in The Australian Moment that I think hasn't been done as cleverly or successfully before is this: He connects our domestic reform experience  -  the decisions our leaders have made  -  to our experience of the global economy  -  the economic shocks of the last forty years.
That story of the interplay of politics and the economy, the successive shocks and what we did in them, from the OPEC oil prices of 1973 to the Global Financial Crisis of 2008, that's the prism through which George tells his story.
It's not complete. But it is a convincing way to understand a lot of what's been done in this country and why. And it's his most interesting and significant contribution yet.
It is good to be living the Australian moment in 2012. And I'm delighted to be here to launch The Australian Moment today.
Thank you very much. 



It is a pleasure to welcome you all to Parliament House, the home of Australia's very much alive-and-well democracy.
I'm here as Prime Minister to acknowledge this industry and its magnificent contribution to the health of our people and the productivity of our nation.
When we talk about the success of Australia's economy, and our contemporary success is simply remarkable, we celebrate the contribution made by sectors such as mining and manufacturing, and we are right to do so.
But there's one sector that deserves to be up in lights along-side those others, and that is the pharmaceutical industry.
You are a great Australian success story, and on behalf of the nation, I honour your success tonight.
Like manufacturing, this is an industry that has said to the rest of the world: We can do this. We can make it. We can compete with the best. And you have.
Friends, I often talk about the new economy growing from the opportunities of the Asian century and a future based on skills and innovation.
You industry encapsulates exactly what I'm talking about. These are skilled jobs held by skilled people. Innovating. Value-adding. Knowledge-rich. Employing 14,000 people and sending abroad exports worth $4 billion a year, half of them to Asia. Like my old friend, the late John Button, I want this industry to succeed and thrive.
That's why we've worked hard with you to make Australia an attractive destination for global investors through the R&amp;D tax incentive and changing the rules on intellectual property.  But, of course, it goes beyond financial incentives.
We are also working to deliver first-class infrastructure like the National Broadband Network. We've opened up university enrolments so that places in science and pharmacy are now uncapped. And we're cutting the red tape surrounding clinical trials so you can get on and do what you do best.
Above all, we're working with you to keep the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme strong and sustainable for the 21st century as we face a growing and ageing population.
I know this is bipartisan gathering but I want to say a word about the PBS and what it means for Australian society. The PBS is no accident.
It's part of more than a hundred years of building a social safety net to bring wellbeing and peace-of-mind to Australian families.
It started in the first decade of Federation with the age and disability pensions.
We added Medibank, now Medicare in the 1970s. Universal superannuation in the 1980s. The National Disability Insurance Scheme in this decade. And back in the middle of it all, we had Ben Chifley creating the PBS. The year was 1947.Our nation had just been through a terrible world war and Chifley wanted to build a nation worthy of its heroes.
He'd also lived through two Depressions and witnessed first-hand the devastating effects of poverty and inequality.
So Chifley envisioned a different Australia  -  a fairer Australia. A nation that would bring security and dignity to all its people, regardless of their wealth or means. In creating the PBS, Chifley was not only engaged in policy development but in a contest of ideas.
Because as with Medicare and superannuation, the PBS was not always universally welcomed.
But like Medicare and superannuation, the PBS has become an integral and trusted part of Australian life.
We cannot imagine this country without it. Affordable pharmaceuticals  -  backed by scientific rigour  -  so that illness does not lead families to financial destitution because of the cost of medicines as it did in Chifley's day.
Today we are custodians of the scheme. Charged with making it efficient and sustainable so it continues to bring comfort and certainty to Australian families for years and decades to come.
I know we've had some tough decisions and difficult conversations in that process. And I'm here tonight because I'm grateful that Medicines Australia made those conversations constructive and professional.
With goodwill and compromise on all sides, we've found way through and we will continue to work with you to ensure the sustainability of the Pharmaceuticals Benefits Scheme.
The Memorandum of Understanding between the Government and Medicines Australia on behalf of industry is but one way we can provide certainty for both parties.
That's not only good news for the millions of Australians who rely on the PBS. It's a template of effective and respectful engagement for those in industry who would seek to influence government.
So friends, I'm here tonight to pay tribute to Medicines Australia and to Will Delaat as he bids you farewell. As an organisation, you have been well served by officials like Will and Brendan Shaw who set a high standard for advocacy in public policy.
As a result, we are maintaining the integrity and sustainability of the PBS as one of the most respected and rigorous pharmaceutical schemes in the world.
Will Delaat has made a significant contribution to that outcome. He can be very proud of the mark he left on your industry and on public life in this nation. A person of quality and a person of substance.
Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in acknowledging Will de Laat as I present this certificate of appreciation on your behalf. 



It's a great a delight to join you here today to be with Queensland Labor.
I see great advocates for Queensland in this audience, Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan, Kevin Rudd, Peter Beattie, Wayne Goss.
It's a genuine pleasure to be with representatives of the Queensland Labor movement, of federal, state and local government, of our trade unions, fellow activists, one and all.
And we're here today for an important purpose because this state faces a very big choice. You've heard Joshua talk about it and I'd like to specifically acknowledge Kate Jones with us today, the current and future Member for Ashgrove  -  I think she's going to change Queensland politics.
I always enjoy coming to Queensland  -  but I love coming and being with Queensland Labor when there's a fight on, because you are great fighters. Whether it's the original shearers gathering under a Queensland tree or whether it's the people in this room today  -  when there is a fight on you show the strength and determination to win that fight and if anybody can win the fight on election day then Queensland Labor can.
Around Australia when people look at Queensland they look with envious eyes. They look at what is being achieved in this state: the rising school standards, the growing numbers of apprenticeships, the new jobs in mining but beyond that as well, jobs in the science and research in this state are growing faster than in the advanced world.
People see a state investing in infrastructure but keeping its taxes low. A state that is improving its health care system and making sure that people have the benefits of new facilities. People see that being achieved today and they know in their bones around Australia that Queensland has the opportunity for a great future. That you are on the cusp of ensuring that your state can be stronger and more prosperous but at the same time can be fairer.
That your state can lead the way in making sure that new wealth and new work and new opportunity is shared by all. Australians around the country know that about Queensland.
But we also know this: you don't have today's achievements or shape the future by accident. It takes work, it takes vision, it takes a plan.
It took Queensland Labor to introduce Prep into this state so Queensland kids have 13 years of schooling.
It took Queensland Labor to do that because Queensland Labor knew that without the benefit of those years of schooling, without rising retention rates, Queensland kids were going to be left behind.
And it's taken Queensland Labor to oversee the current boom in this state, not only in mining, not only in LNG, but the boom you're experiencing in biotech, in aviation. It's taken Queensland Labor to manage your economy so that it gives your people those benefits.
It's taken Queensland Labor to ensure that there is the biggest health infrastructure program in this state of any part in the country. It's been Queensland Labor making those decisions and it will take Queensland Labor to shape this stronger and fairer future.
You are on the cusp of a remarkable opportunity but it will not be realised by accident.
And if the wrong choices are made, if the wrong choices are made for the future of this state, then in the blink of any eye you could slide back 20 years.
That's why election day in Queensland is so important. The choice your face on election day is so important.
It's a choice about who should lead this state, who should lead this state and make sure that it realises the promise the future holds for you now.
Anna Bligh is that leader. She has the vision, the courage and the plan to make sure that this state can be everything that can be realised for its future, that every opportunity is fully exploited.
When this state faced its most difficult hour it was Anna Bligh with her wisdom, her patience, her courage, her voice of reassurance that led this state through.
When this state needed rebuilding it was Anna Bligh who set about the rebuilding, not talking in slogans about can do  -  getting things done, that made a difference to this state.
And for your Premier, for Anna Bligh, rebuilding simply wasn't enough. At the same time she has been building Queensland's future. She leads a team who understands the future of this economy. She leads a team that understands the opportunities from the mining boom in this state. She leads a team with a plan for the future, a plan like using the benefits of your mineral wealth to invest in the minds of young Queenslanders so they can take their place in the future.
Friends, come election day, the choice is absolutely clear. It's a choice as to whether or not this state is going to leap ahead or languish. It's a choice as to whether or not Queensland is going to seize the future or slide back to the past. It's a choice as to whether or not Queensland will be the place that the rest of the nation looks at with envious eyes or the place that's got the reputation of having squandered a great opportunity.
Friends, the choice is clear and the fight is on.
And I ask you to welcome with me today the leader in that fight, the Labor leader, your Queensland Premier, the person who's going to lead this state to a great future - Anna Bligh. 



I begin by honouring the traditional owners of the land on which we meet and pay my respects in the spirit of reconciliation to Elders past and present.
We meet in a spirit of friendship on country made sacred by unbroken centuries of custodianship and care.
One hundred and eight words; that's how Canberra came about.
Just 108 words, which together comprise Section 125 of our Constitution.
From those modest words, a mature, confident city has grown up.
A city Walter Burley Griffin created as the capital for a country of bold democrats.
Just as we made a new nation, so we made a new capital.
Canberra wasn't just a clever solution to a vexing political problem.
It gave expression in urban shape and form to the values that define us as a people.
This is a democratic city.
A city close to nature.
A city that didn't seek to emulate the grandeur of its Old World peers.
And, of course, it is a city wisely named from among the ancient languages of its First Peoples  -  a stunning act of Reconciliation before the term Reconciliation was even known.
In a special way, Canberra belongs to every Australian.
Many children come here in Year 6.
Many Australians endeavour to visit it at least once in their lives.
And many new migrants come here soon after settlement because of the kind of civic pilgrimage it represents.
No citizen who comes to the city is a stranger.
So the Canberra Centenary is a celebration for every Australian, and I am delighted by the leadership being shown originally by Jon Stanhope and now by Katy Gallagher in preparing for it.
As the modern custodians of our capital, you know how much this anniversary means, and I'm very proud of the team you've drawn together led by two living national treasures, Sir William Deane as Patron and Robyn Archer as Creative Director.
I know you are preparing a strong program of events and commemorative projects, and I wish Robyn and her team every success.
I'm also delighted the Commonwealth has been able to make a contribution through the redevelopment of Constitution Avenue and the National Arboretum.
And today I want to go further by making a formal and public commitment on behalf of the Commonwealth of Australia to the role and significance of Canberra in the life of our nation.
Today I commit the Commonwealth to continuing to build and grow the nation's capital, its cultural institutions and its role as the focus of ceremonial, parliamentary and national leadership.
I commit to Canberra remaining the heart of the Australian Public Service and the primary location of government departments and agencies.
I pledge a deep and enduring partnership between the Commonwealth and the ACT legislatures and between the governments of the Commonwealth and the ACT to foster and develop a strong and flourishing city.A city which reflects the national pride we take in this, our bush capital; the respect we pay to our war dead and the vision of our founding leaders so elegantly realised in the plans of Walter Burley Griffin.
We make these commitments with a spirit of pride in Canberra's past and absolute confidence in its future.
As this city begins the count-down to its centenary, I say to all Australians:
Canberra is a success; our collective success over ten decades.
And it deserves to be celebrated.
What we are really celebrating, in a sense, is our ability as a nation and a people to get things right.
Whether in designing a constitution, introducing the basic wage and the old age pension or founding Canberra in that first decade after Federation through to multiculturalism and charting a way through the Asian Century in our own times, we are a people that gets the big calls right.
So I want this to be a celebration of Canberra as our capital.
But also a celebration of our characteristic ability to get things right and the confidence and astuteness that we've brought to the task of building the institutions of our nation.
In that spirit, I proudly launch the program to celebrate this, Canberra's centennial year. 99 going on 100.
I affirm the Statement of Commitment made on behalf of the nation today.
And I look forward to joining Canberrans and all Australians in celebrating the contribution this city has made to all the success and identity of the country we love so much. 



Thank you Peter, for that introduction. He's always a hard act to follow, showing that you can get away with anything in an Irish accent.
It's grand to be here again.
Ambassador White - welcome to an Australian St Patrick's Day event.
Can I acknowledge too my Federal colleagues, Tony Burke and Deb O'Neill, who are here with us enjoying the day.
I know that Joe Hockey is here too, travelling as Joe O'Hockey today, and wearing a borrowed green tie.
I'd like to acknowledge the friends and colleagues from state and local government.
Many friendly Irish faces and names  -  there are Keatings, there are Kellys, Johnno Johnson is here, and so many other friends.
Welcome too, to my fellow speakers today. Barry O'Farrell, for one.
A long standing friend of this Club and of course, a man who's got a considerable promotion since St Patrick's Day last.
Barry, I don't think you view it as your role to make my life easier, but you've made it easier in one respect. I didn't have to text you this morning to make sure that you and I weren't wearing the same outfit.
To Kristina, who's here, it was always a risk and the problem was she was always going to look better in it. Kristina it's great that you're here today.
I'd also like to acknowledge Mr. Alan Shatter, the Irish Minister for Justice, Equality and Defence. Welcome.
We know Ireland has been doing it tough  -  really tough. And it must sometimes feel for our Irish friends that history is a nightmare you're still trying to escape.
We admired the days of the Tiger and through those last decades felt your growing pride and your new prosperity and now we feel how bitter it must be to face tough times again.
But even in these tough times Ireland is proving to itself and the world it's a great nation, a great people with great strengths to draw on. And one of those biggest strengths is your Irishness itself.
In international politics they talk about hard power' and 'soft power'.
Hard power  -  the power of coercion and payment, fleets and armies, silver and gold.
And soft power  -  the power of co-option and attraction, influence and ideas  -  story and song.
Well surely, Ireland is a soft power superpower.
Proved by the fact that we can never say no to you and we can never stay mad with you.
And we know that Ireland is going to be back where it wants to be.
Now today, here, it's serious business here at the Lansdowne Club marking St Patrick's Day. And it has been serious business in this city for a very long time.
Did you know at Sydney's St Patrick's Day dinner in the 1830s they would toast The commercial interests of the colony'?
Even back then, they were telling their families accountants and financial managers that this was a business lunch. And so the story goes on.
It's a day to honour the Irish,and the honorary Irish as well. So it's no surprise either that at those very same dinners here in the 1830s they would toast the sons of St George, St Andrew and St David who have honoured us with their company this day'.
So I'm glad all these years later you can make me, a daughter of St David, so welcome amongst you.
It's a big day for the Irish, and it's a big day for Australians too, because we know without the Irish we would be a very different place.
Our society is this wonderful and complex multicultural tapestry. 
But at the start of European settlement, Englishness and Irishness were the original warp and weft of the people, the weave and the cross-weave of our national personality.
We do love the larrikin. There's one or two of them here today I'm sure.
It was Manning Clark who said the larrikin is like this: Almost archly self-conscious -- too smart for his own good, witty rather than humorous, exceeding limits, bending rules and sailing close to the wind, avoiding rather than evading responsibility, playing to an audience, mocking pomposity and smugness, larger than life, sceptical, iconoclastic, egalitarian yet suffering fools badly and, above all, defiant.'
Could you have a larrikin without Irish emigration? The answer is no.
And if we're more English than we like to admit  -  well, we're not nearly as Irish as we would like to be.
This year I took the opportunity to make the Federal Cabinet just that little bit more Irish. 
I already had that fine Sydney Irishman Tony Burke, a grand representative for all the Irishmen who've been in the great south land for a century or more.
But this time, I thought two was better than one, and if I could get one who came out here on a boat himself, all the better.
So, it was great fun to read out the names of each of the new Ministers last week, but none more so than that fine Melbourne Irishman, Brendan Patrick O'Connor, proudly a member of my Cabinet.
And I know that his brothers Michael and Brian, his sister Siobhan, and his parents, Philomena from Tipperary and Michael Sr, a grand Kerry man, we're very pleased too.
It's good to have another larrikin joining Tony Burke in the Cabinet.
Even if it means we won't get not going to get that much business done in their portfolios this afternoon.
As you all know, we wouldn't be without the Irish for a moment. It's as if Ireland were Australia's marvellous, admired, absent uncle. 
Sending wonderful gifts in the post and ringing us up at odd hours with mad anecdotes, just when we'd almost forgotten him. 
But for all that, he's our favourite uncle, given we know what Australia would be like without the Irish - just like New Zealand. 
Think about it!
I'm going to pay for that in my next bilateral discussion with John Key!
I'm sure it's a good thing, a very good thing, that you all have the weekend to recover from this lunch.
So we can be very confident in the pursuit of national productivity that you will be at work on Monday.
And I do want to say this too. That hasn't changed either. Patrick O'Farrell reminds us of the United Irishman Joseph Holt  -  a true political prisoner - sent here after 1798 and who found himself farming near Sydney, and he said in 1803: My usual time to commence to sow cropswas the first Monday after St Patrick's Day. it requiring a few days to get the men sober.'
Enjoy the lunch! 



Australia stands at the cross roads.
We've witnessed a shift in our economic interests from America and Europe to Asia in a single generation.
We're seeing shares of employment and activity move towards services and high tech production
We're seeing our dollar rise to sustained high levels due to our commodity exports and confidence in our currency and bonds.
It is a major structural realignment of our economy; an externally-led change as big as any we have seen in 200 years.
Like the 1980s, it is a time to choose.
To chart a conscious and deliberate pathway to sustained prosperity, or face the alternative of mediocre growth or even decline.
In the early 2000s, the mining boom gave us a moment of complacency.
But the post-GFC world has made it clear we cannot cruise along any more.
The world of easy money and easy choices that prevailed until 2008 is gone and won't be coming back.
We are in an era of deleveraging.
An era of savings, surpluses and balance-sheet repair.
An era of falling tax revenues and tough fiscal choices.
An era when the baby boomers have begun to retire.
This is a more austere and demanding world where only the resilient and the nimble will prosper.
Growth will not come easily.
Every percentage point of GDP will be hard-won.
Yes there is opportunity in the mining boom and in the relentless rise of Asia's middle class.
But we can only take advantage of those opportunities if we renew the productivity drive that made us so successful in the 80s and 90s.
The high road.
So that people buying our products and services don't ask how much they are but how good they are.
Taking us into the league of countries like Germany, Sweden, Singapore and Israel where high value, high quality is a way of life.
Let's be clear, though, on what productivity means.
It doesn't mean taking a few dollars out of workers' pockets or eroding protections that bring them dignity and security.
And it doesn't mean hard-working employees working even harder.
In a mature, sophisticated economy like ours, the biggest single source of productivity will come from only one place: capital deepening.
Physical capital  -  the infrastructure and equipment that enables us to achieve more.
Like unleashing the power of broadband through the NBN.
Completing the duplication of the Pacific Highway.
Upgrading our national freight rail network.
Unclogging our cities through massive new transport infrastructure like the Regional Rail line in Melbourne.
And we're working towards linking the rapidly expanding resources sector in New South Wales to Port Kembla via the long-deferred Maldon to Dumbarton freight line.
It's a huge agenda, and no government has done more in these areas since Federation than ours.
The other part of the picture is human capital  -  in other words, people and skills.
Nothing is more important to Australia's future economic success than skills development.
Nothing.
Skills are the lifeblood of a modern economy and the key to a more prosperous future.
Skills are central to ensuring that we have the workforce needed to deliver the innovative, high quality products and services that will power our economy this century.
Economic modelling by KPMG Econotech shows that the Government's skills targets could lift Australia's GDP by up to 2.6 per cent each year between 2025 and 2040.
It would boost employment by 1.2 per cent over the same period.
For individuals, achieving recognised qualifications is one of the best ways to secure a job and earn a decent wage.
In a changing economy, skills also build resilience.
They provide workers with the flexibility to change jobs, apply skills in different contexts and go on learning.
They enable employees to manage the demands of new systems and new technologies.
As our economy continues to change, having the right skills, and the ability to apply those skills in the right settings,will be critical.
A few moments ago I used the phrase human capital.
It's a dry economic term but what we are really talking about is liberating the creative capacity of individuals.
Giving them the opportunity to change their lives for the better.
Whether it's a kid in the suburbs who has no other social or economic advantages.
An older worker looking to change fields or overcome the challenge of redundancy.
Or perhaps a single mum wanting to return to the workforce.
In the past it was easy for students to leave Year 9 and 10 without further qualifications due to the abundance of unskilled jobs or career pathways that didn't require formal skills.
But now, and increasingly in the future, individuals without qualifications will simply be forced to compete for a diminishing pool of low-skill, low wage jobs, or else face the demoralising prospect of unemployment.
That's not the future I want for any Australian.
I want a future where Australians have the opportunity to get new skills and a new opportunity to create a better life for themselves and their families.
That's why I refer to the power of education as being transformative.
Transformative for individuals and transformative for society.
To date, this government has covered a huge amount of ground in early childhood, schools and university education.
In universities, we've moved to a demand-driven system that has already resulted in 150,000 extra university places.
More than 40 per cent of young women now have a bachelors degree or higher, achieving a large part of our target more than a decade ahead of schedule.
We are well on track to achieve our target of 40 per cent of people aged 25 to 34 holding a bachelors degree or higher by 2025, with more children from poorer families getting a chance.
We're making sure that all Australian children have the opportunity to reap the rewards of a quality early childhood education through universal access to preschool.
In schools, we've put in place My School, we're devolving power to local school principals and communities, and boosting teacher quality.
We're introducing the National Curriculum and charting a pathway to a better way of funding schools through the Gonski review.
The next wave of reform must be in the area of skills.
This is the missing piece of the puzzle.
Since 2008, our nation has been committed to ambitious targets for skilling Australians:
 * 	Doubling the number of qualification completions at diploma and advanced diploma levels
 * 	Halving the proportion of Australians of working age  without a Certificate III qualification or higher by 2020, and
 * 	Increasing the proportion of young Australians aged 20 to 24 attaining Year 12 or Certificate II to 90 per cent by 2015.
Already we have 460,000 doing a trade apprenticeship or a traineeship  -  with more people studying a trade than ever before in Australia's history.
But we need to go further to make our training goals a reality.
So today I am pleased to announce a new major package of reforms.
A skills blueprint to meet the demands of the Asian Century.
A plan to help Australians gets jobs, learn new skills to get better jobs and to build a more competitive business environment.
Friends, the package I launch today is a plan for better, more timely access to training places.
But also better quality training.
Fairer funding of training.
More flexible and innovative delivery of training.
It is a plan that is mindful of the central place that TAFE plays in our training system and indeed in our national imagination.
Our TAFEs are essential public institutions that have a presence in every region and collectively deliver 80 per cent of VET training.
TAFE is known for its sophisticated technical educationand its ability to reach those in our community who are marginalised.
Our plan encompasses TAFE and all of vocational education, and it starts with this simple proposition: skills are no longer an optional extra but a necessity.
In the new economy we are creating, few Australians can or should be left to embark on their working lives without skills and qualifications.
The economy needs it; our vision for a fairer nation demands it.
Today 4.1 million working Australians do not have the skills necessary for entry to the key growth sectors of our economy.
These workers earn up to $10,000 a year less than their more skilled peers.
They have an employment rate of less than 60 per cent.
And they get locked out of new opportunities because demand for jobs with high-level skills is running at 2.5 times the rate of unskilled jobs.
Put simply, they are less likely to have a job.
Think of it this way.
The jobs of the future are jobs that require skills:
Advanced manufacturing, taking us up the value-chain.
Clean energy.
Mining, building and construction.
Financial and property services.
Child care, aged and disability care.
Nursing and allied health.
New media, culture and design.
These are the growth areas of today and tomorrow, and every single one of them requires skills.
So our plan begins with measures to increase the accessibility of training places in the community.
As a result of our reform plan, every working age Australian will be entitled to a taxpayer-funded training place to obtain a qualification up to and including Certificate III, including language and literacy courses.
Any one from Year 10 to retirement age will be able to obtain one of these places.
This is our National Training Entitlement for every Australian.
Why Certificate III?
Because research tells us this is the threshold qualification that really makes a difference.
It's the qualification that provides a noticeable boost to income.
The first qualification that begins admitting holders into the professions like child care or aged care.
But friends, we know this development on its own is not enough.
Many more Australians will aspire to higher qualifications and they deserve every encouragement to do so.
But the upfront costs can deter many in our community, especially those from modest circumstances.
So today I can announce a new plan to bring to our vocational sector the benefits that interest-free deferred loans have long brought to university participation.
Think of it as being like HECS for Skills.
At last, VET diploma students will get the same rights that university students have had for years:
 * 	No upfront fees
 * 	Access to an interest-free loan to pay for their study
 * 	Only having to pay that loan back once their income reaches a certain level.
Remember university students have enjoyed the benefits of HECS for 23 years.
With these reforms, VET will no longer be the poor relation.
More opportunities to train, funded more fairly.
That's what is on offer today.
But we know these measures on their own are not enough.
We can't pour extra money and extra places into a patchy and inflexible system.
So we also need a focus on quality and a focus on transparency.
Already we've established the Australian Skills Quality Authority to promote higher standards amongst the nation's 5000 training organisations.
The Commonwealth is also moving to review and improve these standards through the National Skills Standards Council.
But we need to go further.
To this end, our reform package includes a number of measures designed to support the delivery of high quality VET training.
We will work with the States and Territories to ensure the qualifications delivered by the VET sector are independently assessed over the next two years.
The Commonwealth will require all jurisdictions to ensure only quality providers with an established record can access public funding.
And we will require the States and Territories to set out a plan for navigating their TAFE systems through these reforms so that the important role of public providers is maintained.
It is in everyone's interests that TAFE remains at the centre of our VET system.
Friends,
There's one final piece of the picture and that is the role of students, especially the information and support they receive.
We've seen how My School and My Hospital are helping to bring choice and transparency to school education and hospital care.
The VET sector trains 1.8 million students a year, so it merits the same open and accountable approach.
Under the government's reforms, we will establish a single website, My Skills, so people can have vital information on training courses and training providers.
Over time, the My Skills website will provide individuals and employers with real time information on things like course options, employment outcomes, audit reports and fees.
We want business and individuals to have ready access to information that will allow them to choose the training organisation that best suits their needs.
We also recognise that such a big and diverse sector can be hard for students to navigate.
So we will introduce a Unique Student Identifier, a single ID number that will enable students to track the skills and qualifications they have achieved.
It will bring all their training history together in a single, portable record making moving courses or providers easier.
It was also make it simpler for them to obtain recognition of prior training and skills when they enrol in a new course.
Lastly, we will be asking the States and Territories to do more when it comes to student retention and learning outcomes.
We want to re-set the benchmark of achievement in training.
A test of this reform will be not just how many students sign up for training  -  but how many complete.
At the moment only 30 per cent of students, on average, complete a VET course.
That is an enormous waste of public funds, a big loss of potential skills, and a human tragedy as well.
With better approaches to training content and delivery, teaching quality and student support, I believe we can vastly increase the completion of VET qualifications.
Indeed we are negotiating measures with the States and Territories to ensure that around 375,000 additional students will complete their qualification over the next five years.
Friends, these are Australian Government proposals that come with the endorsement of my Cabinet and my own lifelong commitment to the importance of education.
But the truth is the States and Territories remain the majority funder for VET training and share a profound interest in delivering quality outcomes.
So these are reforms requiring the support and endorsement of the whole Federation.
Accordingly, I will be presenting these proposals to my fellow First Ministers at the COAG meeting on April 13.
I present them in a spirit of bipartisanship and goodwill.
They are proposals designed in the national interest and I look forward to having a fruitful conversation with my State and Territory colleagues.
In approaching the COAG table, I won't come empty handed.
On behalf of the Commonwealth, I will offer the States and Territories $7.2 billion over five years to underpin Australia's training system.
In addition, we have another $1.75 billion to support and drive these new reforms.
To which will be added funds unlocked by VET FEE-HELP, potentially amounting to $155 million each year, which will help underwrite the National Training Entitlement.
Together these measures almost double the level of funding the Government inherited in 2007.
So it can be fairly said that our nation's long neglect of vocational education is at an end.
A huge new piece of the Government's plans for the nation's future falls into place today.
We have ambitious goals and they are necessarily bold:
To make every school a great school.
To make every university a great university.
To skill every Australian who can and wants to be skilled.
To ensure no employer creates a job without someone qualified and equipped to fill it.
No longer will personal means or a lack of training opportunities be a barrier or an excuse.
We will have a supply of training places sufficient to meet the needs and opportunities of the future.
Training underpinned by quality, flexibility and transparency.
This skills package is a huge breakthrough for business and employees as we shape the new economy.
It sits alongside our reforms in clean energy, broadband and tax redesign as the building blocks to equip our nation for the challenges ahead.
It's also a satisfying moment on my own journey in public life, so let me conclude with this reflection.
I am honoured to lead a movement that was founded in 1891  -  Australia's oldest political tradition.
It was begun by a group of workers and small businessmen who laid out a simple 16-point plan as their first platform.
One of those items was a commitment to Free, compulsory, and technical education, higher as well as elementary, to be extended to all alike.
Universal schooling was achieved quickly in the final decades of the 19th century.
But in university and VET, it's taken more than a century to achieve this promise.
Only now, under this government since 2007, is broad access to university and high-level vocational education  -  free at the point of use and driven by demand  -  being delivered and assured
They are reforms that will shape and sustain our nation for decades to come.
Reforms that position us to be winners in the Asian Century.
A race our nation cannot afford to lose. 



We gather in a spirit of commemoration and of celebration.
Commemoration because the vivid light which was the life of Nancy Wake has been extinguished.
But celebration because that life has such lasting significance for the people of the nations represented here today and, indeed, for the wider cause of freedom.
We remember a moment, decisive in history, when the world stood in dire peril, and exceptional men and women rose up to meet that challenge.
Nancy Wake holds a foremost place in their ranks.
It is commonplace now to call them the greatest generation.
But Tom Brokaw's characterisation is so favoured and repeated because it is so true.
They were the children of one world war, raised in the midst of privation and unease, who were forced to face another war that became the most dreadful conflict in human history.
These were dark days for Europe; the very darkest.
In 1940, France and the Low Countries were smashed as the German forces swept all before them.
In his historic radio address, General De Gaulle asked three defiant questions:
"Has the last word been said?
Must hope disappear?
Is defeat final?
The response in many freedom-loving hearts was a resounding no. No to each of these questions, no to them all.
Nancy Wake was one who gave the same courageous answer and kept the flame of resistance alive.
But in her case, it didn't need to be that way.
Nancy was young, she was wealthy, she was beautiful.
She could have escaped or melted into the civilian population, living out the war in quiet obscurity without reproach.
But from the first days of the Occupation, Nancy knew this was not a time for reticence or self-regard.
She gave all and she risked all.
Never was a cause better or more faithfully served.
Nancy Wake's remarkable career as a spy and saboteur has been well documented in Peter's book and many other sources.
Her deeds and character were showered with honours richly deserved.
And Nancy's own long life allowed her to receive in full measure the affection and respect that was so completely her due.
Now, months after her passing, when so many wise and insightful words have been written and spoken, what is still left to be said?
For me, speaking on behalf of the nation and also expressing the feelings of my own heart, it can be summed-up in one word:
Gratitude.
Gratitude that when history's greatest summons came, Nancy and millions like her were ready to answer the call.
Gratitude for Nancy's life and her achievements.
And so we gather here, in this People's House, and in this distinguished company to say goodbye to Nancy Wake one last time.
She risked her life for months and years, and yet was spared.
Now old age has done what Nazi bullets could do, and Nancy Wake has gone from our midst.
But like all of her comrades, who fill honour rolls and cemeteries in five continents, her deeds will endure.
Her memory will not perish.
And her name will live among the valiant forever. 



Holden has been a proud part of our nation's story for more than a century. It's an Australian icon. But the truth is in January this year we were at real risk that there would be no more Holden in Australia, that we wouldn't have Holden here producing motor vehicles. Now that wasn't acceptable to me as Prime Minister and it wasn't the right thing for the nation's future. It would have been a knock-out blow for manufacturing in this country given the importance of the auto industry to all of manufacturing.
So, I'm pleased to be here today with the Premier, with Minister Combet, with Holden and Mike, to announce some good news. And the good news is that the future of General Motors is now secure in this country for the next decade.
Holden will be here in Australia producing cars for at least the next 10 years. That's great news. And it's as a result of a more than $1 billion co-investment between the Federal Government, the South Australian Government, the Victorian Government and of course Holden, which is investing strongly in the future of manufacturing Holden cars here in Australia.
So this is a great day for Australian car-making, to be able to announce that Holden will be here for the next decade and we've been able to secure that by working together. But I also want to say it's a good day for smart policy, because it is smart policy to ensure that we shape the future, that it's not shaped around us. And the high Australian dollar, the aftermath of the global financial crisis, current global economic circumstances could have shaped the future for us and that future would have been one without Holden in this country.
Instead of letting the future be shaped, we've taken the active decisions to make sure we determine what the future is. And that future will be one in which Holden continues to make cars here. It will be a future of more innovation. It will be a future of high-skill, high-value manufacturing and as a result of this co-investment, we'll see two new Holden vehicles generated here. Next-generation vehicles which are cleaner and greener than the Holdens of the past. They'll be smart, clean cars but the most important thing here today is they will have on them "Made in Australia." They will have been made right here.
This is a co-investment in every sense of the word. Between the Federal, South Australian and Victorian Governments, we are making an investment of $275 million. That joins with a more than billion-dollar investment from Holden to secure the future and because of the multiplier effect of making cars in this country, Holden's estimate is that that will generate more than $4 billion of value to the Australian economy.
This is truly a strategic co-investment not a handout. And if anybody has any doubt about the importance of the car industry to our country and to manufacturing, I suggest that they talk to the people from Holden who are here today. The people who represent the highly skilled workforce at Holden, the people who make these great cars. And they'll be able to tell you about the high skills that are generated in the car industry, they will be able to tell you about the importance of car making to thousands of jobs in car component companies all across the supply chain and they'll be able to tell you too about the importance of those skills to other manufacturing enterprises.
This is an industry that employs more than 50,000 people. It's central to the jobs of 200,000 others. That means that it's a vital component of our economy and it's a crucible of new skills and new technologies.
Now we live in what is a tough global environment with a strong Australian dollar ,and that means we're in a time of change and a time of transformation. What this announcement proves today is during that time of transformation we can be a country that successfully manufactures right here. We can be a country that seizes the opportunity that is going to flow from what I have called the Asian Century, a century in which we will see spectacular growth in our region and new opportunities for the Australian economy.
So I'd like to thank Mike for the work that we've been able to do with Holden to secure today's announcement. I'd like to thank Ministers Combet and Carr for their work on today's announcement. I'd like to thank Ian Jones too and the union representatives who are here, people who represent a highly skilled workforce who have wanted to work with us to secure the future, and Premier Weatherill, thank you for playing your part and I'd like to acknowledge too the contribution of the Victorian Government.
Thank you very much.  



Prof Jeong Kap-young,President of Yonsei University.
Mr Kim Woo-sang, President of the Korea Foundation.
Distinguished guests and friends.
It is an honour to be here for my third visit to your beautiful country as Australia's Prime Minister.
And it is inspiring to gather with you here at Yonsei, one of Asia's most prestigious universities.
So much of Korea's destiny has been shaped by the young people whose education was found within these walls.
Of course, this is also home to a Centre for Australian Studies, so generously hosted by your university since 2008.
I cannot think of a better place to speak on the economic opportunities and security responsibilities that lie ahead for our nations  -  and I could not have chosen a better time for such reflections, following our Friendship Year celebrating 50 years of diplomatic relations between us
Australians and Koreans are indeed friends.
Australian missionaries and Korean people shared their faith in Busan a hundred and thirty years ago.
Korean and Australian soldiers shared their sacrifice defending this very city against aggression sixty years ago.
I will never forget being in Korea last year to mark the anniversary of the Battle of Kapyong  -  and to pay tribute to the courage that Koreans and Australians shared under fire in those dark days.
And today, in better times, Australians and Koreans share so many human connections: as migrants, as business partners, as students, and as tourists.
At any one point, we estimate there are 150,000 Koreans in Australia  -  residents, students and tourists.
Australia and Korea are friends  -  and we are partners.
We are two dynamic peoples, each seeking prosperity based on economic reform and productivity growth.
Two competitive
Two absolutely authentic democracies, each with transparent and accountable governments.
Two middle powers, sharing a strategic outlook, multilaterally engaged, constructive citizens in international society.
And two US allies, each committed to a stable and prosperous Asia-Pacific, free from conflict between states.
That is how I come to address you today  -  as a friend and a partner.
But more, I come to address you as respected neighbours.
Australians in Asia are not strangers.
This is our neighbourhood.
We have brought a spirit of engagement, of openness, of adaptation and learning to our relations in Asia over many decades now.
And the hard numbers measure how much we've changed.
In trade alone, between around 1950 and 1990, Australia's exports into Asia grew to about half of our total exports.
And this grew even further in the past twenty years, with exports to Asia making up almost three quarters of Australia's total exports today.
In 2012, our decades-long project of engagement has reached a new phase.
I have commissioned what we know as a white paper  -  the most elevated policy document in the Australian tradition of government  -  a White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
It will be a national blueprint for a time of global, regional and national change.
And this project unfolds in a century defined not only by the Asian strength that we see coming into being  -  but by changes in the global economy outside Asia  -  by the things the global economy is leaving behind.
The world of easy money and easy choices that prevailed in parts of the global economy until 2008 is gone and won't be coming back.
We are in an era of deleveraging, of savings, of surpluses and balance-sheet repair.
Growth will not come easily  -  every percentage point of GDP will be hard-won.
Ours is a time, austere and demanding, when only the resilient and the nimble will prosper.
But in so many ways, that is exactly what makes this Australia's time, Korea's time, what makes this Asia's time.
Because this is a time when the virtues we share will never be needed more.
A time which suits thrift and industry, education and hard work.
A time which suits societies which stick together, which join in shared work and in mutual care.
A time which suits families, communities and nations who willingly shoulder their responsibility to shape the future and to prosper in it.
A time in which the demands of leadership are to make the big decisions for the long term.
Many of the big decisions confronting Australia are shared with Korea.
In our nation building investment in infrastructure at home  -  in broadening and deepening the trade links between us  -  and in working together for peace and security in the world.
Both our nations understand that high-speed broadband services are critical to future prosperity.
Increases in broadband coverage spur economic growth.
It's estimated that every 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration delivers in the order of a 1.3 per cent one off growth boost to the economy.
And there is a clear link between technology innovation and economic success.
Studies suggest that 70 per cent of product innovation and 73 per cent of process innovation in manufacturing is linked to information and communications technology.
High speed broadband matters.
But I don't need to tell you that: Korea's digital economy leads the world.
Ranked first in the world for the availability of government information online, sophisticated delivery of government services electronically and online citizen participation.
Leading in eCommerce  -  measured at over 30 per cent of all commercial transactions here  -  probably six times the level in Australia.
An information and communication technologies market estimated to be worth 16 billion Australian dollars a year.
Made possible by the highest broadband connection rate in the world  -  reaching over 90 per cent of homes.
We in Australia admire that greatly  -  and we are learning fast.
Because the Korean experience of high-speed broadband  shows how much Australia can look forward to as we build our own National Broadband Network at home.
Of course our two national contexts differ in certain respects. 
Notably, Australia's vast landmass and the need to serve every Australian community means our business model is different.
But we share ambitious goals for internet speeds  -  and for digital productivity.
And with the rollout of the national broadband network, the direct contribution of the internet to Australia's economy is estimated to increase by 40 per cent  -  to reach $70 billion by 2016.
This creates opportunities in Korea as well as in Australia.
Your business and research communities have great experience in the innovative application of broadband.
We're already collaborating in research on developing digital visual content technology for animation and digital media.
Our animation and multimedia companies are establishing alliances.
And the opportunities for Australian and Korean firms and universities to co-operate in this and many other fields will only grow.
Today I can tell you that Australia's NBN Co will be announcing soon the details of its ambitious roll out over the next three years.
Soon, Australian families and firms in communities around the nation will know exactly when their suburb or town will switch on to the NBN.
Switching on to technologies which will revolutionise the way Australians teach and learn, the way we diagnose and cure, the way we buy and sell, the way we live in the world as friends.
Our hundred year old copper network telephone lines have served us well.
But unless we switch on the future, our old system will choke economic growth, competitiveness and the possibility of better health and education services.
Today, I saw with my own eyes the future of education. 
I visited Gyeseong Catholic Girls High School here in Seoul and joined in a broadband video link with Australian students from Armidale in New South Wales.
The Australian and Korean students practiced their language skills  -  introduced each other to the achievements of famous Australians and Koreans,they learned together.
But this was more than a vision of the classroom of the future using Australia's NBN technology  -  itwas a living example of the future I seek for my country.
Of the opportunities for us in the Asian Century. 
Of the transformative power of education in individual lives and in the society and the economy as a whole.
Of how Australia can build the Asia literacy that will help us seize the opportunities which will come as our region grows and prospers.
And seize the vast possibilities of building a new economy -  an economy founded on high skills, high wages, high value manufacturing and clean energy made possible by high technology.
And in this time of opportunity, we in Australia and Korea can prosper together.
Australia's modern and strong economy and our strengths in raw materials, energy and services already complement Korea's strengths in hi-tech manufacturing and heavy industry.
Broadband will increasingly connect our people and our firms.
And it will bring us increasing opportunities to take advantage of our strongly complementary economies.
You are no doubt familiar with the phenomenon known as Factory Asia' which has emerged as costs have risen and currencies appreciated since the 1980s.
First Japan, then the so-called Tiger' countries, like Korea, then the Dragons' of South East Asia, and over time, China and Vietnam, have each in turn moved parts of labour intensive assembly to lower cost regions and countries, while retaining higher end, higher value parts of the production chain at home.
This rapid integration and expansion of Asian supply chains holds important lessons for Australia, with our strong currency and our need to compete on the highest value rather than the lowest cost.
I'm struck, for instance, by the example of the Macquarie Group of companies.
Active in Korea for more than a decade, managing over 20 billion Australian dollars worth of assets here, a leading player in infrastructure funds, corporate finance and merger and acquisition advisory work. 
Now, many Asian bridges have been built with the natural resources Australia's best mining enterprises extract.
But when the Macquarie Group arranged the finance for the recently completed Grand Incheon Bridge, we saw a bridge built with the sophisticated financial products that Australia's best service firms develop.
This kind of sophisticated economic co-operation, seeking out and making the most of new complementarities between our firms, promises considerable opportunities for both our countries in coming years.
A successful conclusion to our negotiations for a comprehensive, high-qualityFree Trade Agreement between Australia and Korea is important to make the most of these.
Giving Australia an opportunity to compete evenly with other countries for access to your market  -  and further opening up our markets for your goods, services and investment.
Bringing new benefits to both our peoples  -  and expanding the existing benefits of our substantial and complementary economic links.
Friends,We do see much that is new in this Asian Century  -  great opportunities for prosperity and growth  -  but only if we can keep the peace.
For among so much that is new, many old tensions remain  -  and many old threats never went away.
No country knows that more than yours.
But you should also know that in Australia, you have an understanding friend.
Your security threatened by a conflict unresolved for 60 years.
Your capital, so close to perhaps the world's most dangerous border.
A border I visited on my last visit to Korea and where I stood face-to-face with a North Korean guard.
A visit not just to see for myself the frontier on which you must maintain such vigilance  -  but to show you as well that you have friends in Australia as you keep the watch.
So we strongly support your efforts to maintain peace on the Peninsula.
We have consistently called on North Korea to abandon its nuclear programs.
And we remain deeply concerned by North Korea's aggressive and unpredictable behaviour.
Just weeks after what had been constructive US-DPRK talks and apparent agreement to a moratorium on long-range missile launches, we learn that North Korea plans a satellite launch using ballistic missile technology.
This clear breach of UN Security Council resolutions would be a very provocative action.
Australia continues to urge North Korea to act in the interests of its own people, abandon this launch plan and follow through on its recent assurances and commitments.
Those Asian countries with the most influence on North Korea can  -  and should  -  act too, and should demand that North Korea not proceed with its planned so-called satellite launch.
North Korea's continued refusal to de-nuclearise is one of the gravest security challenges Asia faces.
I'm here in Korea this week with many other leaders to attend a meeting hosted by President Lee on another grave challenge: the security of nuclear materials.
We are continuing work begun by President Obama two years ago, to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials within four years.
There is progress to report.
Toward legally binding commitments to the highest standards of protection. 
Special precautions for the most sensitive nuclear materials, such as highly enriched uranium and separated plutonium. 
Securing radioactive sources and guarding against the possibility that terrorists could develop a radiological dispersal device  -  a so called dirty bomb. 
And ensuring the secure transit of nuclear materials.
This week will see practical new steps and commitments.
Australia is doing its part.
We have met all our commitments from the first Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington two years ago.
And this year we will host an International Atomic Energy Agency seminar for our Southeast Asian neighbours on best practice in nuclear security standards.
We must do everything in our power to prevent terrorist groups from acquiring a nuclear weapon  -  or the materials to build one. 
We must never permit any terrorist group to threaten any nation with nuclear catastrophe.
And this means we must act together.
Friends, I believe that in this Asian Century the secure and prosperous peoples will be those who never fear change but always make it work for them.
Few nations have done that with greater purpose than your great Republic. Korea shows the way. 
Your long rise is testament to the astute vision and statecraft of your leaders,it is testament, too, to the patient effort and sacrifice of your peoples.
Millions of people, perhaps like the parents and grandparents of so many in this room, who worked so hard for so long.
Who saved and scrimped and went without, who pushed their children through relentless hours of study and homework.
If there is any Asian miracle, it was they  -  and now it is you  -  their children and grandchildren, who have so abundantly matched the high hopes they held. 
We admire you greatly.
In Australia, Korean brand names like Samsung, LG and Hyundai are a byword for quality, innovation and global reach.
Our students are welcome faces in each other's universities and colleges.
Australia's successful Korean community is an integral and respected part of our multicultural society. 
Two million people born in Asian countries live in Australia  -  over 100,000 of these people were born in Korea.
Australia has even caught the Korean wave, the renaissance of your popular culture reaching all the way to our shores.
We welcomed some of Korea's biggest reality television programs to our country last year  -  and tens of thousands of young Koreans and Australians watched your best known singing stars perform at a K-Pop concert in Sydney last year.
Our friendship is strong and growing and when I return to Australia, I will do so enlivened and inspired by your Korean example.
Because in education, in high speed broadband, in economic growth, in securing jobs, my country, like yours, sees great opportunities for each of us and both of us in the Asian Century that lies ahead. 



I wanted to make three observations about what we've achieved since the last the last summit and three observations about what I think we need to achieve for the future.
Since the last summit I am able to report that Australia has honoured the three commitments we made.
We have ratified the Nuclear Terrorism Convention and as we've taken that action in our own country we've also furthered work to assist with nuclear security and research that enables medical isotopes to be obtained using low enriched uranium, rather than highly enriched uranium and as a result, not have a need for highly enriched uranium for our own purposes for medicine.
We've also been at the forefront of developing forensic science to enable the detection of illicit nuclear materials.
The second commitment that we made was to work within our region on nuclear security and I am able to advise that we are bringing together a meeting in Australia for the countries of our region to discuss nuclear security questions.
And third, in keeping with the commitments we made in Washington, we are having an independent IAEA review of our own nuclear facility, which is at Lucas Heights in Australia.
Mr President, as we move towards the next summit I wanted to offer three reflections on things that I believe we need to consider.
We will attend the next summit in the Netherlands in 2014, but at that summit I think we need to agree what will sustain these efforts beyond 2014, what will make a focus on nuclear security a permanent feature of what we do.
In that regard, I would suggest that in 2014, and as we move towards that meeting, we need to consider the following three things: We need to determine how we can further empower the International Atomic Energy Agency to continue its important work beyond 2014.
Secondly, I think we need to establish an accountability framework on nuclear security that builds confidence beyond 2014.
In that regard, one thing that we might consider would be regular peer reviews of our domestic nuclear security arrangements that would ensure ongoing transparency and keep each of us, and all of us, on our toes, which is where we should be as we deal with this challenge.
And third, I think we should find mechanisms to foster co-operation between governments and the private sector.
There are major corporations who play a role in the nuclear industry and to the extent that we can further collaboration with them, then I think we would further our ambitions for nuclear security.
Thank you very much Mr President for this opportunity and for once again being in Korea. Thank you. 



Thank you very much to NICTA for showing me and Minister Conroy and Minister Albanese the applications of the National Broadband Network.
It really has been an insight into the full power of this technology, whether you're at home, whether you're at work, whether you're managing a supply chain globally or whether you are trying to get goods to market in Australia, so thank you very much for that.
And both Stephen Conroy and Anthony Albanese are very pleased to be here too.
As many of you would be aware, I have recently been in Korea and I had the opportunity when I was there to visit Gyeseong Catholic Girls' School and to be on a link up with students who were in Armidale.
And watching those two groups of students talk to each other and explain things about each other's nations, but watching the power of that education experience reinforced in me that I do not want to see our nation left behind.
I do not want to see nations around the world like Korea have the benefit of a broadband network and to see Australia fall behind the standards of the world.
And so, I am here today to say very clearly that whilst our 100 year old copper telephone network has served us well, it cannot deliver the broadband we need for the future.
And if we don't move as a nation to the National Broadband Network, then we will see choked off the economic possibilities of the future and we will see choked off the service delivery possibilities of the future.
We have to move on and we have to move to the National Broadband Network.
This is going to bring a different way of working and living to Australian households, Australian small businesses, to hospitals, to schools, to technical and further education institutions, to universities, to regional centres, to our capital cities.
It is going to be make a difference for everyone around the nation. And in terms of our economy, we know that every 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration delivers in the order of a 1.3 per cent one-off growth boost to the economy.
So, because we recognise the need to switch on to the future and the power of the National Broadband Network, I am very pleased to be here today with Mike Quigley, the head of the National Broadband Network Company, to release the three year roll-out plan for Australia's National Broadband Network.
Now this is a plan that sets out the communities across Australia which will either be connected to, or are in the process of being connected to, high speed broadband fibre by mid 2015.
We are announcing today that more than 3.5 million homes, businesses, schools and hospitals will be getting access to the NBN in the next three years. And where are these?
Well, over one million premises will be covered right here in New South Wales - from Campbelltown in Sydney's west, to Gosford and Coffs Harbour up north. Here in New South Wales, it's full steam ahead with the NBN.
Around 700,000 premises in Victoria will be covered, around 680,000 premises in Queensland, 430,000 premises in Western Australia, 330,000 premises in South Australia, 65,000 premises in the Northern Territory and over 200,000 premises in Tasmania.
This three year plan covers about one third of all the homes and businesses across our nation. It's going to be a fundamental change to regional and suburban economies.
And there will be direct jobs as the construction reaches its peak around 400 work teams, employing more than 16,000 workers, will be installing fibre optic cable to an average of 6,000 premises per week.
Now that direct jobs benefit is very important, as well as the economic potential being unleashed by the NBN.
So for example, to take a great state like Tasmania, which got the NBN first, which is where the National Broadband Network went first.
We know in Tasmania its economy is in transition, so Tasmania will see the benefit of more jobs today and it will also see more quickly than anywhere else, the ability of the NBN to transform Tasmania's economy for the future, an economy in which traditional industries like sustainable forestry will still employ people, but where we will see people employed in new industries as well.
High speed broadband is simply going to revolutionise the way Australians teach and learn, the way we diagnose and cure and the way we do business.
In this new world, you have to make the big decisions that shape the future.
And the Government is doing this through our roll-out of the National Broadband Network.
The choice for Australia is very stark. It's a choice between embracing the future or standing still.
It's a choice between broadband or no broadband.
We have made that choice and I am very pleased to be here to announce the three-year roll-out of the NBN.
Thank you very much. 



Thank you very much, it's great to be here today and I'm joined by my Labor colleagues Andrew Leigh and Gai Brodtmann, Labor Members for the people who are working and shopping in this Woolworths as we meet this morning and Andrew had the opportunity of actually launching this store on Thursday.
I'm here because there's nothing more important to us as a Labor Government than making sure that people have got the benefits that come with having a job. The simple dignity that comes with making your own way in the world and the benefits that come with having employment and having that pay packet.
As a Government we've worked hard to make sure that Australians do have the benefit of work and when we faced very tough economic times during the global finance crisis we wanted to protect Australian jobs.
We want to see jobs grow now as our economy keeps changing and the way we live and work changes. So this store doesn't look like the Woolworths stores of the past, indeed there are new innovations in this store which are really at the cutting edge of retailing. But we all know that from the Woolworths that we used to go into five years ago or ten years ago or fifteen years ago, we live in a world of change, retailing is changing, our economy is changing and as a Government we have got to work with businesses and work with communities right around the country to maximise the benefits that can come with that growth and to maximise the benefits of jobs.
So that's why I'm very pleased to be here today, it is good news that Woolworth is looking to employ 10,000 more people, to put on 10,000 new starters to get them the benefit of a job. But it's even better news that Woolworths wants to do this in partnership with Government, so we not only find the quickest and most efficient way of filling those jobs, but we also ensure that we are embracing the full diversity of the Australian community and giving people a start and a hope.
So it's been great today to meet people who work right here at Woolworths today for whom this retail job was their first start and their first hope. I had for example the opportunity to talk to Chloe who's in the audience now, who had the benefit of this start and this hope through Woolworths.
And I've also had the benefit of meeting people for whom this was the first run on what ended up being a career. I know for many their image of retailing is that it's something people maybe do when they're young as their first job or it might provide them with flexible employment whilst their raising their family, but here at Woolworths today I've met people for whom this has become a career, who have worked here for 15, 20, 25 years, who started in that first job and who have got that all important apprenticeship through being involved with Woolworths. And I can see Skye in the audience, she's one of those.
So this agreement today is about making sure we can get for these jobs, it's about reaching out into the community to those who maybe find it that bit harder to get into the employment market and to get work and to make sure that because, perhaps they didn't do so well at school or they have a disability they don't get locked out of the benefits of employment. And it's also about putting people on the first rung of what can be a lifetime career, an apprenticeship opportunity, a management opportunity, the opportunity to really get ahead in life.
As we are working on the work that Government needs to do, I'm here in a store where a lot of people would be wandering around making their decisions today based on their family budget, so we're probably here with a lot of people working hard on their family budget. Just like they're working hard balancing their family budget, we're working hard down the road in Parliament House on balancing the Government's budget. But as we go about that task nothing is going to be more important to us than ensuring that we continue to protect jobs and we make sure that the families shopping here and the people who work in this store get the frontline services that they need.
So this is a great partnership, I'm really pleased to be able to be here to put my name on the dotted line for this fresh start partnership and I do also want to say particularly with Jennifer Westacott here from the Business Council of Australia and Margy Osmond from the retailers organisation, that this is the start of what I hope will become far more widespread as more business enter this kinds of partnership with Government to create jobs, fill jobs, reach out into the community and ensure that the benefits of jobs extend to all.
Thank you very much.



In order to make sure the breakfast does go to 11 o'clock this morning, I'm intending to give you a two-hour speech, the first hour will be on the Salvation Army's Red Shield Appeal, the second hour will be on the Western Bulldogs. So please settle in.
I am simply delighted to be here in Adelaide to launch The Salvation Army's 2012 Red Shield Appeal.
I'm here to celebrate a very worthy cause and a very worthy organisation,  in a city which holds such a special place in my heart.
Adelaide is, of course, where I grew up. Where my family made its home following our migration from Wales. And part of that was involving the Salvation Army.
My mother worked at a Salvation Army home as a cook, Sunset Lodge. Many of you might know it, it's on Unley Road.
And I spent a lot of time at Sunset Lodge growing up, as mum worked there in what was then, I think, a first for family-friendly workplaces, my mother who worked from early afternoon til 6:30 in the evening so that she could prepare and serve a meal to around 70-80 elderly women who lived in what in modern parlance we would refer to as residential aged care.
In order to do that, she needed to make arrangements for my sister and I, and so particularly for me, who was the younger child she was able to go in the mid-afternoon, given a little bit of time off to either run across Unley Road to the infants' school I went to, Mitcham Infants, or run down the road to Mitcham Primary School so that she could get me from school in the mid-afternoon and I could sit on a stool in the kitchen where she worked til she finished at 6:30 at night.
And when I tell people that story, it all sounds a bit, you know, Oliver Twist, Charles Dickens, doesn't it.
A small girl sitting on a stool in a kitchen for a number of hours every day, but it wasn't like that at all because it really was a very special place, full of a lot of love and friendship.
And particularly for a small girl who migrated to this country, who didn't have any extended family and certainly didn't have any grandparents in this country.
To be able to spend time with the women who lived in that aged care facility, to stay with them as they gathered in the tea room for afternoon tea and then spend time with them afterwards being taught how to knit, playing cat's cradle, you know playing games and puzzles with women who had a lot of time and had a lot of love to give was a really special experience.
So a big part of my life, and I'm never going to forget it, and it's certainly taught me a lot about the values of the Salvation Army. So it's great to be here today, able to repay what was a very big favour for me, that love and affection in that home at Sunset Lodge.
And we're here, really, remarking on the work of Australians who are there on the frontline in times of crisis. In times of crisis you'll always find the Salvos there, and they're not there expecting fanfare, they're not there expecting recognition, they're just there getting the job done.
The Salvos were amongst the first to fly into Darwin on Boxing Day 1974.
They arrived at Granville before the emergency services.
The Port Arthur shooting, the Thredbo landslide, the Bali bombing and the Asian Tsunami all saw a rapid response from The Salvation Army.
More recently I've witnessed with my own eyes the work of the Salvos first-hand during the Victorian bushfires and in the aftermath of the Queensland floods and cyclone.
Even this day as we meet for breakfast, the Salvos are in communities where floodwaters are still affecting lives.
It was a very great pleasure to award the very first National Emergency Medal in January this year to some very deserving Australians and it was no surprise to me at all that amongst the recipients were people wearing that very familiar Salvation Army uniform.
One of the medal presentations was in Flowerdale, a town almost wiped off the map by the Black Saturday bushfires.
I was reminded that in that region, the Salvos, over a period of nine days, produced more than 29,000 meals and provided clothes and chaplaincy support for a community that desperately needed to know at that time that it wasn't alone.
But care and compassion has been the calling card of The Salvation Army since John Gore and Edward Saunders began its work in Australia, right here in Adelaide, more than 130 years ago.
The style of evangelism of The Salvation Army attracted some robust and at times even violent opposition in those early days.
We are reminded just how courageous those first Salvationists were when you realise that two officers died for the cause and more than 100 were fined or imprisoned for singing or preaching in the streets.
Of course, The Salvation Army's founder, William Booth, experienced heated opposition himself as he set about establishing the mission. 
His wife Catherine wrote that he would return from preaching and often his clothes were torn and bloody bandages swathed his head where a stone had struck'.
Courage has been the cornerstone of The Salvation Army's history, as its ministry has taken its officers into prisons, to work with those in our society that too often had been shunned by our society, and the Salvation Army has shown great courage going into theatres of war.
And whilst the Salvos' core mission has not changed over the years, the Army has shown its ability to change and grow as our society changes and its needs change.
The Army's services have ranged far beyond crisis support and soup kitchens, or even the op shops that are our first port of call when we're going to go to a fancy dress event.
The Salvos have offered prison ministries since 1883, rural chaplaincy, and the uniquely Australian outback flying padre service, children's holiday camps, and even Australia's first film production company which not only captured the birth of the nation at Federation in 1901 but also made the world's first feature film.
But the modern Army has become an integral part of Australia's not-for-profit sector which in turn has become part of our vision for a more socially inclusive nation.
And what does that commitment to social inclusion mean?
It means every week, the Salvos locate 40 missing family members.
They help 500 people with drug, alcohol and gambling addictions.
They provide 2,000 homeless people with shelter so they don't have to sleep rough, and they give counselling to thousands more who just can't cope with things anymore.
And all of that is in just one week.
And members of the Salvation Army need to know that we, the Government, and those across our nation want to work with them to support them as they bring their special sort of compassion and care.
In last year's Budget, I was very proud that we were able to restate our commitment to welfare reform, especially for women and children.
And the Salvation Army is helping us get that support to the people who need it the most.
From financial counselling for women in crisis to delivering early intervention services for children and families in disadvantaged communities.
And in the first 12 months of the Government-funded Emergency Relief Housing Service, the Salvation Army has helped prevent almost 1000 families from becoming homeless.
Above all, we all know the thing that shapes a life, that makes a life, is the benefits and dignity of work, getting a job. All of the satisfaction that comes with it, the social connections that come with it, and that all-important pay cheque which is the difference between life on the margins of our society and life in the mainstream.
Employment Plus, by the Salvation Army, is the largest jobs network in our nation.
Getting people those opportunities for work, and the skills and support they need to make it possible.
I'm proud that the founding CEO of Employment Plus, Wilma Gallet, is joining the Australian National Council on Drugs because there is such a powerful link between overcoming substance abuse and breaking down the barriers to work.
This goes to the heart of Salvation Army's beliefs.
Yes, belief in God.
But also a profound faith in the resilience of the human spirit and its capacity for rehabilitation and self-reliance.
In other words, lifting people up, and honouring the human dignity that lies in all of us.
So the Salvation Army is there for those in need, a welcome constant in a rapidly changing world.
The Salvos uniform has and will always stand for hard work, integrity, help, compassion and caring.
It is a welcome sight for emergency workers and disaster victims alike.
It embraces society's outcasts but it passes no judgement.
It is a beacon of hope in many people's darkest hours.
It truly is Christianity with it sleeves rolled up'.
And while not all Australians will be a member of the Salvation Army, each and every Australian can be part of the work of the Salvos' through the Red Shield Appeal, no matter what their faith or their background.
So I encourage every firm and individual in this nation to give as much as they can.
Every cent helps.
Even a dollar scrimped from a fortnightly pension is gold because it speaks of personal sacrifice and also care for the work of the Salvos.
So I say to all Australians  -  give generously.
And the Federal Government will be alongside you donating $350,000.
It's a worthy cause.
An honourable cause.
And so I proudly launch today the 2012 Red Shield Appeal, and I wish it every success.
Thank you very much. 



This ground, Adelaide Oval, is universally admired and it's one of the grand old venues of Australian sport and Ian has spoken to you this morning about some of those moments in sport, some of the history of this place.
It's been home to football and cricket in Adelaide for 140 years, a sports ground with a river end and a cathedral end, and with a marvellous traditional scoreboard - the best in the world just as described by Ian.
For so many South Australians, it's a place of very fond memories. Bert Oldfield's courage in 1932, and Mike Hussey's run chase in 2006, and the Victor Richardson gates and the old scoreboard are known and loved by so many.
Tens of thousands of South Australians have jammed in here to watch football games in the past.
We, of course, we were participating in our own football league before the days of the AFL, and when people came here to feel very close to their fellow South Australians and to watch a great game.
And there was that wonderful preview when Port played Melbourne at the end of last year, of what AFL footy will be like here from 2014.
So this is a very big project, it's taken long term decisions, substantial investments, sacrifices from everyone involved and above all faith in the future.
And that's happened because leaders in the community of the wider South Australian public all came to recognise that we have a chance to give Adelaide Oval a future every bit as grand as its past.
Securing the future of top-line cricket here, ensuring the long-term viability of AFL football in South Australia, and bringing to life the River Precinct and the centre of Adelaide all week and all year round. 
It's why, when I was asked by Kate Ellis in her capacity as local member, to provide funding to help deliver this project, we were pleased to provide the funding.
I know that our contribution, $30 million, is only part of this much larger $535 million project.
But I also know that this funding will make a difference in securing the development of the surrounding wetlands and making sure there is suitable car parking in and around the Oval for people who come here for all sorts of events.
We didn't want such a grand redevelopment to be diminished by not helping to get some of these very important details right.
And I know, growing up here in South Australia, just how much of a change this redeveloped oval will bring.
You're in days of change for South Australia, very, very optimistic days lie ahead.
There's a real focus on this city now, on Adelaide and its future, and I know through this redevelopment, the other work that is happening at State Government level and at local council level, the city can look forward to its future with pride.
And part of that sense of pride will be what happens here and seeing in just two years from now one of the great sporting grounds of this country rise up around us.
I want to congratulate everyone who's worked so hard, congratulations for being on time and on budget one week in, here's hoping every week's like the first week, and for all of you who are doing all of the hard work, on you rests the dreams and hopes of the young cricketers and footballers who are sharing with us the unveiling of the time capsule today commemorating the start of major construction work.
So it's great they're here to witness it. I'm going to look forward to coming here in the years ahead, to see what's achieved here, to watching some footy here, to spending some time at the new redeveloped Adelaide Oval.
Thank you very much for all being here this morning to celebrate this special event. 



Some of you here will remember that the Council of the Australian Strategic Policy Institute met for the first time in late winter 2001  -  less than a fortnight before the September 11 attacks on the United States.
One thing that did not change after September 11 was Australia's need for the work of an Institute such as this.
Independent and non-partisan, of course.
But more: informed and informative.
Giving us the possibility, at least, of a public conversation which is more empirical than opinionated  -  and in strategic policy, this is what we must have.
Here, the facts are a matter of life and death.
This is why, on several occasions in the past two years, I have spoken directly to the Australian people about our mission in Afghanistan.
My annual statement to the Parliament has been an important formal mechanism to engage the nation as a whole.
So have the Defence Minister's regular statements to the House.
And sadly, the deaths of Australians serving in Afghanistan have also been occasions for me to express the nation's grief and to restate the nation's resolve.
To reassure Australians not only about what we are doing there and why  -  but for how long.
For two reasons, this is another important time for an extended statement on our commitment to Afghanistan.
First, ever since 1915, April in Australia has been memory's season.
It is our most solemn national promise that in the morning of the 25th of this month, we remember the service of Australians in all the wars of our history.
And that remembrance amply includes the men and women of the Australian Defence Force who  -  alongside their civilian counterparts  -  are serving us now, in Afghanistan and around the world.
They more than meet the grave demands the ANZAC tradition makes of them.
And I am sure that in the period leading up to ANZAC Day, there will be renewed discussion of the strategy and policies which see our Defence Force committed overseas. 
So this is a symbolically significant period for Australians  -  and it is a strategically significant period.
In the next four weeks, the nations that make up the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan  -  ISAF  - will make critical decisions about the future of the mission.
On Thursday, the Foreign Minister Senator Carr and Defence Minister Smith will participate in ISAF Ministerial discussions in Brussels.
And on 21 May, I will attend the NATO/ISAF Leaders Summit in Chicago.
There, I will put Australia's view on the key questions before the international coalition.
I believe it is important I explain to Australians the decisions the Government is making and the position we will take to the table this month and next.
This audience is more than familiar with the origin of our commitment to Afghanistan.
You know that successive Australian Governments have seen our national interest in making sure that Afghanistan does not again become a safe haven for terrorists.
That the September 11 attacks  -  and most of the terrorist attacks since which have targeted Australian interests directly or in which Australians have been killed  -  had links to Afghanistan.
You know too, that successive Australian Governments have stood firmly by our alliance with the United States, invoked after September 11, against a shared threat.  
And you know that Australia's commitment  -  in our national interest, with our ally  -  is part of a strategy which enjoys wide international support.
In coalition with 49 international partners  -  under a United Nations mandate  -  at the invitation of and in co-operation with the Afghan government.
These facts of the origin of our commitment to Afghanistan are widely known and the fact that they have endured since 2001 is widely known too.
This consistency of purpose must not be mistaken for persistence in a strategy which is not working.
Quite the contrary. 
In reality the current international strategy for Afghanistan has only taken shape since 2009.
Two and a half years ago, in December that year, President Obama announced a new international strategy.
Based on counter-insurgency.
Backed by a surge of 30 000 US troops and increased contributions from NATO/ISAF nations.
And designed to facilitate transition: to prepare the Government of Afghanistan to take responsibility for its own security.
It was the right approach.
To quote ISAF's military commander, General Allen:
Throughout history, insurgencies have seldom been defeated by foreign forces.  Instead, they have been ultimately beaten by indigenous forces.
So in the long run our goals can only be achieved and then secured by Afghan forces.  Transition, then, is the linchpin of our strategy, not merely the way out.
This is why eighteen months ago, at Lisbon in November 2010, Australia, our international partners and the Afghan government laid out a clear process and a clear timeframe for transition of full security responsibility to the Afghan National Security Forces.
And why we committed to supporting Afghanistan's security and stability over the longer term.
This should be clear.
The requirements of the new international strategy led to the adoption of the timeline.
Not the other way around.
While the challenges in Afghanistan are significant and there will inevitably be setbacks, the new international strategy has been accompanied by security gains over the past year and a half.
Bin Laden is dead.
Most of al Qaeda's senior leaders have been killed or captured.
We have pushed al Qaeda's remaining leaders to the Afghanistan-Pakistan border area.
Their freedom of movement, and capacity to plan and execute terrorist operations from Afghan soil, have been significantly degraded.
We continue to see steady gains in the fight against the Afghan insurgency.
In some areas these are fragile and are not beyond reverse.
But in each month since May 2011, there have been fewer attacks by insurgents than in the same month the previous year.
Afghan forces are now leading more than a quarter of special operations and just under half of conventional operations.
We are also seeing progress in Uruzgan province  -  the main focus of Australia's contribution. 
The Afghan National Army's 4th Brigade is increasingly capable of planning and conducting operations on its own and the Afghan security presence across the province is expanding. 
The Brigade is conducting combined operations with the Afghan National Police.  And it is leading on many operations, with our Mentoring Taskforce in a tactical support role. 
For example, Commander 4th Brigade oversaw a two-week operation to clear a contested valley last month.
Led by the 6th Kandak, this operation demonstrated the 4th Brigade's ability to plan, execute and sustain an operation over an extended period.  It was marked as a keen success. 
The Brigade was able to disrupt insurgent resupply, to manoeuvre through an insurgent stronghold without taking major casualties  -  and to make contact with the enemy in an area the insurgency previously considered to be a safe haven.
Although we still face a dangerous enemy, this is the kind of progress we see  -  in Uruzgan and across the country.
And this view is increasingly shared by our Afghan partners.
With all this in mind, Australia, the international community and Afghan authorities have now reached another point where key decisions need to be made.
This is the vital business of the Chicago summit in May.
To review our progress in transition  -  to map out how we intend to complete the handover of security responsibility to the Afghan Government.
To ensure sustainment  -  to build the international commitment necessary to fund, train and support the Afghan National Security Forces after transition is complete.
And to highlight our long-term support  -  to recommit to and define our continued contribution in the years after 2014.
In Afghanistan, transition is already happening. 
Today, around half of the population lives in areas where the Afghan National Security Forces have begun taking lead security responsibility.
The next stage of transition  -  tranche three  -  will be announced soon.
And it's likely that by the middle of next year, mid-2013, the fifth and final tranche of districts and provinces will have commenced transition.
ISAF has made clear that this will not mean the end of combat, combat support or training.
But I'm now confident Chicago will recognise mid-2013 as a key milestone in the international strategy.
A crucial point: when the international forces will be able to move to a supporting role across all of Afghanistan.
I also expect President Karzai to make an announcement on transition in Uruzgan and other provinces in the coming months, including which areas of Uruzgan will begin the process first.
Once started, this should take twelve to eighteen months.
And when this is complete, Australia's commitment in Afghanistan will look very different to that we have today.
We will have completed our training and mentoring mission with the 4th Brigade.
We will no longer be conducting routine frontline operations with the Afghan National Security Forces.
The Australian-led Provincial Reconstruction Team will have completed its work
And the majority of our troops will have returned home.
When transition is complete, the international community will need to continue to support the Afghan National Security Forces. 
This is what we mean by ensuring sustainment.
The ANSF  -  which includes the police, the Afghan National Army and Afghan Air Force  -  is building up to a surge force of some 352,000.  
We expect the final size of the ANSF to be smaller than this.  
Indeed, the Government of Afghanistan, in consultation with ISAF, has made some initial decisions about likely future size and force structure.
Importantly, the ISAF Summit will discuss a funding arrangement for the costs of ensuring sustainment.
To maintain full responsibility for security in Afghanistan after 2014, the Afghan National Security Forces will need the right support  -  including funding and training  -  from the international community.   
In Chicago, I will be arguing strongly for broad and substantial international support. 
And I will go to Chicago prepared for Australia to pay our fair share.
Australia will also be prepared to provide niche training to the Afghan National Security Forces after 2014.
We are already involved in institutional training, through the Afghan National Army Artillery Training School. 
In future, we will support the proposed UK-led Afghan National Army Officer Academy.
We will maintain a role providing training and support to policing in Afghanistan.
The AFP will progressively refocus its police development efforts from training in Southern Afghanistan to institutional capability development of the Afghan National Police in Kabul.
And, finally, as I have stated previously, we are prepared to consider a limited Special Forces contribution  -  in the right circumstances and under the right mandate.
There may be a continuing role to train the ANSF to conduct  -  and to work alongside them in carrying out  -  counter-terrorism operations in Afghanistan.
Australia has an enduring national interest in ensuring that Afghanistan does not again become a safe haven for terrorists.
Reviewing progress in transition  -  and ensuring sustainment  -  are vital work for Chicago.
Stating our commitment to Afghanistan's human and economic development is vital too.
Strengthening the capacity of the Afghan government, economy and institutions will be essential to ensuring that the gains made to date are not reversed. 
Sustaining development and growing the economy will be enormous challenges in the years ahead.
The people of Afghanistan enjoy greater freedoms and a better quality of life now than in 2001. 
In that time life expectancy has increased by five years to 48 today.
85 per cent have access to basic health care services, compared to 10 per cent under the Taliban.
Over 7 million children, including 2.5 million girls, are now enrolled in school.
But clearly, development and capacity-building programs will need to continue well beyond 2014.
Above all, Afghanistan must grow economically, including by developing its mineral resources.
Mining, education and agriculture will be crucial sectors  -  all areas in which Australia can offer some technical expertise.
Like many in Afghanistan, I believe that a successful democratic transition at the end of President Karzai's second term will be a critical point in the development of Afghanistan's democratic norms.
Previous elections in Afghanistan have been criticised and many in Afghanistan and the international community have urged electoral reform. 
Electoral assistance will continue to be an important focus of the Australian aid program. 
We will maintain our support to Afghanistan's Independent Electoral Commission. 
During my visit to Afghanistan in October last year, President Karzai and I discussed formalising a comprehensive, long-term framework for the future of the Australia-Afghanistan partnership.
Indeed we hope to be in a position to sign the agreement when we meet at the Chicago summit in May.
This will set out Australia's enduring partnership with Afghanistan in development  -  along with security, trade and investment, as well as cultural and people-to-people links.
The Government of Japan will host an important ministerial conference in Tokyo in July.
At Tokyo, the focus will be on the coordination of international assistance through to 2014 and beyond  -  and on the Afghan Government's strategy for sustainable development.
At Chicago, it is vital that the nations of the Coalition restate our commitment to this cause.
I will use the opportunity that the Chicago summit creates to announce the details of increased Australian development assistance to Afghanistan through to 2015-16  -  and of our commitment to maintain that contribution in subsequent years.
At Chicago and at Tokyo, the international community will meet in a spirit of mutual commitment  -  so these are also opportunities for the Government of Afghanistan.
Opportunities to demonstrate its determination that our mutual gains over the last decade in democracy, development, tackling corruption and protecting human rights are maintained.
Australia and the international community also have a key role to play in supporting political reconciliation within Afghanistan.
Reconciliation is not a precondition for successful transition  -  our strategy is designed to ensure Afghanistan can wage counter-insurgency beyond 2014.
To be part of a settlement, those looking to reconcile need to lay down their weapons, renounce violence, cut links with al Qaeda and accept Afghanistan's democratic constitution.
And by taking the fight to the insurgents, and strengthening the Afghan forces in that fight, we help create the conditions for a successful Afghan-owned and led process.
It is clear talks are in their very early stages.  They are likely to be long and complex and will inevitably involve setbacks.
We will continue to support these efforts to pursue reconciliation.
We will also continue to work for a secure external environment for Afghanistan.
Australia welcomes regional initiatives  -  such as the Istanbul Process  -  which bring together Afghanistan's neighbours to identify ways to improve regional cooperation, including on economic linkages.
And Pakistan is critical to Afghanistan's stability.
We well know that Pakistan has been at the frontline of the threat of violent extremism in its region. 
Terrorist groups have attacked its people and Government.
Pakistan has launched numerous operations against these groups including in areas near the border with Afghanistan.
And in this fight the people and the military of Pakistan have suffered losses in the thousands, indeed the tens of thousands, over the last decade. 
Nevertheless, there is also no doubt that parts of Pakistan are being used by terrorist groups.
Particularly in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border areas.  
I am realistic about the threat that poses  -  realistic too about what can be done to limit that threat.
And our strategy, to build Afghanistan's own security forces, is founded in that realistic assessment of the country's future strategic environment.
The Government of Pakistan is in no doubt about Australia's determination  -  or our concerns.
We will work with Afghanistan  -  and with Pakistan  -  in those areas where our best judgement is that co-operation against terrorism which threatens both states is effective and real.
So for instance, there is scope to improve the tracking and control of items that assist terrorist groups in their attacks  -  as we see in the problem of Pakistani fertilisers being used to produce IEDs in Afghanistan.  
And we will do whatever else we judge best makes a difference in this difficult and sensitive task.
The people of Afghanistan face immense challenges for their national future.
Harsh natural terrain and turbulent history, tribal politics and the impact of thirty years of war, contemporary problems of corruption and narcotics.
National progress is the ultimate responsibility of the Afghan Government and people. 
But the world can help  -  and Australia can do its part.
I welcome a genuine public debate on our commitment to Afghanistan.
I say this because I am confident that the Government's approach is one which is soundly in Australia's national interest.
As well, because our people are entitled to a genuine questioning of national policies in a matter so serious  -  and difficult  -  as this.
In 2011, eleven Australian soldiers were killed in action in Afghanistan and fifty were wounded.
Four died and ten were wounded as a result of attacks by rogue members of the Afghan National Army
Several other nations have also suffered such attacks. 
These raised legitimate questions about the success of our mission to train the Afghan National Security Forces.
I also know that for many of our Defence Force families, the impact of these attacks was especially deep.
We are working with our Afghan partners to tighten vetting and screening and to implement a counter-infiltration plan.
I can assure Australians  -  through you  -  that we will do our very best to protect our soldiers from this threat.
Events of recent months have underscored the challenges for Australia and our ISAF and Afghan partners.
February's deeply unfortunate incident in which Islamic holy books were burned at Bagram Air Base caused offence to many in Afghanistan and around the world.
While in March, we were all appalled by the killing of Afghan civilians by a US soldier.  A shocking crime condemned by US and ISAF leaders alike  -  and by public demonstrations across Afghanistan.
These actions of an individual are no mark against the tens of thousands of courageous professionals deployed by Australia, the United States and other coalition countries.
Any more than attacks by rogue ANA members are a mark against the hundreds of thousands of patriotic Afghans training in uniform to build a capable national security force.
In March, an Australian Civilian Corps Adviser working with local communities on development activities in Uruzgan was injured in a suicide attack.
A reminder that our civilian staff in Afghanistan  -  our diplomats, aid workers, police and civilian corps workers  -  are also doing a magnificent job in dangerous circumstances.
And the weekend's renewed insurgent attacks in Kabul remind us that as the insurgency comes under greater sustained pressure in the field, the prospect of high-profile attacks aimed at disproportionate global public impact remains.
What remains too is the fact that these attacks were successfully countered by the Afghan National Security forces without substantial direct support from ISAF forces in Kabul.
An encouraging sign for the future of the counter-insurgency and for the success of transition to Afghan security lead.
And the shared endeavour between ISAF and Afghan forces across the country goes on.
None of this is easy.
There will be hard days ahead  -  there will be new days of grief. 
We did not enter this conflict lightly and we do not persist in it without great care.
I know that the peoples of the world's democracies want to see their sons and daughters return from war. 
This is as it should be.
I recognise that the global economic climate leads many, especially in Europe, to think of the pressing needs at home.
And I see that the people and leaders of Afghanistan rightly look forward to the day when they can truly lead in their own country. 
These are considerations I weigh heavily, as do the leaders of all the ISAF nations.
They are why I argue strongly for the integrity of the transition strategy.
Because the international strategy for transition in Afghanistan is the responsible, orderly, sustainable approach to full and permanent Afghan responsibility for security.
The judgement of the Australian Government, which I will take with me to Chicago, is this.
We can proceed with the transition we agreed to in Lisbon: understanding that it is a difficult mission, but confident it is on track.
We will see our mission of training and transition through.
When transition in Uruzgan is complete, Australia's commitment in Afghanistan will look very different to that we have today.
We will have completed our training and mentoring mission.
We will no longer be conducting routine frontline operations.
The Provincial Reconstruction Team will have done its job.
The majority of our troops will have returned home.
And there will still be some work to do.
We will ensure sustainment of the Afghan National Security Forces after 2014.
And we will support the long-term development of the Afghan government, economy and institutions. 
We will not abandon this mission for which so many have worked so hard  -  and for which some have lost so much.
So I can say today: to our people, whatever their view of the war.
To this audience, which consider these issues so carefully.
To the Australian civilians working in Afghanistan.
To our troops and their families.
This is a war with a purpose. This is a war with an end.
We have a strategy, a mission, and a timeframe for achieving it.
We are serving our national interest in Afghanistan.



I am delighted to be in Singapore on my first official visit as Australia's Prime Minister.
I thank Your Excellency for your very warm welcome.
This is indeed a place where Australians have for so long been welcomed and where so many of our interests converge.
In Singapore, my country sees a partner and friend with a capacity to bring pragmatic and far-sighted thinking to regional and global challenges.
With you, we share defence and strategic interests, underpinned by a commitment to multilateralism and regional cooperation.
And, of course, we value our economic links and seek to learn from your example of adaptation and innovation as Australia remakes its economy for the demands of the Asian Century'.
Few capacities are more important for my nation's success than education and training, as they have been for yours.
This year marks the 60th anniversary of the arrival of the first Colombo Plan scholars to Australia.
It brought some of Asia's brightest and best to my country in order to better serve their own, including around 1000 gifted young Singaporean students...a number of whom are with us here tonight.
Such exchanges have been a profound anchor in the ties between our nations, reflecting a high-quality relationship which is immensely valued by my country.
Tonight, I celebrate our shared past and I look to the future.
I look forward to working with you, Mr Prime Minister, on further ways in which Singapore and Australia can work together in the future.
I especially look forward to your official visit to Australia in October, where you are, of course, a familiar and honoured visitor.
Meanwhile, I deeply appreciate the warmth and generosity of your welcome.
I know our relations will be strengthened by the fellowship we share here tonight because our nations have long been friends,in good times and in bad.
It was here in Singapore that Australia established one of its very earliest foreign posts in 1941, a fateful time in the life of our people.
The years since the war have been years of opportunity for both our nations.
And just this morning, I reflected at Kranji on how a great price was paid for that freedom.
In those post-war years, Australia came to value anew the friendship of our neighbours and learnt to open our economyto the world.
Singapore used these decades with exceptional wisdom to build a city-state that is the envy of the world.
And I know you spoke movingly last year of the ordinary people who struggled to improve their lives and lived through war or hardship or the turbulent early years of independence, and [who] achieved extraordinary results with good leadership.
To this great nation, and those who lead them, I offer this heartfelt toast:
To the President and the people of Singapore.' 



They were strangers in a strange land.
Men who came from the ends of the earth in an enterprise of hope to end a far-off, dreadful war.
But it was not to be.
Even at dawn, the shadows were already falling over this fate-filled day.
Here on these beaches and hills, so foreign and yet so familiar, a skilled enemy lay in wait, led by a man destined to become a great leader.
A world of war was described in the mortal struggles of a million men on the narrow confines of this peninsula.
For the allies, this was a battle of nations fought by great powers and the might of their empires for a wider strategic goal.
For the Turks, this was a defence of the soil and sanctity of home, for which Ataturk ordered his men not only to attack but to die.
And the men who fought here from our nation, our allies and from Turkey did die  -  terrible deaths that spared no age or rank or display of courage.
Over 130,000 men gave their lives in this place, two-thirds of them on the Turkish side and 8700 from Australia.
So this is a place hallowed by sacrifice and loss.
It is, too, a place shining with honour  -  and honour of the most vivid kind.
A place where foes met in equality and respect, and attained a certain nobility through their character and conduct.
Eight months later, this campaign ended as it had begun  -  at dawn.
At 3.57 on December 20, 1915, the last Diggers quietly slipped away.
They did not begrudge the victory of their enemy, which was hard-fought and deserved.
They did share a regret greater than any defeat  -  having to leave their mates behind.
So the Australian and New Zealand commander, General Godley, left a message asking the Ottoman forces to respect the Anzac graves.
But no such invitation was required.
The Turkish honoured our fallen and embraced them as their own sons.
And later they did something rare in the pages of history  -  they named this place in honour of the vanquished as Anzac Cove.
We therefore owe the Republic of Turkey a profound debt.
No nation could have better guarded our shrines or more generously welcomed our pilgrims.
A worthy foe has proved to be an even greater friend.
Through Turkey's hospitality, we do today what those who left these shores most dearly hoped:
We come back.
As we will always come back.
To give the best and only gift that can matter anymore  -  our remembrance.
We remember what the Anzacs did in war.
And for what they did to shape our nation in peace.
In this place, they taught us to regard Australia and nowhere else as home.
Here where they longed for the shape and scent of the gum leaf and the wattle, not the rose or the elm.
Where they remembered places called Weipa and Woolloomooloo, Toowoomba and Swan Hill.
Or the sight of Mt Clarence as their ships pulled away from Albany, for so many the last piece of Australian soil they would ever live to see.
This is the legend of Anzac, and it belongs to every Australian.
Not just those who trace their origins to the early settlers but those like me who are migrants and who freely embrace the whole of the Australian story as their own.
For Indigenous Australians, whose own wartime valour was a profound expression of the love they felt for the ancient land.
And for Turkish-Australians who have not one but two heroic stories to tell their children.
All of us remember, because all of us inhabit the freedom the Anzacs won for us.
These citizen-soldiers, who came here untested and unknown, and who founded a deathless monument of valour through the immensity of their sacrifice.
This dawn will turn to darkness at the ending of today.
But the sun will never set on the story of their deeds.
Now and for all time, we will remember them.
Lest We Forget. 



They landed on this day in a land ancient and implacable.
They were young and raw.
Few were professionals, most new to battle.
They were called the Australian Imperial Force.
But before these 240 days of hell were over, they owned a name among the immortals  -  the Anzacs.
Unlike their French and British comrades, who held aloft battle honours like Austerlitz and Waterloo, the Anzacs had no tradition to rely on or defend.
They did something greater  -  they created one.
A new story for a new nation.
It is the story of us all and it belongs to us all because they were men of every background and belief.
But in this they were united  -  they were volunteers, every single one.
And so their presence here in Turkey was not only a manifestation of duty but an expression of citizenship.
Free citizens from a free land.
That is why Charles Bean was moved to say that it was on the 25th of April, 1915, that the consciousness of Australian nationhood was born.
Here, on these shores.
So rocky, so harsh  -  and so very far from home.
Our federal bond was young when the Anzacs came to this place.
The laws and institutions of our nation were laid down in 1901.
But here, in 1915, its spirit and ethos were sealed.
This was our first act of nationhood in the eyes of a watching world, an act authored not by statesmen or diplomats, but by simple soldiers.
The Anzacs.
The boys of Federation who became the men of Gallipoli.
This campaign claimed 8700 Australian lives.
From the most senior  -  Sir William Bridges  -  our first general to be killed in war to the youngest, James Martin who died at just 14, waiting to receive a letter from his mother that never came.
Almost one in ten of all Australia's losses in wartime occurred in the narrow confines of this peninsula.
And no portion of this landscape was fought more fiercely than Lone Pine.
Three days of vicious fighting soaked this ground in blood.
Of the nine VCs awarded at Gallipoli, seven were won here.
Like the campaign as a whole, it was a story of occasional success but ultimate frustration.
So today we come here not in triumph.
We come here in honour of qualities that defined the Anzacs and, we hope however faintly, might also define ourselves:
Reckless daring under fire.
Larrikin good humour.
A genius for improvisation.
And the unbroken bond of mateship.
Qualities that a swift victory might not have so easily revealed.
But qualities tempered and disclosed over nine months spent in the mud and filth of these treacherous gullies and unyielding cliffs.
Victory was not gained here, but meaning was won in this place and a harsh learning.
From here, the Anzacs went to the Western Front and Palestine where they found triumph.
And it is over this entire continuum from Anzac Day 1915 to Armistice Day 1918 upon which, in the final analysis, our judgement must be made.
That is the tradition of arms that gave us Tobruk and Kokoda, Kapyong and Long Tan.
And that is the tradition of arms passed down unbroken over a century to more recent conflicts, as the presence of Ben Roberts-Smith so powerfully attests today.
Victory was unlikely on these shores; a test the Anzacs were never going to pass.
They passed a greater and more enduring test.
So when Lieutenant Noel McShane of the AIF's 1stBattalion, asked of posterity:
I hope you in Australia are not ashamed of us; we have done our bit and no blame can fall on us, our answer rings unanimous down the decades.
No.
No, we are not ashamed of you.
Because no shame can exist in this place.
We are proud.
We are thankful.
And we will never, ever forget. 



It's a great day to join everybody here. And everybody here is someone with a powerful story.
A powerful story about what it's like to live a life with a disability.
A powerful story about the lives of their family and their friends.
The lives of disability care workers and service providers.
And we know disability can be for a lifetime.
Which is why a lifetime of care and support for people with disability makes sense.
But we're all here today because we know that's the aspiration but we also know today it isn't like that.
You know this already from the stories of your own life.
The system is unfair, it's under funded, it's fragmented and it's inefficient and we can do better.
We're all here as Australians and we all know that this is a great country. Australia is a country where we can be good at solving problems like the ones we've been hearing about today. 
We're a country when we all see that something needs to be done, when we see that there are people who are missing out, when we understand that there's something that we can do, we're a country that's really good at getting it done.
Once, old age used to mean disadvantage.
So this country said, our country said - Australians are missing out, there's something we can do.
And a hundred years ago through the pension, and then more recently through superannuation, we've made sure that old age doesn't have to mean being left behind.
Once, sickness used to mean disadvantage.
So again this country, this country, our country said - Australians are missing out, there's something we can do.
And thirty years ago, through Medicare, we made sure that being sick doesn't mean that you get left behind.
I'm tremendously proud of these great Labor reforms, which responded to real community needs and shaped a better future.
Now we're here today because it's time to respond to another group of Australians who are missing out.
You're here today.
People with disability, your family, your carers, people who aren't getting a fair go in today's Australia.
In today's Australia, disability does mean disadvantage.
Over 400,000 Australians have significant and permanent disabilities that require ongoing care and support.
Today, more than 100,000 of you get no help through the current arrangements.
A hundred thousand Australians with disability are left behind altogether by government disability care, left to rely entirely on family, friends and other informal support.
The nearly 300,000 Australians with a disability who do get care, can't be sure that you get the care you need.
Instead, you basically get a ticket in what can be a very cruel lottery.
A lottery where access to services and support depends on your postcode or on the cause of your disability rather than on your need.
Disability doesn't discriminate  -  it could happen to any of us.
Any one of us could fall off a ladder, or have a stroke.
Any one of us could have a child or a grandchild born with cerebral palsy or Down syndrome.
We know Australians are missing out.
All of you here, and around the country, have raised your voice, you've campaigned magnificently.
And no one can say today, that the current system is good enough or it's fair enough. 
The system is broken.
And now  -  we also know that there's something we can do.
Because of your campaign, because of the work we asked the Productivity Commission to do, because of the work of Jenny Macklin, we know there is a practical, affordable, long-lasting solution.
That's why we're all here today.
For just one reason.
Because we know Australia is ready for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
So friends, I've come today to join you for one purpose.
Today I can announce that in the May Budget, my Government, your Labor Government will fund our share for the launch of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We will do our part.
And of course we will be working with the States and Territories who are willing to do theirs.
We will launch a full year sooner than the Productivity Commission suggested.
That means from the middle of next year, select launch sites around the country will begin serving around 10,000 people with disability.
Growing to 20,000 people from the middle of 2014.
Places where people with significant and permanent disability, their families and carers will have their needs assessed, and will start to receive personalised care and support.
And the work of these launch sites will give us the vital lessons we need to go ahead with national roll-out when our discussions with the States and Territories are done.
Friends, this is good news today - good news for Australia and it's happening for two reasons.
First, because of the unity, the courage of the disability community.
And second because we've listened to you, Labor has listened to you. I've listened to you and I've heard your message of change and it's time to make it real now.
So I want you to promise me one thing: promise me you won't stop campaigning, and I promise you, we won't stop working.
You are saying  -  something has to change.
Today, I'm saying  -  you've waited long enough.
Because people with disability are missing out  -  because we have a plan which will work  -  Australia is ready for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Thank you. 



Ten days ago I was making my sixth visit to Asia as Australia's Prime Minister.
I visited Kranji War Cemetery and there reflected on the Singapore of 1942 and the Singapore of 2012.
How a nation could so radically transform itself in the space of just one lifetime.
Singapore is now a powerhouse of Asian growth - a hub for investment, education, transport and regional diplomacy.  Since 1942 its population has grown from 1 million to 5 million. 
Their living standards today are, on average, more than ten times higher and average life expectancy has increased by almost thirty years.
Today's Singapore would have been unimaginable in 1942.
Singapore's rise is richly symbolic of Asia's extraordinary rise, a story that could be told in a thousand ways but for which I will just give you one compelling statistic. 
In 1992, China and India, accounted for less than a tenth of world gross domestic product. In the two decades since, in a growing global economy, that has doubled.
Of course, Australia has also been transformed since World War II to become a dynamic, prosperous and diverse nation in which we pride ourselves on maintaining our unique blend of prosperity and fairness. 
At the time of the fall of Singapore, Asia represented a threat to the Australian identity.
Over the decades since our engagement with Asia has become essential to our identity. Our relationships with the diverse nations of the region are positive and successful.  
In 1950, Australia's goods exports to Japan, ASEAN and other major Asian countries were around 13 per cent of all of Australia's goods exports. 
Today, China, Japan, Korea, India and our ASEAN neighboursabsorb around three quarters of our merchandise exports. 
For all of us, the speed and reach of these changes are unprecedented.
But if you think the change we have lived through already in our region and in our nation is amazing, then, hang onto your hats, because so much more change is still to come.
Today, for example, 30 per cent of global output is created within 10,000 kilometres of Australia's shores.
That may double by 2050.
The number of middle-class people in the region is projected to rise from around 500 million today to 3.2 billion by 2030.
By 2030, China and India alone are forecast to account for 35 per cent of global energy demand.
The number of internet users in Asia and the Pacific tripled between 2005 and 2011, from 344 million to more than 1 billion.  
Every day, the number of people living in Asian cities grows by more than 120,000.
I want Australians to understand what all this change will mean for our nation and for them.
Adapting to the Asian Century requires a response from every level of Australian society.
That is why I decided to commission a White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
Australia needs to plan for that future and seize its opportunities.
I wanted to see a growing national debate and dialogue about the impact of what is happening across our region and about how we, as a nation, should respond.
So I welcome this summit and the work of the Global Foundation.
And for your summit and for our nation, it is important to understand how we are already preparing for success in this century.
Our program of national reforms is designed to improve our readiness to sustain and share prosperity.
They begin with skills and education: developing the human capital of all Australians.
150,000 extra Australian students are now studying in Australian universities as a result of our new plan for higher education.
We are introducing a world-class national school curriculum, empowering local school principals, rewarding teachers who increase their effectiveness in the classroom.
Last month we delivered a national skills reform to help more Australians to gain qualifications and provide up-front loans to help them with the cost. 
We are delivering a clean energy future for Australia, with the carbon price commencing on 1st July this year and major investments in renewable energy.
We are investing in infrastructure around the nation for roads, rail, ports and public transport.
Through the Minerals Resource Rent Tax we are spreading the benefits of the mining boom, investing in infrastructure that will help mining regions to grow.
We are rolling out the National Broadband Network, delivering high speed broadband to the whole of Australia and creating the means to connect and innovate.
We are delivering other policies to support innovation across our economy, like the reshaped R&amp;D Tax Credit, the instant asset write off for small businesses and long term investment in research .
And we are maintaining the right fiscal policy by working to return the Budget to surplus in 2012-13.
There is no clearer sign of a strong economy than a surplus.
Yes, it requires hard decisions.
But a surplus provides an essential buffer in case the global economy deteriorates.
And it gives the Reserve Bank room to cut interest rates when it judges appropriate  -  as we have seen this week.  That is good news for Australians.
Throughout this period, we have pursued a relentless focus on jobs with 700,000 jobs created in Australia in the last four years.  In last year's Budget we delivered reforms to help more Australians into work, through better support and clearer responsibilities. 
And we have pursued improved front line services for Australians including better hospitals and now a new National Disability Insurance scheme.
I will never endorse the perspective that Australians are too greedy, or view themselves as entitled to too much and that we should be content to see front line services slashed to the worst levels available in other countries in our region.
Our vision for our nation is not about this race to the bottom.  Rather, it is all about improving the lives of Australians today and Australia's readiness to succeed through this century. 
There are good reasons for optimism about our ability to do this.
In part that optimism comes from Australia's endowment as we grapple with the challenge.
This endowment is much more than our natural endowment.
It includes what we built together in the Hawke and Keating era, our open economy and strong economic institutions.
The White Paper process is about guiding us to seize the opportunities that are now opening up.
But we need to be aware that other countries are competing for those same opportunities.
And Asian economies themselves continue to move up the value chain, developing new capabilities of their own.
Asia has recently overtaken Europe in the share of world R&amp;D it performs.
In 1998 China performed twice as much R&amp;D as Australia; in 2008 it performed six times as much.
Four of the five top performing school systems are located in our region, not in America or Europe.
And we know all too well that painful structural change is occurring in the Australian economy and creating strain in some parts of our nation.
Australian businesses must find opportunities in conditions where the dollar and terms of trade will remain high for the foreseeable future.
They will not do that by simply doing more of the same, or by slashing costs and quality.
They will need to offer products and services with distinctive value, based on real areas of comparative advantage.
Indeed, the 21st century business model is likely to be very different from the successful business models of the last quarter of the 20th century.
In some cases, Australian businesses will be able to access large Asian markets through export, including through regional supply chains.
In others, the business opportunities will be secured by establishing enterprises, including business partnerships, in Asian countries.
Already some Australian firms are showing how these things might be done.
Just weeks ago, we saw the venerable Australian law firm Mallesons merge with a Chinese peer, King &amp; Wood, to create a new legal powerhouse centred in Asia.
It is the first alliance of its type in the world, combining a Chinese and Western law firm that will cooperate across mainland China, Hong Kong and Australia.
A few weeks later, GM Holden here in Australia (struck an agreement to design and engineer two new car models for manufacture in China by Shanghai GM, a joint venture with government-owned Shanghai Automotive Industry Group.
These are developments that were rare ten years ago and are still unusual today.
But in the decade to come, they need to become absolutely routine.
How we achieve that is what the White Paper is about.
So let me refer to a two areas that I hope will be part of your discussions tomorrow and beyond. 
First, Australia's potential to become a regional food superpower.
Just as we have become a minerals and energy giant, Australia can be a great provider of reliable, high quality food to meet Asia's growing needs. 
In doing this, we are not just an exporter of commodities, but a partner in growing international markets and a provider of higher value products and services for the global food industry.    
Joe Ludwig, our Minister for Agriculture, is developing a national food plan.
I know the Global Foundation has been working to support this process and I welcome further dialogue on how Australia can best take these opportunities.
At the same time, Craig Emerson is working from his trade portfolio to develop new agricultural partnerships between Australia and China.
As I said, it's not just about more exports. It is about developing the systems and services that add extra value to them and participating in the development of a market-based solution to food security across the region.  It would involve
Building our food processing industry so that it can supply Asia's growing consumer markets and developing the research, technologies and logistics that strengthen irrigation, grow higher yield crops and improve safety.
Second, White Paper consultation has demonstrated that cultural literacy and understanding, or Ken Henry describes as Asia-relevant capabilities' are vital to Australia's prospects in this century. 
When I last visited South Korea in March, I met a young Australian woman who is studying at Yonsei University in Seoul.  She had decided that it was a great way to prepare for the career she hoped to have in Australian diplomacy. 
I agree.  We need to encourage even more Australians to study and work in the region and maintain their connections over their lifetimes.
Australia already possesses great specialist expertise in Asian culture, history and geography through our universities, and leading firms. 
And we have a dazzling array of Asian-Australian communities living here, with many different linkages across the region.
We need must broaden and deepen these ' Asia relevant capabilities' across the whole of Australian society.
We also have an incredible network of Australians living and working in countries of the region.  As the internet and new digital technologies accelerate, we should be using them to gain even more value from this diaspora.
Finally, in all of this, we do not forget that every nation approaches this century from the perspective of their own interests and values.
Australia is no different.
Our commitments to peace and prosperity, and our alliance with the US is a bedrock of our security and our region's.
And as we progress our agenda for engagement and collaboration, we remain clear about the essential importance Australia's military capability and alliances in this century.
Just as important is our continued commitment to building strong partnerships and friendships with the other nations of this region.
We will maintain an Australian Defence Force able to protect our interests and help maintain the peace and stability of our region.
We will also continue to review and update our own capabilities.
That is why I announced earlier today that we are bringing forward the next Defence White Paper to early 2013 and that we are taking the next steps in the submarine program.
Friends, we can and should face the Asian Century with confidence, optimism and strength.
We are plotting our path to success. But success never flows easily. It depends on making the right decisions now.
As Prime Minister, I remain determined to make us a nation that works together to put ourselves in that position to succeed.
A nation able to realise the opportunities in front of us.
I thank you for your preparedness to join me in designing and detailing how we can achieve that strength and prosperity in this Asian Century.
Thank you very much.  



PRESIDENT KARZAI: Madam Prime Minister, it's a happy day for us in Afghanistan to consider ourselves partners with Australia, a country that has been generous and kind to us, that has contributed to our stability and progress, that has spared no effort with risking the lives of its men and women in uniform, with relief Afghanistan, the taxpayers money of Australia to help our country and then today the signing of a document towards a strategic partnership for the future and for the announcement from Australia, by you Madam Prime Minister, of contribution to the Afghan Security Forces of $300 million for the next three years, all go very well with a lot of gratitude from the people of Afghanistan, Madam Prime Minister.
We will remember this and take it into history and I hope the day can come that Afghanistan can do its very small part as well in this regard.
PM: Can I say, in front of the friends gathered here and with you, President Karzai, that it is a great pleasure to be able to execute this agreement today.
I have said consistently to the Australian people that we would not abandon Afghanistan and we will continue to be working with you and this document today is our way of saying this is how we will continue working together.
We want to see, for the people of Afghanistan, an end of conflict, a growing economy and the ability to enjoy health, education, opportunity in life and if we can make a contribution to that we will be pleased to do so.
So thank you very much. 



Friends, it's a tribute to your industry's importance to this country that Minerals Week has become an institution on our political calendar, now into its fourth decade.
Mining is our economy's strong right arm.
When Australians see those great images of the industry, big yellow trucks the size of apartment blocks and open cuts as deep as Sydney Harbour and trains as long as the Story Bridge, we all feel a real pride in the vast continent we share and the endeavour we've made to develop it.
When almost six million Australians travelled overseas last year  -  nearly tripled from seven years ago  -  every one of them had a purchasing power based on the strong dollar mining has built.
And mining is woven through our culture and history as well.
The first diggers were miners  -  it was miners who raised the first truly Australian flag and who beneath it swore to stand by each other and their rights.
And it's my view that the modern story of mining is also one from which all Australians have much to learn  -  because the mining industry is now one of the finest examples of what I think of as the Australian endowment.
This country derives a historic advantage from our national talents and our natural gifts.
The gifts inherent in our natural resources, environment and location.
The talents embodied in the skills and knowledge of our people.
Now, no question, one of those talents is self-deprecation.
Outside the sporting arena, when we do undeniably achieve, we too often put it down to luck.
But it's not luck that makes this a top-ten country on low trade barriers, openness to international ideas, sophisticated and independent economic institutions, a list that goes on.
Luck didn't give us the three triple-A ratings which only seven other economies can claim  -  which no previous Australian government can claim either.
Luck didn't make us a top-two country on the measures that are most important to us: political stability, social mobility, ease of starting a business.
Luck didn't keep us out of the worst global recession in eighty years.
Any more than luck built a mining industry that supports the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians, that develops and exports advanced mining services and leads the world in production of so many commodities.
No, it took hard work, good ideas, tough business leadership, a skilled and creative workforce, generations of private endeavour.
And Governments playing their part.
You had to fight for it, we had to fight for it, and that suits us, because Australians know that things worth having are worth fighting for as well.
Many places on earth are resource-rich.
Few nations turn natural resources into national wealth as well as Australia does.
In reality, so many countries manage their mineral wealth badly that in the developing world they call it the resource curse and in the advanced world they call it the Dutch disease.
Australia's success in managing our resources has been built on much more than chance.
This is one of the keys to understanding your industry's success  -  and it is one of the keys to understanding our future success as a nation.
You see, our national endowment is not just the value of our natural gifts or the value of our national talents.
It's the way we use those talents to make something out of those gifts.
The way we take our skills and knowledge, and use them to transform our natural resources, environment, location: the way we turn these things to our purposes.
This endowment was not just given to us  -  it was made.
We made our location an advantage when we all worked hard to open this nation to Asia.
We made our environment an advantage when we all worked hard to protect it and to show it to the world.
Just as our natural resources only become an advantage because you make the most of mining.
Because of the work you do, and the work your people do, to extract its value, to find markets for it.
Making mining succeed is the work you do every day  -  and in modern Australia, it's a big part of the work of Government too.
And mining will benefit from much that this Government does in coming years, what we do for growth in the world  -  and for growth at home. 
And yes, what we do to deliver a share of the benefits of growth to all. 
When I recently said I fight for Australia I meant it.
In a tough global environment, Australia needs tough leadership, and I think you know by now, I'm prepared to fight.
Right now, there are important challenges to global growth.
At the centre of these challenges is the struggle of many European economies to deal with their sovereign debt crisis and restore growth on their whole continent.
The political developments that flow from this struggle have captured public attention in recent weeks, but in truth they have only dramatized the real economic debates which we have been engaged in through this year and last.
In Chicago last week, while of course the principal business was security, I did take the opportunity to express to my counterparts Australia's support for the G8's renewed resolve to promote European growth alongside fiscal sustainability.
And the European leaders weren't surprised at the view I expressed or that I flagged Australia will keep up the fight for strong and effective pro-growth policies at the G20 next month.
It's an argument we've pressed for some time now, and in doing so we have pointed to our own example and achievements.
Australia is a case study of policies to hold growth up in the face of a downturn, combined with charting  -  and following  -  a disciplined path of fiscal repair.
Growth and consolidation.
Of course, Europe is in a fundamentally different position from Australia, facing deeply entrenched problems with no easy fixes.
While Australia also has the advantage that we are in the right region at the right time, entering an Asian Century.
Asia's transforming growth won't end in a year or five years  -  it's an historic change with historic consequences and it's driving a long term shift in demand for what you produce.
But ultimately what's best for our peoples' jobs is balanced global growth and what's best for our firms' prosperity is balanced global demand and your industry is no exception to that.
So we'll keep up the fight for growth in the global economy.
And we'll continue that fight at home as well.
I'm very proud of the surplus Budget the Treasurer brought down this month.
In a very tough world environment, there's no clearer symbol of Australian strength.
And the surplus is right for the domestic economy as well.
The fiscal consolidation we've delivered has been designed to maintain sustainable, low-inflation growth, and you can see the effects already.
And you can also see that the extraordinary investment pipeline in this country keeps growing and now sits at over $500 billion.
So it's vital Government create room for the private sector and that's exactly what we've done.
Of course, it's not easy.  I look out at the room and there's a few veteran industry cost-cutters here who know that.
People who know what it's like to look at the revenue forecasts going down, quarter after quarter, who know what it's like to open up the lid on a few big cost-centres and to make the tough changes to get costs coming down.
That was the kind of picture we faced in framing this Budget:
Our predecessors saw revenues increased by almost two percentage points of GDP during their term.
In five Labor Budgets revenues have fallen by more than one and a half percentage points of GDP.
So what's our response been?  We've cut spending.
Down to 23.5 per cent of GDP next financial year and staying below 24 per cent over the forward estimates. 
The longest sustained period at these levels since the early 1980s.
We don't cut spending, or shrink the real size of Government, in a lunchtime libertarian seminar.
We do it in long days of expenditure review.
And because we make difficult decisions and pursue tough savings, we are able to keep room for important investments in the long-term drivers of productivity.
In infrastructure.
Projects vital to your industry, like the long-deferred Maldon to Dumbarton freight line linking resource fields in New South Wales to Port Kembla. 
And new economic infrastructure, delivered through the Regional Infrastructure Fund, drawing on the proceeds of the MRRT, like the hundreds of millions we've contributed to the major upgrade of the roads around Perth Airport.
In skills.
The Budget funded our new HECS for Skills scheme.
Part of our almost doubling of the level of skills funding we inherited in 2007.
So while for projects where there's a real need for some temporary overseas workers we will support that, our first priority is to secure jobs and training for Australian workers.
So our surplus Budget is a Budget for growth  -  it's the right Budget for the times.
I know many of you have serious differences of opinion with us on some of the elements of our policy approach.
You've told us that straight, and we expect nothing less, straight talking is the Australian way.
But I think we also both know that there there's a whole productivity agenda that we do share and where we can make a huge difference: in skills, innovation, infrastructure, business regulation, trade.
And you know that when industry and government work together on the world stage we get results together too.
Australian officials overseas, my ministers too, spend plenty of time working in the interests of our mining industry.
It's the same in my own meetings with visiting heads of Government, in my own work overseas.
Many of you know from your own experience that when it's in the industry's interest, the country's interest, for something to get said at the highest level, it gets said.
These are the opportunities for progress we share.
So we've got a plan to keep up the fight for growth, in the world and at home.
And yes, we've got a plan to spread the benefits too.
We are going to cut taxes, lift pensions and lift family payments.
Now, I know you're not all in love with the language of spreading the benefits of the boom.
I know everyone here works hard, competes in a tough global environment; you take big risks and you earn the big rewards.
You build something. 
Australians don't begrudge hard work and we admire your success.
But I know this too: they work pretty hard in car factories and at panel beaters' and in police stations and hospitals too.
And here's the rub. 
You don't own the minerals.  I don't own the minerals.
Governments only sell you the right to mine the resource.
A resource we hold in trust for a sovereign people. 
They own it and they deserve their share.
I think we've been crystal clear since the Budget.
We want growth and then we want the benefits of growth to spread to all.
There's been a fair bit of talk recently about whether Labor wants to make the pie bigger or slice the pie up differently.
Well, here's the answer.  Since we came to office:
Euro area: economy shrank, one point six per cent.
Japan: economy shrank, one point seven per cent.
United States: economy grew, one point three per cent.
Australia: economy grew, eight point eight per cent.
At the end of it all, the short-term arguments come and go  -  the facts endure.
Our economy is the envy of the world.
Our mining industry is the envy of the world.
There's nowhere in the world you'd be better off investing.
And there's nowhere in the world where mining has a stronger future.
And this is Australia, and it has a Labor Government. 



Friends, this year we celebrate the 60thanniversary of Gough's election to Parliament, which brought into public life one of the finest minds of a great generation.
Gough, who is so well-known for his deep love of literature, was very fond of quoting the last lines of the Inferno, when Dante and Virgil returned from the deep and came forth to see the stars once again.
Gough Whitlam is one of those stars, one of those stars for the Australian nation, for the Labor movement and the Labor Party.
Gough Whitlam would surely have become pre-eminent in whatever profession he chose.
If he'd gone into academia, he would have been a vice chancellor; if he'd gone into the law, he would have been a chief justice.
But he chose politics, because he understood its dignity and he saw its possibilities.
He brought a depth of analysis to public affairs grounded, as he expressed it, in the tradition of optimism about the possibility of human improvement and human progress through the means of human reason.
They were wise words then, just as they are wise words now.
Friends, in 2012 the certain grandeur of our friend Gough Whitlam endures as we celebratethe 40thanniversary of the government that bears his name, while the rancour and pettiness of his opponents pale into merited insignificance.
The thousand days of the Whitlam government were a brilliant, transforming moment  -  our own touch of Camelot.
Graham Freudenberg once wrote that Those of us who were there have a duty to educate those who were not.
Graham and Gough have laid down that record in their writings, their interviews and their lectures.
But it is a story that must speak to future years and future generations as well.
Not only as an artefact of history or literature, but as the inspiration of a living tradition of social action to shape the Australia of tomorrow as Gough has shaped the Australia of today.
So it's fitting that the Whitlam Institute has found a home here in the region where Gough became the first leader to elevate the needs and aspirations of suburban Australians to the level of national concerns.
Here in the university of which Gough can rightly claim to be the father.
Here, in one of our most important heritage buildings, founded by Governor and Mrs Macquarie to provide care and opportunity for the girls of the new colony.
Indeed, surely there is an appropriate symmetry for me as the first female prime minister of our nation, to be here today to celebrate the fact that more than half the enrolments of this university are now made up of women, many of them migrants and many of them refugees; many more the first in their family to receive the benefits of higher education.
So, it was a wise choice of this venue to host the Whitlam Institute, and my colleagues are here today to celebrate it.
And today we enable the job to be completed with a grant of $7 million to achieve full restoration and functionality of its eastern wing.
That work will include a public library displaying a collection of Gough's personal books and papers, plus accommodation for the Institute itself.
Perhaps for all of us most poignantly, it will include a public gallery on the top floor named in the honour of Margaret, remembering her lifelong connection with the arts.
And, more broadly, honouring what Gough Whitlam himself called "the longest prime ministerial marriage in Australian history; a partnership without which the Whitlam legacy cannot even be imagined.
So friends, here today with a contribution from the Federal Government and joined by a contribution from the University itself, we can complete the task began 12 years ago when the University kindly agreed to give the Whitlam Institute a home.
So friends, in these historic walls, one of the nation's greatest stories can be told and retold, and one of nation's greatest sons can be esteemed.
Gough, you are in our thoughts today, and we thank you for giving us so much; the men and women of Australia, so much to remember and so much to preserve.
Thank you. 



On behalf of the people of Australia, tonight we will have the honour of lighting this beacon.
This beacon will be one of those shining around the world, and in lighting the beacon tonight we are joining our celebrations for The Queen's Diamond Jubilee with celebrations being held right around the world.
These beacons glowing around the world symbolise one family across a wide world, the family of the Commonwealth nations. Rich in their diversity but united now in admiration for the unstinting service of The Queen.
Tonight we are reflecting not just on the passing of six decades;we are reflecting on a life well lived, a life of sacrifice, a life of service. And to the young people who are here with us this evening, I hope one thing you always remember about tonight is that example of The Queen spending her life in the service of others.
We are also reflecting on six decades that have passed and how much our nation has changed in that time.
We have become a confident nation, understanding our place in our region and in the world, with every reason to be optimistic about the future.
Across all of that change in our nation, 60 years of change, The Queen has been a symbol of continuity and a very wise and patient friend.
So tonight we honour her by lighting the beacon in front of us and we hope that, as she sees these beacons lit around the world, she accepts them for what they are  -  lights in admiration of her service.
Thank you very much 



It does give me great confidence in our economic future to see you all here tonight.
I've got great confidence in Australia, because I've got great confidence in you.
You're Australians who understand the big changes at work in our country and who understand the opportunities those changes create.
You're Australians who know we can be the winner in the Asian Century and who, through your presence here, also show your commitment to work together to get us there.
And you're Australians who know that in a difficult global environment, we wouldn't change places with anyone in the world. 
Above all, because you know the facts.
Since Labor came to office:
Euro area: economy shrank, one point seven per cent.
Japan: economy shrank, one point seven per cent.
United States: economy grew, one point two per cent.
Australia: economy grew, ten point three per cent.
The facts speak up for Australia  -  but I will say to you, they don't just speak for themselves.
We'll have some detailed policy discussions tonight and tomorrow, we'll talk about some of the concrete things we can do together, identify specific problems, some of them big ones, develop new approaches and specific solutions. 
That's vitally important.
It's just as important that we all leave here tomorrow determined to speak up for our economy, to speak up for the facts.
The bad news from overseas is making more noise at the moment than hailstones on a tin roof.
Those of us who know how strong our economy overall really is do have to speak up to be heard.
We know it's in the interest of business that confidence grow, we know it's in the interests of working people that confidence grow too.
We all need investment to flow, we all need jobs to grow, we all need consumers to spend.
In truth, there is strength, and the facts of our economic performance support a pragmatic, soundly-based, long-term confidence in our country and in its future.
So speak up  -  because we are strong today, and we do have a chance now to build that strength for the future.
We can do things now to ensure that in ten and twenty and thirty years' time, this country is still fair, still strong, and we still don't want to change places with anyone, anywhere.
That's really the job before us at this Forum.
Now, that's never easy  -  the strength we have today came from decades of hard work.  Building tomorrow's strength will demand just as much.
And you know the challenges of the contemporary moment.
Global weakness, no one here needs reminding of that.
But I will be reminding my G20 colleagues in Mexico next week of the Australian example.
Here, we have put growth and jobs first  -  growth which in turn is the solid foundation for fiscal discipline in the long term.
Austerity alone is not the right path.  That's the case I'll be making at the G20.
And I'll be making the case that today's challenges cannot be allowed to distract us from the importance of acting now to shape the future.
Once again, I'll point to the Australian example.
Two crucial initiatives come into force next month.
The long debate about whether an economy like ours should tax minerals rents concludes for practical purposes when the MRRT begins operation.
I know we have a better model today because of the genuine process in which you've engaged with us.  And the facts of continued investment in the mining sector bear this out.
We've had an even longer debate about pricing carbon pollution and driving the shift to clean energy  -  and now the time for action has come with the implementation of a carbon pricing scheme which is market-based, efficient and fair.
So this is a demanding chapter in our nation's economic story.
But we have made great progress, in which we can all take pride, and last week's national accounts show that.
And it's quite false to say that this was built only on mining  -  consumer spending was measurably stronger this first quarter than last year  -  and there's a message in that for those who continue to jawbone the country down.
It's increasingly clear that we've got the macro policy settings right.
We stimulated in the down turn.
It was controversial, some in Australia wanted to go down a different path, some overseas did go down a different path.
But here, Government stimulated, in nation building, in jobs  -  business did the right thing, preserving employment and maintaining the skills base  -  unions were responsible partners and worked with the broader community to manage change.
And here we are, with growth back to trend, with more than 800 000 new jobs under our belt in five years, with more to come.
And, in line with the strict fiscal rules we adopted at that time, we're consolidating in the recovery. 
The sharpest fiscal consolidation on record in Australia, giving us a Budget surplus in 2012-13 and growing in subsequent years, even while tax receipts are forecast to remain below 23 per cent of GDP across the forward estimates.
Government making savings decisions, business and unions working with us to identify priorities, to build support for plans for our economic future.
And here we are, with prices under control, with the Reserve Bank given ample room to lower rates given difficult conditions overseas, with the benefits of those hard decisions being seen and felt.
Our country's made progress and the things we've done together are making a difference.
There are big challenges still before us and the job for tonight and tomorrow is as simple as this  -  to follow through on our investments and reforms to lift productivity, to do more to sustain and spread growth.
Let me nominate a couple of my areas of greatest interest in pursuit of these goals.
I am especially keen to hear your thoughts on competiveness.
The business tax reform conversation has been a wide ranging one, perhaps even a diffuse discussion.
I've got no doubt the company tax rate should be lower  -  and no doubt the revenue base has to be maintained as well.
And we understand that the benefits of a lower corporate rate would flow to workers and the wider community in more jobs and better pay over time.
So I think that's an area where there's a lot we can discuss tomorrow.
And we have to talk about labour mobility.
Workforce is one of the real nubs of the economic discussion in Australia.
We're doing structural adjustment at a time of employment growth, and that's a good thing, but it doesn't make the fact of a business closing its doors any easier on the day it happens.
And anyone here who was a bit reluctant to leave home and get up to Brisbane for this night will have a bit of insight into why working families need some convincing that their next job is on the other side of the country.
But we've got to crack this nut and it's one of those issues which genuinely demands a range of measures because it reflects a range of factors.
We've worked on national licensing of professions and trades and on incentives for welfare to work and now we're turning attention to more improvements to jobs services and to issues like State transaction taxes on property as well.
And there's a range of other issues on the table here as well.
Innovation ... infrastructure ... skills and education, and we know skilled workers are mobile workers, and that the national curriculum is a serious contribution to mobility too.
All of them, opportunities for investment, opportunities for reform, opportunities to build on the Australian endowment, opportunities to build the new economy of the future.
It'll take hard work, good ideas, thoughtful business and union leadership, a skilled and creative workforce, generations of private endeavour.
And Governments playing their part.
I know we can do it because we've done it before.
It probably wasn't Gary Player who first said the harder I work, the luckier I get but he certainly made that quote his own.
He could have been talking about Australia.
If we ever were just a lucky country, we're certainly not now.
It's not luck that makes this a top-ten country on low trade barriers, openness to international ideas, sophisticated and independent economic institutions, a list that goes on.
Luck didn't give us the three triple-A ratings which only seven other economies can claim  -  which no previous Australian government can claim either.
Luck didn't make us a top-two country on the measures that are most important to us: political stability, social mobility, ease of starting a business.
Luck didn't keep us out of the worst global recession in eighty years.
And luck won't build us a new economy for the future.
We have to make it.
Just as we made our location an advantage when we all worked hard to open this nation to Asia.
As we made our environment an advantage when we all worked hard to protect it and to show it to the world.
As we made our natural resources an advantage by making the most of mining.
And our people aren't born with skills and knowledge  -  the stork doesn't bring us human capital  -  we are making it.
In childcare, schools and universities and workshops and TAFEs and in the learning and training that goes on throughout the working lives of millions of our people.
It's up to all of us  -  we all have a place in making our economy more adaptive, flexible and better able to seize new opportunities.
Government's essential responsibility to business owners and to workers is to get the economic fundamentals right.
We have done it  -  and we'll keep at it.
We won't ever rest on our laurels. 
I know you won't either.
Australians should be confident: not because change is always good, but because Australia is always good enough to make the best of change.
What government, business and unions are already doing together is working  -  together we can do more.
That's why I wanted to bring you all here, to continue our good work together.
You're making a great contribution to our country by being part of the conversation tonight and tomorrow.
I look forward to joining with you. 



Last night, I said that we would be discussing the strength of our economy - and that's been acknowledged by participants in the room from many different perspectives today.
I also spoke about the very difficult circumstances affecting the world economy and new ideas to address uneven growth at home. 
I said that  in today's discussions we would not  shying away from hard questions because we are committed to keeping our economy strong:  creating jobs, driving growth and improving productivity  -  they're all critical to securing our economic future.
And we have not shied away from those hard questions.
Together we have spent the day framing new grounds for confidence and new ideas for reform.
So allow me to try and summarise what's been a big day of discussion.
We've certainly heard about the need to bolster confidence - to appreciate our strengths and to forge together to build confidence, and to recognise that our glass is more than half full.
We've heard about the structural shifts underway in our economy.
The high terms of trade and high dollar - and the benefits and challenges presented  by those.
The normalised levels of wealth accumulation and consumption, after a period of unusual growth in both of these areas and the ageing of our population, and what the means for employment of the future.
We've heard a lot about the need to focus on productivity and lifting productivity growth.
And we've heard about the importance of investment in developing human capital, in developing our people.
The importance of the education system, the importance of maths and science of skills development or research and development.
You would have seen Governor Stevens this morning, in what I thought was a very description of the circumstances of our economy, talk about the need to address and then somewhat modestly suggest he wasn't the expert and people searching for ideas should go to the Productivity Commission.
It's not necessarily fashionable in life today to suggest someone might know better than you but he did point to the Productivity Commission.
And I would remind on this question of human capital that the Productivity Commission has found that VET reform is crucial to lifting productivity and delivering the COAG reform goals that we've set ourselves would raise GDP by 2 per cent.
So skills work is underway and vital to our productivity.
On infrastructure, we discussed new financing opportunities, risk management, how we use new infrastructure and maximising investment opportunities.
We had a discussion about construction costs particularly for multi-dwelling residential projects and I think it was good that we saw in the room in that discussion, the preparedness of stakeholders within this room to collaborate on this question of construction costs.
We also heard more broadly about the importance of collaboration right across our economy, the creation of such relationships within workplaces through management practices as a way of increasing productivity.
I was especially pleased to see the acknowledge of the effective and ongoing dialogue that there is on these questions maximising collaboration within firms and maximising our use of R&amp;D, employee engagement and minimising conflicts at work.
A clear thread running through today's discussions has been the acknowledgement that technology, is changing the way we live and work and will change the productivity of our economy.
That it's driving innovation in sectors like manufacturing and agriculture.
It's changing the way we do things and it's certainly changing the way government does things too  -  our ability to deliver services in a different and smarter way.
We heard in this last session a recommitment to the deregulation and competition agenda first outlined at the Business Advisory Forum which met with COAG in April, and I do thank people for the kind words about that initiative, bringing business leaders together for the first time with the Prime Minister and Premiers meeting in COAG to talk directly about deregulation.
It's imperative that we bring the reforms that we outlined through that process home this year and next year.
And coming back, once again to the Reserve Bank Governor pointing to the Productivity Commission and its analysis.
The Productivity Commission recently examined 17 deregulation priorities and estimated that these reforms could increase GDP by over $6 billion in the longer term - so working through that forum, an important productivity initiative.
So in thinking about these issues in advance of our Forum and thinking about the in the course of discussions today, I do now want to outline some priorities for attention.
On the key issue of competitiveness, we have had discussions in the sessions and through the proceedings, and I want to say this.
To the business representatives in the room, we've heard you loud and clear on the company tax rate and we see it as a priority for the next steps in tax reform, building on the Government's substantial record of tax reform.
Now I've lost count of the amount of times that Wayne, Penny or I have said we're in the cart for a lower company tax rate.
But it has to be affordable and that means that it has to be funded by other changes in the business tax system.
So today though, let's be very clear.
From today I want to see achieving this company tax rate reduction as the absolute top priority of the Business Tax Working Group.
I want it to be the focus, and I want it to be the outcome.
I want it dealt with before the other business tax issues in the Working Group's in-tray are dealt with.    
And if we do that, if we have the Business Tax Working Group addressing the questions of the right offset, you will get your company tax cut as a down-payment to help you be more competitive in this the Asian Century.
That's what we're on about, what you're on about, and ultimately it's why we're here.
To help our businesses be competitive, to ensure our economy remains strong and becomes stronger.
Another theme to emerge from the discussions today is this question of labour mobility.
There are thousands of jobs being created in our strong economy, but there are also some areas where industries are struggling and jobs are being shed.
And it's our collective task, for everyone in this room - as a matter of good economic management and good social policy - that we do our absolute best to match the demand for labour with those who are seeking employment.
The Government's going to continue to provide leadership, and work with other governments, other levels of Government and business and unions to promote a more mobile labour force - including through measures like ensuring skilled trades people can move seamlessly from one part of the country to another without having to get a new license. 
And it might seem puzzling to some that we are still in the modern age working on these questions like recognition of occupational licenses but we are  -  a simple measure, a very important measure and we're very determined to get it done.
But there is always more we can do.
The Government invests over $6 billion every four years on jobs services.
That's the services that go to assist people to find work.
These are the services right around the country, who reach out and help people who are out of work including those who have just lost jobs.
Our current arrangements for our employment services make it easier and more convenient and financially rewarding for a provider to place someone in a job in their local area, and less convenient and rewarding if a jobseeker moves out of the region or interstate.
To help us improve labour mobility, as a result of today I commit the Government to providing stronger incentives for our employment services to grasp interstate opportunities available in the jobs market.
We need to provide better incentives for employment service providers to put people into jobs wherever they are in the country, including the growing resources sector but let's not forgot to the growth we're seeing in the services economy including particularly the health and caring sectors.
Of course looking out on this room of many business leaders I would say this, employers also have a responsibility to train-up and employment people who are prepared to move.
We've got to help get the match between the people and the places that are available.
In a similar vein, I took a lot of notice of worthwhile comments made during the course of the day about training and income support and making sure that we have a better package of the two.
I'm keen to pursue the ACTU idea to better marry up income support and training.
Job services bring these things together already. But as an outcome from today's discussion, I want to explore further options to combine Government efforts to support individuals who need income support, many of whom also require further training to be successful in the labour market.
I also noted the suggestion made by small business here, by Peter of better integrating the training needs of small business into our training system and that is both employees and owners.
I think he made a powerful point about the need for our training system to work for owners as well.
And making sure that people in small businesses have the opportunity to up-skill even as they operate their business so we will be looking at that.
The new HECS for TAFE arrangements will help workers undertake further training to get those skills without forgoing income, that is without paying up front fees.
Of course, last night we heard from business and unions alike a desire to better capture the opportunities of this Asian century  -  our desire to make sure that Australia is a winner in this period of growth.
We articulated that last night as a search for greater people to people links and stronger economic integration.
It is my view that Australia has been slow to participate in global value chains, by one measure ranking third-lowest among OECD countries.
As Minister Emerson, the Minister for Trade and others mentioned, if Australian businesses participate in global value chains they can be producing for the vast and rapidly growing markets of Asia instead of relying on our relatively small domestic market. 
This economic transformation would be a big boost to both Australian manufacturing and to all the service industries that can participate in value chains.
My Government is willing to support this transformation, integrating our manufacturing and services industries more fully into the opportunities in the economies in our region. 
The Government will deploy the expertise and resources of Austrade and the Export Finance Investment Corporation in encouraging the participation of Australian manufacturing and service businesses in global value chains.
We will also ensure the Export Market Development Grants Scheme is helping to capture these new opportunities for Australian export businesses.
With my Ministerial colleagues and I intend to deal with many of the other very important points that have been raised today in the period ahead.
We are going to take what you have said forward and feed it into the ongoing policy processes we have underway.
By that I mean the business tax working group, with a renewed focus on company tax cuts.
The manufacturing taskforce, with an even further impetus for policies which drive innovation and high performance workplaces.
Through the high-powered Business Advisory Forum, which is working at great speed to deliver the deregulation agenda and of course in the vital work that is being undertaken to prepare the Asian Century White Paper.
Working through these processes will allow people in this room to continue to collaborate on solving some of the big economic challenges before us.
These processes, together with today's Forum, are helping to re-enliven important reform important conversations in the context of an economy that is once again undergoing structural change.
To make sure, at the end of the day, that we deliver the very best policy outcomes on the key questions that will govern our future, our economic security and our prosperity as a society.
I've certainly heard in the room a real hunger to continue these kind of collaborative processes and we will.
It's the best way of making sure that our policy outcomes are informed by a broad cross-section of views. It's the best way of making sure that we are taking those views and using them to secure our aim of more prosperity in our society and more fairness.
Finally, there have been a number of observations during the course of the day about the nature of the international economy and about how fortunate we are to live and work in an economy as strong as ours.
Many reflections both formal and informal about how there is no place in the world you would want to live or work than Australia.
Next week, I will be sitting at the table of the G20 and in view with that spirit about the Australian example I will be calling on my European counterparts to take the decisive action we all want them to take.
That means greater banking integration, greater fiscal integration and a strong focus on growth and jobs.
And that last point is particularly important.
As our own experience shows, and this is the power of the Australian example, growth and fiscal consolidation are not mutually exclusive.
But growth is a necessary precondition for strong public finances.
The Australian model has worked well for us and we've been remarking on it today just what we have achieved together and I will be commending it to my colleagues at the G20.
For the sake of the global economy, and for the sake of our own economy within that global economy.


Thank you very much for that kind introduction, and can I too start by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and in a spirit of reconciliation paying my respects to elders past and present.
Can I say what a great delight it is being here for today's lunch. I do get the opportunity to attend a number of women's events, but not necessarily of this size and status, so it is a great honour to be here.
In fact we were reminiscing in the car on the way here about the last women's event I attended. It was at my local football club in Melbourne, the Werribee Tigers. It was the women's day at the Werribee Tigers, I was there at about 3 in the afternoon, the women had been drinking champagne since 11, and they were more interested in having photographs with my security team than talking to me.
So I am anticipating, hopefully, a slightly different reaction today, but if I see you all clearing out of the hall looking for my security team I'll know I'm getting the same reaction.
I think we should, when we gather like this as women, of course with some of the men who are our friends, reflect on just how far we've come.
And we have been on a remarkable journey as a nation, and we should never forget the great achievements, the great strides forward that have been made for women in our nation.
From the first days when the first women spoke in the Australian Parliament, Edith Cowan, who said in that very first speech in a woman's voice, I know many people think that perhaps it was not the wisest thing to do to send a woman into Parliament.
Now, after all these years of history we can say it was a wise thing to do, it was a wonderful thing to do, and it was that first step by that brave woman that has led to everything else including me being here today as the first female Prime Minister.
Sixty years ago we also saw another brave woman, Dame Enid Lyons, who was there in the sea of suits in the Menzies' cabinet, the first woman to sit at that cabinet table.
Now I have the privilege of sitting at that cabinet table with incredible women, including Jenny Macklin, Penny Wong, Nicola Roxon and Tanya Plibersek.
And we get to go to Executive Council and be there with the first female Governor-General, and we know that there are three women on our High Court.
Change has happened.
Change has happened too from the days of the early suffragettes, and perhaps we should today be saying to ourselves thank heavens we're not in the days that we had to go on hunger strike to make our point, now we can come out for lunch.
Change is good indeed.
What change means is that things that are unthinkable become thinkable, and ultimately the things that are thinkable become normal.
Indeed the history of great social movements is that things were unthinkable, then they slowly started to change and in retrospect everybody says the change was inevitable.
The women's movement has been a bit like that.
We have made so many strides forward that now, with the remove of history, we see as inevitable. But they were only made because women of courage stepped up and got them done.
But here at today's lunch we can't just sit and raise a glass in celebration and say the journey is over, and that women have arrived because we now have the first female Prime Minister or the first female Governor-General, we still have work to do for women's equality and women's full empowerment in our society.
I think Hillary Clinton best caught this sense of progress but the need for more when she spoke after her defeat in the presidential primaries, and when she said, although we weren't able to shatter that highest, hardest glass ceiling this time, thanks to you it's got about 18 million cracks in it, and the light is shining through like never before. Filling us all with the hope and the sure knowledge that the path will be a little bit easier the next time.
Here in our nation our glass ceiling has cracks in it, but it hasn't been shattered yet.
It is 28 years since the Sex Discrimination Act became law in this country. Or put another way, a baby girl born on that day would be a 28 year old woman now.
And whilst in her lifetime there has been change, 28 years later the gender pay gap in Australia is still at 17.4 per cent.
Only 3 per cent of the ASX 200 companies have female CEOs.
Women on boards are now at 14 per cent. Now admittedly that's better than the 8 per cent two years ago, but it's certainly not good enough.
So in this room, I want to say to corporate Australia represented here, we have to keep pushing for change.
We have to keep pushing to see more women take their rightful place on those boards of our major companies.
If you believe as I do, and it's a fairly simple belief at base, that merit is equally distributed between the sexes, if you believe that and then you look and see a result like boards only having 14 per cent of women, then it means that women of merit that should be there aren't there, and in the interests of justice but also in the interests of the highest possible quality for those boards, we should fix that.
There may be some men in the room who now remark, That would tend to imply there are some men there who shouldn't be there.
Maybe that might be true as well.
We want to play a role helping this change, which I know corporate Australia is now very passionate about.
We want to make sure that there are women available to take those positions on those boards.
We've already made a start and a partnership with the Australian Institute of Company Directors to provide board diversity scholarships to help provide a pipeline of qualified women.
Now how many women are interested?
A story is told by the first round of these scholarships. They began in 2011, and we had 70 scholarships to award with nearly 2000 woman applying.
So I think that's telling you that there is interest out there.
So I'm very proud to be bale to announce today that the Government will fund a further round of these scholarships, because we want more women to get that qualification and we want to play our part as a Government seeing more women come through to the boardrooms of our nation.
But as we think about that glass ceiling, we should never lose sight too of the lino on the floor.
We've got to make sure that whilst, as women, we are thinking about the next stage for women's equality, those things still to be achieved which haven't been achieved in equal numbers, we must still, too, have our eyes on equity.
I know from my family, from my own life, from my mother, that Ten Pound Pom who has been spoken of, are that there are so many things as a society we need to do to help women, the vast mass of women, women in their day-to-day lives, in their ordinary lives, in the struggles in suburbia and our regional towns in raising the family and combining work, there are so many things that we need to do to support women on that journey. 
When my mother was raising my sister and I, raising her family, there wasn't paid parental leave, there wasn't subsidies for childcare.
Indeed my mother used to mind other people's children for money; something in modern parlance we talk about a family day care, but that was the way that she was able, when we first arrived in this country, to earn a bit of money while she cared for her children.
And she moved from that stage of caring for us, as my father worked unbelievably hard in a series of occupations and ultimately as a psychiatric nurse, she moved from minding other people's children to working in the kitchen cooking in an aged care institution.
And there wasn't after school hours care then, so she used to run across the road to infants' school, where I was, and I would sit in the kitchen with her until she finished work at 6:30 at night.
Not something we have happen these days, a small child in a kitchen cooking for 80 people  -  what could possibly go wrong?
The Occupational Health and Safety Standards aren't going to quite let us do that.
But for me, what might sound in some ways a bit Dickens-like, it wasn't at all. It was a wonderful experience of being in an aged care home, home to older women.
A young girl who didn't have a grandmother in this country, who didn't have any aunts or uncles in this country, got the opportunity of having 70-80 grandmothers to learn to knit and play cat's cradle and do your ABCs, so it was a wonderful experience.
But as a society we've learned that we can do better than that and we should do better than that to have the policies that give women raising their families options and choices.
And I've always felt it keenly as a responsibility as the first woman to hold this position that we need to be delivering, as a government and as a nation, the policies that will give women those options and choices.
So I'm very proud that we've delivered after so many years of debate Paid Parental Leave.
And I'm very proud too that we're putting more money into subsidising childcare than ever before.
Though we've still got a conversation to have about how our subsidy system can best meet the needs of working women today.
I'm proud that we've taken a big step forward in equal pay.
Those women who work in our social and community service areas, who do some of the most stressing work in our society, who for too long have been dismissed as the sort of people who do caring work, women's work, work that doesn't have to be well-rewarded. That we have achieved for them equal pay.
I'm proud we're on a journey now to look at other areas where women work. Area like aged care  -  truly value their skills.
And we have been recognising the real skills of the workers in childcare, not assuming that somehow it is inherent in women to care for children, but recognising that caring for children is a real skill and it deserves to be recognised for the skill that it is.
So we have made some big strides forward, but there are still things we need to do as a nation, and which we will only be able to do together in order to change women's experiences of their lives.
For too many women, it's still a struggle and a juggle.
For too many women there are so many thinking moments about the choices that they have made.
For too many women there are workplaces that aren't free from harassment.
For too many women there is the denial of their career aspirations and choice.
The mum track, the softer option that is laid out for them whether or not they want to embrace it, they're told that's their pathway at work.
And so we still have things to change, and we've got to change them together.
But when I come to events like this I am very confident that as a nation we will make those strides forward for further change.
But I'd have to say this  -  I don't think it's going to be easy.
Change is never easy, it always requires people to step up and say that they recognise the need for change and they're going to make it happen.
The change that we live today, the changes that have made our lives possible, brought to us by earlier generations, were not easy to achieve.
And so for us to achieve the things that we want to see for our daughters and our granddaughters won't be easy either.
They will take determination, but I know the women in this room are a very determined lot and we will get it done.
Recently, I got the best compliment of my lifetime from an unexpected quarter when it was said about me that Gillard will not lay down and die.'
To which I thought, damn right.
And I think that spirit of determination is what binds us together indeed when we look back in history we see so many fine and so many strong figures who have brought us to where we are today.
We know that we can learn from them about taking our journey forward.
I want to point you to one wonderful quote from a female lawyer in Melbourne.
I know what it's like to be a female lawyer in Melbourne and the stories of this woman a female lawyer in the 1950s to the 1960s can still be told.
Her name was Joan Rosanove and she was working as a successful female lawyer well before that was the norm.
She uttered these immortal words, You must have the stamina of an ox and the hide like a rhinoceros and when they have kicked you in the teeth you must look as if you hadn't noticed'.
Well in 19 years the job description for high achieving women probably hasn't changed.
But I'd be here today saying to you don't recount space in your head to the naysayers, to the people who say further change isn't possible and that we can't get more done.
I absolutely believe we can. I know that we will do that together.
We will reach days in this country when it is so norm for the Prime Minister to be a woman that no one even talks about her hair anymore.



And I thank each of you for your contribution to promoting economic and social progress, despite the deep problems affecting the global economy.
There are some 200 million people unemployed worldwide, with nearly 75 million youth unemployed. 
Growth is weakening in a number of countries and uncertainty and risks have intensified, driven in particular by events in Europe. 
The scale of the human cost tells us that a return to growth is urgently required. 
So it's important that we ask hard questions about plans to spread and sustain growth, to create jobs, to avoid the mistakes of the past.  Today I want to say to you very clearly:
In a world where it is easy to be downbeat, we must also be able to point to our successes and understand our strengths.
Difficult times in the global economy demand courage from leaders in government, business and wider society  -  but that courage can find its strongest foundation in confidence.
So for example, Australia takes considerable pride in the work of the G20 and of associated gatherings like this one, the B20.
The growth of the G20's importance and effectiveness is one of the global successes and strengths we can reflect on, and build upon, as we look to spread and sustain global growth. 
And today I want to say to you that Australia also takes considerable pride in our own economic achievements.
Our record of growth and job creation gives me confidence: because I have seen our own determination and decisiveness rewarded in Australia, I'm confident that determined and decisive leadership around the world will be rewarded too.
And I hope that Australia's strong economy can be a sign of confidence to other countries.
We know there is a path of openness, investment and reform which leads to jobs and fiscally sustainable growth for the long term.
We know that because it is the path we have followed.
And while we acknowledge that every country faces its own unique circumstances, we do believe that there are some lessons for the world in the Australian way.
So first, the dose of realism.
Some progress has been made on the global economy since we last met.
Importantly, in the United States, the recovery continues at a moderate pace. But challenges remain even there, particularly in the housing and labour markets.
European leaders have also taken important steps.
But despite an increase in bail-out funds; the bank restructuring that has occurred in a number of countries; the unprecedented liquidity injection afforded by the long-term repurchase operations of the European Central Bank; and the debt restructuring that has occurred in Greece, Europe's situation remains hugely difficult.
The euro area's unemployment rate remains at double-digits and many euro area economies appear to have re-entered recession.
Second, the signs of change.
It's now clear to more and more people that austerity measures  -  measures which we freely acknowledge have been followed in response to well-grounded concerns about sovereign debt  -  need to be accompanied by a commitment to growth which is equally urgent and strong. 
The growing consensus about this is a positive and important development.
We are seeing a reshaping of the debate in Europe and beyond: not before time, there is a growing recognition that growth is an important precondition for confidence, job creation and ultimately fiscal consolidation itself.
Europe must have credible fiscal consolidation plans to restore fiscal sustainability, but it is also essential that it has a strategy for growth that includes policies aimed at boosting trade and investment, freeing up product and labour markets, deregulating business, promoting competition and building skills.
Fiscal consolidation cannot be an end in itself.
It must be a part of a comprehensive approach to spreading and sustaining economic growth.
Plainly, one of the key pressure points of the global economic recovery is the magnitude of many nations' public debt.
Plainly, ensuring the sustainability of these countries' public debt positions is an important medium-term issue that cannot be ignored.
Indeed, that is perhaps the most important lesson of the current crisis.
But at this point, I believe the debate has often taken one of two missteps.
The first is the view that austerity alone is enough, when public debt is partly a function of other structural problems.
The second of these missteps is the opposite view  -  that we must choose growth instead of discipline.
For growth to be sustained, it must be sustainable  -  and so policies to promote growth must work alongside policies to deliver fiscal discipline over time.
The right path begins in recognising of a more complex reality.
It begins in understanding that in Europe and beyond there are at least two problems  -  the problems of fiscal sustainability and the problems of stagnant growth in the real economy, often underpinned by structural weakness.
Understanding, in turn, that these two problems are related  -  as the longer economic growth remains stagnant, the harder the task of reducing public sector debt to sustainable levels.
It requires acknowledging that fiscal sustainability can't be achieved by immediate cuts which choke growth.
Knowing, in turn, that growth will not be forthcoming without credible commitments to discipline - without action now to adopt medium-term fiscal consolidation plans. 
Businesses will not invest and consumers will not spend unless they have some confidence in the future and the economy.
If the need to keep a watch on longer term fiscal outcomes is the headline lesson of the crisis, the opening paragraph is that Governments must ultimately pursue policies which markets accept are affordable over time.
Ultimately, profligacy and austerity are each symptoms of simplification and short-termism.
What is needed in contrast is a comprehensive and long-term approach.
So  -  this is a sketch of the real strategy required.
Third, let me sketch the action that should flow from this strategy.
Governments in countries where growth is weak should not be looking to aggressively cut public spending or raise taxes now  -  in real time as it were.
Rather, I want to encourage policies that can maintain or even expand growth in the short term, but that can also be fiscally responsible.
Governments' immediate fiscal decisions must be made with an eye on the future  -  something which has been missing for far too long.
This leaves room for sound policies which impart short-run boosts to consumption and investment and which also add to productive capacity in the long run.
This approach must be applied strictly. It cannot be used as an excuse to repent now and repent later. And open trade is vital too. 
Pressures for protectionist measures remain high in many countries  -  often badged as a means to keep jobs at home. 
Yet we know that open trade is ultimately vital for growth and jobs.
Broadly speaking, this has been the Australian way  -  the policy path our Government has chosen  -  not only in 2008 and 2009 but now as well.
We stimulated in the downturn.
When growth was threatened by the onset of the global financial crisis, our fiscal response was timely, temporary and targeted.
This was coupled with a clear set of fiscal rules to ensure we returned the budget to surplus when growth returned to trend.
We went for growth on the way in and we went for discipline on the way out once growth had returned.
This took form in deeds, not just words.
Our stimulus contributed around two percentage points to real GDP growth in 2009 and without it we would have lapsed into recession.
Now that our economy is showing strong signs of growth, we have brought down a Budget which delivers a surplus in the coming financial year.
The recent Budget did not just bring our finances back into balance.
It maintained a policy balance as well  -  shaped by a clear set of priorities reflecting our commitment to the wellbeing of all our people and our understanding of the long-term drivers of economic growth.
So in a Budget which contained total cuts worth around one per cent of government outlays, investment in infrastructure was maintained, spending on education and skills formation grew, and our investment in high-speed broadband continued.
Friends, each country faces circumstances more or less uniquely its own: its own weakness and failings, its own successes and strengths.
It's certainly true that Australia's circumstances are importantly shaped by forces beyond our domestic policy settings  -  like growth in Asia, like our rich natural resources.
It's also true that Australia's historically strong public and private institutions, particularly our strong financial system, have held us in good stead.
It's equally clear to me, however, that Australia's economic strength can be an important sign of optimism to countries of the world.
And that our policy response can be an important sign of the right way ahead.
This is why, in coming days, I'll be urging my European friends this:
Take note of the Australian way.
A credible commitment to fiscally responsible growth is the only way forward: Australia has shown this is the way.
Consider this - unlike the recession Australia endured in the early 1990s, when our unemployment levels reached 11.2 per cent, since the crisis of 2008-09 we have been able to create over half a million jobs.
Indeed since late 2007, Australia has created over 800,000 jobs.
To give you a sense of the scale of this achievement in Australia's medium-sized economy  -  the equivalent would be creating over 10 million jobs in the US or more than 13 million in the euro area.
Australia's unemployment is currently 5.1 per cent.
Australia's GDP is now about 9 per cent above pre-crisis levels.
By contrast, around half of the world's other advanced economies have not recovered their pre-crisis GDP levels.
And by growing the economy and avoiding mass unemployment, we've prevented social dislocation and the destruction of human capital that other advanced economies have seen in the past four years.
During our own recession of the early 1990s, the number of people starting apprenticeships fell by one third in just two years  -  and even worse, took thirteen years to recover to pre-recession levels.
That loss of human capital meant skills shortages during the recovery and long-term joblessness even during periods of sustained growth. 
We learned from that experience.
In 2008 and 2009, Australia's Government invested in skills as the downturn hit Australia and cost jobs.
So while we had a drop in training starts as the down-turn bit, falling nearly one fifth in 2008-2009, they took just two years to recover and today stand at record highs.
And we have done all of this while putting Australia's public finances in the most enviable of positions.
Last year, for the first time in our country's history, we were awarded a Triple A credit rating from all three major credit rating agencies.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends. If I can summarise:
Realism demands that we recognise global weakness.
It also allows us to recognise some signs of positive change.
A more sophisticated understanding of the connection between economic growth and fiscal discipline is emerging  -  and not before time.
That understanding must lead to action  -  to decisive new measures to restart growth, combined with credible plans and practical steps for medium-term fiscal discipline to sustain growth.
And while that action will take courage, it can be based on confidence  -  and we offer the Australian experience as a sign that your confidence can be well placed.
And having summarised, if I can address you as business leaders in particular:
The type of approach I have outlined is not easy  -  if it were, it would already have been followed.
Your governments can only do so much and they need your support  -  business leaders are as important to this process as political leaders.
In Australia's case, in 2008 and 2009 the business community and government worked together and it was this sort of cooperation that helped pull us back from the abyss significantly reducing the human cost of the crisis in Australia.
We've maintained that commitment to co-operation in the years since and it is driving our agenda in areas as diverse as deregulation, trade, innovation and reforms to tax.
Across the globe, this same cooperative approach is needed to drive growth and jobs. 
Everyone has to support reforms to drive growth.
Everyone who does will benefit from such reforms.
That is the lesson of Australia's way. 



Thank you very much to Bob for that introduction and it's a great pleasure to join Prime Ministers Harper and Cameron for this very special event.
One statistic really tells the whole story for all of us, and that statistic is that it is estimated that one billion people go hungry each day and we know that 1.4 billion men, women and children, 75 per cent of the world's poorest people, live in rural areas, and they are already struggling to produce enough food for themselves.
And yet the scale of the challenge is going to increase  -  by 2050 it's estimated that the world will need to feed an additional two billion people, as our global population reaches nine billion in total.
Now these are daunting figures, they are particularly daunting if you live  -  as we do  -  in the Asian region of the world, with so many growing nations.
These statistics about how many people are hungry are simply unacceptable and the world can't stand by and just watch this worsen, which is why today we are making a joint commitment to improve agriculture and to improve food production.
We know that we need better agricultural productivity, more open trade, greater investment, increased aid, innovation, research and development.
And we need a more sustained international effort and marshalling of all resources,  both public and private.
Ag Results will make an important contribution to meeting this challenge, by investing in creativity and harnessing technological innovation, we can improve agricultural productivity and food security in some of the world's poorest countries, for some of the world's poorest people.
And we can do that in a way that rewards real change, so I'm delighted that Australia will have an opportunity to play a role in this important new initiative and I'm very pleased to be able to announce that Australia will provide a contribution of $20 million.
We are a very efficient agricultural producer. We are in parts a very arid country, so we've got some relevant expertise and we're very happy to share.
I want to applaud the work of my colleagues here today, of Canada and the United Kingdom, and of course the important role of the World Bank in administering this fund.
And I'm looking forward to working with my other G20 colleagues over the coming day on tackling global food insecurity and delivering real improvements to the lives of billions of people around the world.
Thank you very much.



PM: Thank you very much, and it is a great pleasure to join President Lee and colleagues and friends for this very special event.
Australia is here because we share a vision of a world where growth can be greener, where we continue to see economic growth, and see the benefits of prosperity, but where we no longer have to see economic growth at the price of more and more carbon and more and more pollution and degradation of our environment.
I'm also here because we are a good friend of Korea, and I wanted to pay a special tribute to the leadership of President Lee that has brought us to this moment.
Without his leadership, passion and enthusiasm for this project, we would not be here.
This has been brought together very carefully, but also very quickly.
An organisation that has started to function, now becoming an international organisation today.
President Lee is a good friend of my country, but I believe, in initiating this Global Green Growth Initiative, he will be remembered as a friend of the entire world.
This is a major legacy from his presidency of Korea, and I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to him.
It's been a pleasure to be involved in the start of this organisation, and I look forward to Australia being involved as it goes from strength to strength.
Thank you. 



Thank you very much and thank you to our ambassador for that introduction.
Can I welcome the support of our co-hosts for this event: Norway, New Zealand, Tokelau and Brazil  -  thank you very much for your support.
If I was home in Australia I would commence this speech by acknowledging the Traditional Owners of the land on which we meet and in the spirit of reconciliation paying my respects to elders past and present.
We do that when we commence a speech in Australia because we want to acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the land.
We want to offer a spirit of reconciliation; it's an important gesture of respect made by our settler society now to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples  -  the indigenous peoples of Australia.
It's also an important recognition of the special connection between indigenous peoples and the lands and waters for which they are custodians.
We're all now more than familiar with the importance of this year as the 20th anniversary of the original Rio Earth Summit.
In Australia, this year marks another momentous 20th anniversary.
On 3 June this year Australia celebrated the 20th anniversary of the Mabo decision of our High Court: the finding that Native Title existed in our nation.
This monumental decision acknowledged the traditional laws and customs of indigenous people by affirming the right of Indigenous people to their lands under Australian law.
So it is particularly fitting that 20 years on from the Earth Summit, after 20 years from the Mabo decision, Australia today joins with our co-hosts to acknowledge and support the profound and continuing connection between Indigenous peoples and their lands and waters.
Today we acknowledge the immensely important work of indigenous peoples and local communities as custodians with knowledge and expertise linking ancient traditions to modern practices as guardians of the natural environment all over the world.
A custodianship, a connection and guardianship  -  each of these are important and intense because there's so many indigenous people and local communities, the health the local eco-systems is vital to their economic livelihoods and social wellbeing.
Last year Traditional Owners of the West Kimberley celebrated the inscription of 19 million hectares of their country on our national heritage list.
The three year journey to include the West Kimberley on this very important list was one of the largest and most complex listings and allowed Traditional Owners to share stories about their culture and ecological knowledge of country, which had been passed down from generation to generation over thousands of years.
All the peoples of the world owe a great debt to the world's indigenous peoples  -  for their custodianship over the land. And sea and all of the peoples of the world share a responsibility to join with the world's indigenous peoples to protect and nourish the land and sea in the future.
Protecting our shared environment is a shared task.
So I am particularly pleased that everywhere today people are building relationships, sharing knowledge and ideas for best practice on land and sea management.
Contributing to the social and environmental health of their own nations, and of the world. And the Australian government is determined to play our part.
So I'm delighted today to announce that we are seeking partners from across the world to work with us to develop an Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities Land and Sea Managers Network.
Yes, protecting our shared environment is a shared task, and so we must come together. That is the purpose of the Network.
In Australia indigenous peoples have played an important role in shaping many of the initiatives that we are proud of.
For example, the Working on Country Program, through which 700 indigenous rangers, funded by the Australian Government, manage the environmental and cultural values of over 1.5 million square kilometres of land and sea.
Over the next twelve months we will be working with our partners and indigenous peoples from around the world to explore and test ways of effectively and efficiently connecting land and sea managers across the world.
Next year, Australia will host an international conference with our partners.
We want participants to help shape this initiative from the ground up. And to develop practical activities that will form a strong foundation for this innovative and well-grounded international network.
I take this opportunity to commend to you our book One Place, Many Stories, Our Country.
It tells the story of the Government's programs supporting indigenous people to care for country, including the West Kimberley story as told by the indigenous people we partner with.
This book is testament to the resilience of Australia's indigenous people and their communities, and the significant contribution they have made to towards conserving and protecting our environment and biodiversity towards sustainable development and poverty eradication.
The Australian Government continues to work with Australia's indigenous peoples for sustainable development outcomes.
The Government invests in a number of innovative programs, the Working on Country indigenous rangers, Indigenous Protected Areas and Indigenous Carbon Farming, but recognise protecting the environment is a shared responsibility.
It is an Australian Government priority to support indigenous people and improve social cohesion.
Better health and economic opportunities, as well as conserve biological diversity and sustainable use of natural resources.
We are determined to ensure that the indigenous people of Australia share in the wealth created by the rich natural resources on their traditional lands.
That is our determination at home, and it is one we extend to the world as well.
We are committed to supporting the indigenous people and local communities to share knowledge and best practice, to conserve biodiversity and to use our natural resources sustainably.
And, most importantly of all, we are committed to doing this in partnership by bringing people together.
It is a very great honour to be here for this launch today.
Thank you very much. 



That I am here as Australias first female Prime Minister  -  alongside so many other female heads of government and several of the worlds most influential women leaders -  is only because of the extraordinary courage and tenacity of generations of women before us and because of the vision and commitment of the United Nations.
The Call to Action we heed today requires the full force of our focus and ongoing resolve.
Women and girls continue to bear the brunt of global challenges and inequalities.
Too many continue to be voiceless.
Too many continue to face unacceptable obstacles to education, employment and leadership opportunities.
The suffering of millions of women diminishes us all and obligates us.
How can we achieve sustainable development if we do not rectify these inequalities?
I commend the work of UN Women, under the valuable leadership of its Executive Director, Michelle Bachelet.
I support the Call to Action not only because the inherent dignity of women and gender equality is a right, but also because it makes profound economic sense.
By some estimates, two-thirds of the worlds illiterate people are women. Thats about 500 million women worldwide who cannot read or write.
According to UNESCO, more than 30 million girls worldwide are not even getting basic primary-level education.
Thats more uneducated girls than there are people in my entire country.
Failure to support womens education and employment equals billions of dollars in economic losses.
The Asia and Pacific region alone is losing up to 47 billion US dollars annually as a result of womens limited access to employment opportunities, as well as up to 30 billion US dollars annually as a result of gender gaps in education.
These statistics are graphic testament to the urgent need to elevate gender equality, they underscore the urgency of this Summit and they point to a serious economic blind-spot in boosting global prosperity.
If we are to achieve sustainable development, we must invest in womens education and training.
We must include women in the workforce.
And we must increase the proportion of women in high-level decision making roles.
Of the 193 members of the United Nations, only about 10 per cent have elected a female president or prime minister.
Women hold less than 20 per cent of the worlds parliamentary seats, in the Pacific only about 2 per cent.
As Michelle Bachelet herself has said: Democracy grows stronger with the full and equal participation of women.
As one of the worlds top 20 economies, Australia has a responsibility to contribute to womens equality globally.
Thats why nearly half of Australias aid expenditure in 2009-10 was in support of activities promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women.
Australia has a chance to show real global leadership.
I am delighted that from January next year Australia will actively further UN Womens work as a member of its Executive Board.
In September last year, I was proud to appoint Penny Williams as Australias first Global Ambassador for Women and Girls, to advocate internationally for the empowerment of women, particularly in the Asia Pacific region.
Im pleased shes here with us today.
Penny and I are personally committed to improving conditions for women, both in Australia and internationally.
We must forge greater country-to-country links on gender programs and learn from one another.
If the determination and commitment of the remarkable women here today can be amplified globally, we can make our Call to Action a pledge that will benefit generations of women to come. 



In the twenty years since the first Earth Summit, the world's great environmental challenges have grown.
Biodiversity is being lost.  
Many oceans and forests are threatened.
Carbon emissions and other pollutants have grown dramatically.
But in the same twenty years, the strength of the world's peoples to meet those challenges has grown too.
The global economy is twice as large as it was in 1992.
Economic growth has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty  -  building new lives of hope and building the capacity for communities to protect their natural heritage.
New technologies have emerged  -  and continue to emerge  -  driving green growth and clean energy use.
And even through difficult days, international determination for shared action towards shared goals has endured.
World leaders and their peoples have united in the past to achieve great environmental goals. 
We can do it again.
That is why Australia believes that this Conference must agree to develop and then work towards a set of Sustainable Development Goals.
Everyone here knows that collective action is hard  -  and global collective action even harder.
Because through global collective action we seek complex change, with imperfect knowledge, through difficult actions.
Everyone here also knows that setting goals is important.
Because when we set goals, we put before ourselves a task which is practical and empirical. 
To allocate resources with rigour  -  to define progress through a measure of our outcomes, not of our efforts or intentions.
And even when we set ambitious goals, which stretch our resources and test our resolve, we bring a precision and clarity to our work together  -  and in doing so we set the firmest possible basis for long-term success.
The Millennium Development Goals have transformed global thought and action against extreme poverty.
While much remains to do, it also true that much has been done.
Including being on track to halve the number of people living in poverty by 2015.
Yesterday I was delighted to accept an invitation from the UN Secretary General to co-chair the Millennium Development Goals Advocates.
And through this role Australia will do its part in the vital ongoing task of pursuing the MDGs.
Our own aid program is set to increase sixty per cent in the next five years.
This is an act of a generous people  -  but undoubtedly it is one prompted by a determined global project.
And we believe global thought and action against environmental challenges can be similarly transformed.
Friends, Sustainable Development Goals are not the only important objective we will discuss here.
The world needs new models of clean growth.
This must be grounded in an acceptance of this vital fact:  that a growing global economy also consumes more energy. 
Innovative new mechanisms like the Global Green Growth Institute, launched yesterday as an international organisation, can help.
Australia is playing our part, adopting market-based mechanisms like carbon pricing and investment for renewable energy technologies.
And as an island continent we understand the world needs a new focus on the health of our oceans and on theblue economy' they underpin.
Australia welcomes the resolve expressed here at Rio+20 to step up our efforts for our oceans. 
Australia is pleased to see recognition in this conference of the need for greater action to conservethe high seas and their resources.
We hope that all states will act urgently on this global issue by developing a strengthened oceans governance regime under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, including for the establishment of marine protected areas.
We welcome agreement to take action to eliminate fisheries subsidies that contribute to over-fishing.
And to address the affects of climate change on our oceans, including acidification.
Again, Australia is playing our part.
Supporting collective action to restore depleted fish stocks, conserve marine ecosystems and improve the science of ocean management.
With additional funding of $8 million to the Coral Triangle Initiative and up to $25 million to the Pacific Oceanscape Framework.
And establishing a national network of marine reserves, placing some three million square kilometres under conservation management.
Women must be able to fully participate in and benefit from sustainable development.
I welcome warmly the Summits affirmation of the vital role of women in all areas of sustainable development.
I was proud to be one of the Leaders supporting the Call to Action on Women earlier today.
Friends, with unity we can achieve change and that unity must embrace the world's women and all of our people.
And the world must listen to the knowledge of indigenous people and work with them as custodians of their lands and waters.
Yesterday Australia launched the Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities Land and Sea Managers Network, a forum that will help us listen and learn.
Friends, Rio+20 has brought us together for the third time in 20 years.
We are  -  each of us  -  greatly privileged to be present here today.
Let us greet this privilege with passion and perspective.
We are not here this week just to talk to each other. 
We're here to decide, to agree  -  and then to act.



Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
I welcome this historic opportunity to join with leaders of like-minded countries to renew our commitment to the marine environments of the world.
Oceans are the foundation of livelihoods, economies and cultures... a rich source of inspiration and life.
My island home Australia has a great stake in the life of our oceans.
The ocean is of profound innate value to Australians, who overwhelmingly live on the coast.
And Australia has a large stake in the Blue Economy.
So Australia welcomes the resolve expressed here at Rio+20 to step up our efforts for our oceans.
Our oceans are threatened.
Some threats vary in their size and scale in different regions  -  such as pollution, habitat destruction and overfishing  -  then there is the global threat that affects us all, climate change, including the significant resulting problem of ocean acidification.
And we know the ocean challenge is not simple.
Rather, it is a demanding and dynamic work of stewardship and ongoing management.
These are the challenges of sustainable development that governments have been attempting to manage for at least the last twenty years since the first Rio Earth Summit conference.
Australia is a committed guardian of the oceans for which we are responsible as a nation.
And we are a strong advocate for international action to ensure a sustainable future for the oceans of the world.
That is why my Government recently announced our plan to establish the world's largest and most comprehensive national network of marine reserves...
Putting more than three million square kilometres of Australia's oceans under conservation management.
Protecting the habitat for more than half of the world's species of dolphin and whale, home to six of the seven known species of marine turtle and containing thousands of species of fish.
The marine reserves network will include marine creatures and habitats ranging from the great reefs and green turtles of the Coral Sea to the deeps of the Diamantina Fracture Zone to the Blue Whales of the Perth Canyon off Australia's south-west coast. 
It ensures these remarkable natural treasures will be preserved for future generations and showcased for the peoples of the world and the many yearly visitors to our shores.
This achievement fulfils Australia's Johannesburg commitment to establish a representative system of marine protected areas by 2012.
We have a strong tradition of working with neighbours in regional fisheries management organisations, especially in the Pacific, to support the sustainable management of their oceans.
Australia is committed to providing practical support for developing countries to achieve their sustainable development objectives. We have doubled our Pacific fisheries assistance over the last four years, to about $11.7 million this year [2011-12].
This funding is helping improve food security in those communities that depend upon fisheries for their livelihood, by working with those communities to better manage coastal fisheries and near shore marine resources.
We have also provided more than $160 million over the past four years to help Pacific Island countries adapt to the impacts of climate change... as well as supporting Caribbean countries to reduce the marine impacts of climate change too.
I am pleased to announce today that we will increase our support for the Coral Triangle Initiative which has been led by my good friend President Yudhoyono.
Over 300 million people in Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Solomon Islands and Timor-Leste rely on healthy marine environments for food, livelihoods and economic prosperity.
The Coral Triangle Initiative is helping empower these communities to sustainably manage and utilise these resources.
We will provide a further $8 million in direct support over four years to augment the $5.4 million we have committed to date. This funding will provide support to Coral Triangle countries to help them effectively manage and utilise marine and coastal resources and ecosystems.
One project we are already funding is the provision of Landsat satellite imagery of Timor-Leste's north coast to the Timor-Leste government. This is a first step in mapping and assessment of the coastal marine habitats of Timor-Leste... a foundation for sustainable coastal management.
And I am also pleased to announce today that, over the next four years, Australia will provide up to $25 million to support the Pacific Oceanscape Framework being developed by the Pacific Islands Forum.
This will fund improved coastal resource management including for fisheries and climate change adaptation, support to Pacific Island countries to ensure maritime boundaries are internationally recognised as well as increased assistance to help address the threat of illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
Australia is proud to be an advocate for the world's oceans...
And we are proud to work with the peoples of the world who live near and depend on the marine environment; indigenous communities island communities or coastal communities.
The oceans of the world feed billions of our people, their wealth generates hundreds of billions of dollars and hundreds of millions of jobs.
They are a treasure we share  -  a treasure we can only benefit from by working together to ensure their sustainable future. 



I have been here in Brazil over the last few days attending the Rio+20 event and it's a great credit to Brazil that an international meeting of that magnitude has been held in this wonderful city.
During the course of being here over the last few days I've had the opportunity to meet again with the President of Brazil, President Rousseff.
We have come to know each other in the context of the G20 where we attend a meeting each year for economies to come together and talk about circumstances in the global economy.
But we met yesterday and entered a strategic partnership between our two countries which is a recognition that Australia and Brazil can have a more interlinked future.
I actually think that there are a lot of similarities between our two nations.
We both have a very sizable land mass, we are both great agricultural producers, we are both producers of minerals, of commodity that are in great demand in the world, we are both seeing the changes in our economy that that kind of demand for resources can lend.
Both here in Brazil and in Australia we can see a patchwork effect in our economy where the strength of your resources sector can mean some troubled times for other parts of your economy, for example manufacturing.
These are issues, policy issues, structural adjustment issues in our economy which we share and about which we can share perspectives.
We're also nations very focused on clean energy as part of what is going to power our future.
In Australia, we are focused on that through putting a price on carbon which will start on the first of July and focused on it through two new agencies we have developed as part of our carbon pricing package and Clean Energy Future.
The Clean Energy Finance Corporation, a $10 billion fund to partner with the private sector on clean energy developments and a body we're calling Arena which is really about supporting an catalysing the innovation we will need as a planet to see us move in an era of ever growing energy demands to cleaner and cleaner energy sources.
So I'm very much looking forward to the business roundtable discussion.
I think it is a nice symmetry that yesterday the President and I agreement on a strategic partnership between our two countries and here we are today, talking about making that very practical and real by building business to business links.
It's also terrific to be able to start that process off with a celebration.
So we shouldn't give the impression that we are starting this discussion on a clean sheet of paper as if there's been no work together in the past.
There's been good work together in the past but there is more to do to build on that work.
But here today we are seeing the products of the fruit of that good work together with the agreement between Pacific Hydro and Vale.
Pacific Hydro being involved in the development of wind energy here in Brazil and of course your company, Vale being such a global giant.
So this is a good partnership to be able to witness the signing of the memorandum and I think it starts as an example of what we can achieve together through this business dialogue and through the linkages between our two great nations. 



Well, friends after four years the preparation and the hard work are ending.
The countdown's on, London 2012 is now just an airline flight away.
And of course, for all these years, all, these months, every day, you've trained as individuals.
But today, with this official announcement, you become a team.
A team that bears the highest honour to which any sportsperson can aspire  -  you get to wear the green and gold and compete in our country's name.
Selection in this team means many things, but above all it means this.
You are the fastest, the strongest, the best  -  161 athletes who have been found worthy above all your colleagues and peers.
I know you will pile up a formidable medal tally, just as you and your mates have done before at Beijing and the Games before that.
We're looking forward to hearing that Australian national anthem time and time and time again.
But our cheers won't just be for the success of our country.
As Australians, we will also be cheering for your efforts and your victories, and the determination you have each shown in  individualjourneys.
Of course, these journeys began long before today.
They started in your backyard, your local park or the high school gym, where the joy of sport captured your hearts and imaginations.
Your journeys continued through the setbacks and the victories of district meets, state knockouts and national championships; through injuries, gruelling fitness tests and countless early morning training sessions.
And through your passion and persistent hard work, these journeys have brought you here to the honour of representing your country at the highest level of world sporting competition.
Now of course, it's Britain we're talking about, so you'll have to put up with a fair bit of bad weather and bad food.
I'm a ten pound Pom, so I'm able to make jokes like that.
But truly, I think our UK hosts have worked hard over the past seven years to present a Games that will be professional, friendly and welcoming, with great venues in one of the world's top sporting cities, which is also the place where the Paralympic movement had its beginnings back in 1948, so in that sense it's a homecoming as well.
I know you'll do great things in London, and if I can give just one quick plug to the work that we've been doing with you, I'm proud of the $13 million of funding we've provided this financial year plus the initial funding of $400,000 for the Green and Gold Project to strengthen ties between Paralympians and the Australian Institute of Sport.
As well as supporting the wheelchair rugby team to attend the final competition in North America before the Games.   
We've also got our eyes on Rio, I've just returned from there, with initial support for the development of future coaches and support staff in preparation for the next Games in Brazil.
All that talk about funding and support really means one thing  -  the Australian people are with you.
And I don't think there's a single taxpayer out there who would begrudge a single cent.
Before we go, I just want to mention one more thing that's close to my heart, the Prime Minister's Paralympic Challenge, which commenced in May and will run all the way up to your closing ceremony.
The Challenge gives kids the opportunity to try a range of your sports, get active and healthy, and perhaps even share the same dream you have.
The dream that one day they will enter a great stadium in a great city under an Aussie flag cheered and admired by millions and join the ranks of the world's best.
In a few short weeks, that's exactly what you will be doing.
And whether we're in the stands at that stadium or in our lounge rooms at home, Australians will be watching for that flash of green and gold racing through the water, or on the court, or on the track.
And we'll understand why the Olympics and Paralympics go inseparably together because they are both about a commitment to excellence and being the best that you can possibly be.
So thank you for your hard work, for your commitment.
Congratulations on your selection and good luck in these final weeks of preparation.
A proud and a grateful nation is just waiting for the moment we get to see you shine.
Thank you very much. 



I advise the House that a major rescue operation is underway right now, 107 nautical miles north of Christmas Island and 100 nautical miles south of Indonesia.
As this Parliament sits, we have planes in the air, merchant vessels on the scene, and HMAS Maitland has arrived.
The information I will give the House now is the latest information available. Of course the information can be changeable - it is always difficult to get accurate information when a search and rescue mission is under way.
But I am advised that this morning, at approximately 6:17am Australian Eastern Standard Time, the Australian Federal Police received a satellite call from a vessel, possibly in distress, two nautical miles north of Christmas Island.
Information about the vessel was immediately passed to the Australian Maritime Safety Authority.
Border protection command vessels rushed to the scene, but found nothing two nautical miles out from Christmas Island.
I am advised that at approximately 7:30am, the Australian Federal Police received a further call from the vessel, advising that it was actually 107 nautical miles north of Christmas Island.
This has prompted a major search and rescue effort, as I'm sure the House can imagine.
I can advise that a number of merchant vessels responded to the Australian Maritime Safety Authority's calls for assistance this morning.
By approximately 10:30am Australian Eastern Standard Time, two merchant vessels had reached the estimated location of the vessel in distress.
The Australian Maritime Safety Authority advised that a merchant vessel reported seeing a vessel stopped in the water with people on board wearing life jackets. No people were reported as being in the water.
At 11:37am Australian eastern standard time, the merchant vessel reported that the vessel was sinking and that there were people in the water.
I am advised that the merchant vessel did what it could to assist at that point, including deploying its life rafts to render assistance.
I am advised that the HMAS Maitland arrived on the scene about an hour ago. I am also advised a Royal Australian Air Force maritime patrol aircraft carrying life rafts has flown to attend to the scene.
I am advised that there are approximately  -  our numbers obviously can change, but there is reason to believe that there are around 123 to 133 people on board.
As we speak, my best advice is that 123 people have been rescued.
Madam Deputy Speaker, clearly then the lack of precision about the numbers of people on board does not enable us to be precise at this time, as to anyone who is unaccounted for.
Standing here in the Parliament now, I simply don't know. Australia has been called on once again to lead a very major search and rescue operation.
Once again, Australian men and women have raced to help, they've gone to the rescue zone, they've gone in search. Once again, we acknowledge their courage in doing so.
Madam Deputy Speaker, in view of these events and in view of the events of last week, I want to say to the Parliament now most sincerely that I believe the time for the party divide on this issue is at an end.
We have seen too much tragedy. And I can't, and I don't believe other Members of Parliament can now sit here with the prospect of more tragedy to come.
In these circumstances, I have requested that Mr Oakeshott be prepared at this moment to bring on his bill on immigration amendments so that the House can now, I hope, by leave and in agreement deal with it to finality.
As the House may be aware, that bill has finalised its second reading, Deputy Speaker, and consequently we would just need to deal with the third reading stages of the bill.
I actually think it's of significance to this Parliament that this is a bill brought to this place by an Independent Member of Parliament.
Given all of the circumstances here, Deputy Speaker, I as a Labor leader would want to walk from this place saying no-one won, no-one lost, we just got something done.
And I think an Independent member's bill gives us all the opportunity to do just that. To go from this place saying no-one won, no-one lost, it wasn't about party politics, it wasn't about who's got what sort of party ticket in their pocket - we just worked together do get something done.
Deputy Speaker, I have reason to believe that the bill, moved by Mr Oakeshott may be in a position to command majority support in this House of Representatives.
I seek to have that tested now and the bill dealt with to finality.
To the Leader of the Opposition, I understand that he is of a different view from me on the substance of the policy here and that is as it may be.
But I can undertake to the Leader of the Opposition is if Mr Oakeshott's bill passes this House of Representatives, if indeed it passes this Parliament, then what the Government will do on that legislative foundation stone is what the Government offered to the Opposition some time ago.
That is, that the Government would enact a policy position that the Opposition has advocated for quite passionately, and that is the opening of a detention centre on Nauru, as well as the Government taking the appropriate steps to enact its arrangement with Malaysia.
I would also undertake to the Leader of the Opposition that we would pursue in good faith the review of Temporary Protection Visas and their deterrence value that we offered to the Opposition some time back.
That we would do that in circumstances where we would make all reasonable efforts agree with the Opposition the identity of the reviewer or reviewers and the terms of reference of the review and that there would be full transparency to the Opposition at every stage.
That is, we would not seek to have the outcome of that review come back to the Government first. On the day I received it the Leader of the Opposition would receive it too.
In these circumstances, Deputy Speaker, I am now going to ask this Parliament by agreement to make some procedural arrangements and then I'm going to ask this Parliament I would hope by agreement to give a majority to the bill moved by Mr Oakeshott.
Can I also undertake to the Opposition that bringing the bill on at this time is not about whether or not we have Question Time today.
At the option of the Opposition having finalised Mr Oakeshott's bill, then I am well and truly content for us to have Question Time of the usual duration so that the Opposition has its ability as is appropriate to ask questions of the Government in this place.
It's in that spirit and in those words, Deputy Speaker, that at this stage I would ask leave of the House to move a motion to enable the Migration Legislation Amendment (Bali Process Bill 2012) to be called on and considered immediately. 



Pak President, welcome to Australia. 
It is so good to see you again.
Your visit to this country two years ago and your address to our Parliament in Canberra was a moment of enormous significance in the history of our two nations.
I will long remember your words that day: 
We are not just neighbours, we are not just friends ... we are strategic partners.                                                                             
And the decisions made during that visit will be remembered too.
We are here this week because two years ago in Canberra our Governments agreed to a new annual leaders' meeting, agreeing to a closeness of co-operation we share with only a handful of countries.
Last year was the first meeting in Indonesia and this year is the first on our side.
It's especially fitting that we are meeting in Darwin, Australia's northern capital.
This city is at the centre of so much of the great and growing economic, strategic and humanitarian co-operation between Indonesia and Australia.
And so I want particularly to pay tribute to the people of Darwin, to the Government of the Northern Territory and my friend the Chief Minister Paul Henderson.
You have done so much to welcome us here this week and to foster relations between our two peoples.
So tomorrow, we will meet as strategic partners with much work to do.
We share a full agenda  -  our dialogue will be a powerful symbolic expression of good will.
But it will be much more than that too.
We will have our sleeves rolled up and there will be very real business to do.
Ours is a busy working partnership. 
Travel and study, investment and trade, are all growing, with great opportunities to grow more in coming years.
Our Governments exchange high-level visits every few weeks.
Indeed between APEC, the East Asia Summit, the G20, ASEM, it sometimes feels like you and I meet personally every few weeks!
Our Defence personnel work closely together, in the region and beyond.
Among the thousands of Indonesian peacekeepers serving in the some of the most difficult UN missions are those who serve alongside Australians in South Sudan.
Wearing the blue beret of the United Nations which you yourself, Pak President, wore with such distinction in the Balkans in 1995.
I remember that a few years later, in 1999, as a new parliamentarian, I was privileged to be an election observer in West Timor, witness to the birth of modern Indonesian democracy.
The patient enthusiasm of the people I saw, waiting to cast their precious ballot, is something I will never forget.
That was the 1990s. 
You and I have both come a long way since then  -  our countries have come a long way together as well.
Some of the issues for tomorrow are hard  -  terrorism and drugs, people smuggling, natural disasters management  -  threats as difficult as any in our shared history.
It's a remarkable tribute to the relationship between our nations that now, when faced by these hard issues, we turn towards each other, rather than turning away.
I believe problems which once threatened to divide us now only bring us closer together.
For two such diverse and dynamic nations to achieve a relationship of such stability and maturity is the real proof, Pak President, that we can meet the goal you set in Canberra in 2010: to build a fair dinkum partnership.
The people of these waters and lands have been neighbours for tens of thousands of years.
The Commonwealth of Australia was a friend of the Republic of Indonesia from the moment you proclaimed your independence in 1945.
Tomorrow, we meet sharing a partnership.   
And, Pak President, your share in this partnership, as a great neighbour and friend of my country, is high indeed.
I look forward very much to our discussions tomorrow with you and your delegation.
And we are so very pleased to be hosting your visit here in Darwin.  



Thank you very much.
I have been delighted to welcome President Yudhoyono and his senior ministers to Darwin for the second annual leaders meeting. It's the first one to be held in Australia.
President Yudhoyono and I participated in the last one in Bali last year. It's been a special delight to be able to welcome the President to Darwin, which is the city of Australia closest to Indonesia, our closest capital city.
Indonesia is a close friend and neighbour and one of our most significant partners. It's a true strategic partnership of great importance to both our countries.
We are living in this Asian century of remarkable transformation and change. And in this time of change, Australia very much welcomes the transformation that has taken place within Indonesia itself.
It's now a strong and vibrant democracy, an economy that's growing rapidly and a leader in the region and beyond.
Today, we've had broad-ranging and productive discussions. The President and I have had the opportunity of meeting together personally and then conducting discussions around a table with our ministers.
We have agreed, through those discussions, that as close neighbours, we should continue to enrich our understanding of one another's country and culture.
I am therefore delighted to be able to announce that we will significantly increase the number of work and holiday visas available to Indonesians, up from 100 to 1,000.
I am also delighted that the second Indonesia/Australia dialogue will be held in Sydney on the 24thof September. That will be looking at a change of ways of strengthening the links between our two peoples.
And we're pleased today to welcome a new partnership between Charles Darwin University and Indonesia's Nusa Cendana University and that is going to build on research and education links currently in place between the Northern Territory and eastern Indonesia.
Mr President, we have a very strong interest in each other's prosperity and I have appreciated our discussion on how we can work together to strengthen the prosperity of both of our nations.
We are looking forward to the first round of the Indonesia/Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations, which will take place ahead of the annual Trade Ministers Meeting later this year and that will provide great impetus to our commercial relationship.
I have also taken very careful note of the President's interest in developing greater Australian engagement in the economic development of eastern Indonesia and we have agreed that our relevant ministers, particularly for Australia's behalf, our Minister for Trade, will work together to take that forward with Australian business leaders.
I am glad too that we could talk about trade in agriculture, including cattle. We look forward to continuing to support Indonesia's food security through our export trade and support for Indonesia's own beef industry.
I am also very pleased that Australia has contributed to a World Bank program for economic resilience in Indonesia through a $1 billion contingent loan to help safeguard our economic stability.
We also discussed how we can enhance our security cooperation and defence cooperation.
I am delighted that we signed a memorandum of understanding for the transfer of four Australian C-130 aircraft to the Indonesian air force. And we're looking forward to signing our Defence Cooperation Agreement in the near future.
The President and I discussed the importance of the Bali process in combating human trafficking and people smuggling.
I welcomed the strong cooperation we have with Indonesia on people smuggling, including Indonesia's law enforcement efforts against people smuggling syndicates.
We also discussed opportunities to strengthen our maritime cooperation, including in search and rescue. And I'm pleased that a delegation of Australian ministers and senior officials will visit Indonesia for discussions on maritime cooperation.
Australia will also work with Indonesia's search and rescue agency to help strengthen its ability to communicate with merchant vessels during safety of life at sea incidents. And we will explore an exchange program of search and rescue specialists.
President Yudhoyono, let me take this opportunity to thank you for the work that our two nations are doing together.
To thank you for your leadership in our region of the world, and to thank you too for the work that we have been able to share together at the G20, where you bring such a strong voice for Indonesia and on behalf of our region, more generally.
We can build on that partnership in upcoming years, in particular as Indonesia hosts APEC in 2013 and Australia hosts the G20 in 2014.
Mr President, a busy agenda is in front of us, we've agreed much and there is much to do. Thank you for making the time available to come here with your esteemed delegation, to spend this time in Darwin.
It's been a special opportunity for our two nations.
I thank you.



Sixty-five years since Bill McKell last held elected office in this State, his story still has much to tell us.
His was a truly remarkable Australian life  -  from our meanest streets to the very summit of our society  -  or as his biographer put it, from boilermaker to Governor-General.
He was born in the same year as our grand old party  -  1891.
Raised by a hardworking single mum, he left school to help support his family at 14, before winning a prized spot as an apprentice in the noise and heat of the workshops in Balmain.
There he gained more than an apprenticeship in boilermaking  -  he gained an education in Labor values.
Bill McKell rose through the union movement and the Labor Party through his ability, his decency and his integrity.
At just 26 he became a member of the NSW Parliament representing the inner city neighbourhood of Redfern.
As an MP, he put himself through law school and became a reformist Minister for Justice.
He served as Party Leader and Premier  -  uniting NSW Labor after the disastrous Lang split and leading the State through the Second World War.
In doing all that he created the model of steady and methodical, practical and progressive government which became the template for his great successors  -  like my own Foreign Minister, Bob Carr.
In Government, McKell expanded or created miners' pensions, workers' compensation, work safety laws and annual leave.
He founded the State's first conservation department, saved the Macquarie Marshes wetlands and established Kosciusko National Park.
He extended electrification to rural areas, and sat down with Chifley to help create the Snowy Scheme and the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement.
A lifetime later, these achievements still benefit the people of this city and this State.
Why?  Because great reforms endure.
Friends by next year, pricing carbon will be part of the lived experience of more than 860 million people worldwide.
Polluters are paying a price  -  in Ireland, $24 per tonne of carbon  -  in Sweden, $145 per tonne from fossil fuels for heating.
It's a reality seen and understood by more than 500 million Europeans, more than 200 million Chinese and starting this week, more than 20 million Australians.
Now, the facts are on the table  -  indeed, on the kitchen table.
For years, our people have heard extraordinary claims about what carbon pricing will be like.
Now, Australians can finally judge for themselves.
This is a point we reach, eventually, in debate about every reform.
Progressive governments always try to make important changes for the future.
Someone always says it'll be the end of the world.
When reform becomes reality  -  we find out who's right.
The doomsayers said that universal superannuation was one of the biggest con jobs ever foisted by government on the Australian people  -  that the Mabo and Wik decisions would veto mining investment  -  that our Fair Work Act would cost jobs and threaten the economy.
But Australians judge reform, not on the rhetoric, but on the reality. 
After months of the doomsayers predicting chaos and preaching despair, the reality can now emerge. The simple facts can become clear.
First, that our carbon price will cut carbon pollution.
Because we now have a price on carbon, Australia's pollution will fall by at least 160 million tonnes a year in 2020  -  a cut equivalent to taking forty five million cars off the road.
All the evidence shows that this is the right contribution for Australia to make to the global effort now.
Our world faces real and urgent threats from climate change like rising sea levels.
A one metre rise would see a million people in our region on the move.
Our country faces very direct threats too: worsebushfire conditions and droughts, more days of extreme heat, increased cyclone intensity, bleaching of coral reefs.
Climate change is a global issue that threatens us here, so we are doing our bit.
Second, our carbon price will not only cut carbon pollution  -  it will strengthen our economy.
I can see the world changing to cleaner sources of energy right now and I know we must not be left behind.
There is a clear threat to our future prosperity if our economy does not keep up.
I don't want all the scientific and technical expertise we have  -  especially in solar research and development  -  only to benefit companies in China and India, Europe and the United States.
I don't want precious investment funds to be lost to more energy-efficient economies.
I want Australia to develop and benefit from new technologies  -  whether that's energy efficiency in our commercial and industrial buildings and our homes  -  whether that's on our farms and in our food processing factories  -  even in our landfills and down our mines.
And the sooner we begin making the transformation, the sooner the benefits will be felt.
Did you know the Chinese company Suntech  -  whose CEO, Dr Zhengrong Shi was educated at the University of New South Wales  -  became the world's largest producer of silicon solar modules in 2010?
Or that a decade ago China had no sizeable wind turbine makers  -  and now, Chinese makers occupy four of the top 10 slots in the industry worldwide?
Individual examples of a worldwide transformation: in 2010, global investment in generating renewable energy such as solar and wind power overtook investment in generating energy from fossil fuels.
We've got to start the transformation to cleaner energy now 
With our price on carbon in place we can already forecast $100 billion flowing into renewables by 2050, the power of a market mechanism driving investment in the power of the earth, wind, water and sun.
And revenue from the carbon price is funding complementary measures.
This is a transformation incentivised by a price signal and supported by public investment.
The $10 billion Clean Energy Finance Corporation will operate in the so-called market gap', opening up new opportunities for business to invest in clean energy technology and infrastructure. 
Financing viable start-up projects, ones which in their nature find it difficult to attract bank finance  -  like community wind farms, modelled on those already built in Hepburn in Victoria and Denmark in Western Australia.
The Clean Technology Fund will deliver thousands of projects to help manufacturers modernise their businesses and cut energy use.
And the Carbon Farming Initiative will support new methods for farmers to reduce carbon emissions and earn extra income.
Under the Carbon Farming Initiative Australian farmers have the opportunity to save carbon through proven methods  -  like environmental planting of native species, destroying methane generated from manure in piggeries and carrying out savanna burning early in the dry season.
And more opportunities are on the way. 
Right now private industry and our leading scientific bodies, like the CSIRO, are working to research and develop new ways to cut carbon emissions from the land sector  -  as well as new methods to measure on-farm carbon savings.
Our Solar Flagships program is supporting AGL Energy and First Solar's solar projects at Nyngan and Broken Hill.
These will be amongst the largest solar projects in the world.
The Nyngan project site alone will occupy an area equivalent to two Sydney Olympic Park precincts.
The two projects combined will require over 2 million solar panels, they'll cut greenhouse gases by over 400,000 tonnes each year and  provide enough energy annually to supply over 33,000 average Australian homes.
Now, our economy has had a carbon price for only a few days.
But business decisions have been made with the carbon price in mind for more than a year.
And the sum of all those decisions is this: the Australian economy is strong.
Since the carbon price passed Parliament at the end of last year, the economy has grown 1.3 per cent, household consumption is up 1.6 per cent and new business investment is up 5.5 per cent.
In fact since the details of the carbon price were announced earlier last year, the economy has grown 3 per cent, household consumption is up 3 per cent and new business investment is up twenty per cent - the biggest comparable lift in investment in seventeen years.
There's no better proof that the scare campaign is nonsense. And the economic bottom line: with a carbon price in place, by 2020 our economy will create 1.6 million jobs.
Third, the carbon price is not only good for the environment, it is not only good for the economy but because we are a Labor Government, when we make change, we help working Australians to make ends meet.
I am acutely aware of the financial squeeze felt by many Australians. Not just families, but by pensioners and singles as well.
Wages are growing and overall inflation is under control but parts of the household budget are under tight pressure.
Bills like electricity and insurance add up. People often tell me that some of the small good things in life  -  an outing with the kids, a family holiday at the end of the year  -  are starting to feel like luxuries that are out of reach; that the uncertainty in the world economy means that they feel the need to save more and pay off debt more quickly as well.
And that while they hear about a mining boom, they don't see the benefits in their home.
So our Labor Government is determined to help.
The schoolkids bonus, the childcare rebate, paid parental leave record pension increases and we've kept interest rates low. 
These are all making a difference.
And now the carbon price is funding real assistance for working Australians.
Household assistance payments which will continue to rise over time  -  these are permanent increases, indexed like other government payments.
Australian families and pensioners have already received an initial payment in May or June to help with their utilities bills.
This pay day, all taxpayers with incomes up to $80,000 will get a tax cut, with most getting a tax cut of at least $300 a year.
This week, the tax free threshold is tripled: people earning $18,200 or below will now pay no tax.
That means that almost a million people won't pay any tax out of their next take home pay  -  including many students who work part-time  -  along with 600,000 working women.
Single pensioners will get $338 more every year and couple pensioners get $510 more every year combined  -  and these higher pensions will be maintained in future years.
Put it another way: the average impact of the carbon price on electricity bills will be $3.30 this week.
And this week, we are providing an average of $10.10 to each household, in tax cuts and payment increases.
In fact about 6 million households  -  two thirds of all households  -  will get tax cuts and increased payments which fully cover their expected average extra costs.
This reform is building us a clean energy future  -  with a stronger economy  -  where working Australians get help to make ends meet.
That's how Labor does reform in this country. That's the kind of reform that our country deserves and that's the kind of reform that endures.
I know we can do all those things  -  because we have done it before. 
Look at our decisive action in the global financial crisis: we saved jobs, stayed out of recession and got back to surplus.
And who would have thought then that we'd be where we are today: where we wouldn't change places with any economy in the world.
And the same kind of decisive actions are what will ensure that in the decade to come: we'll be making a difference to the climate  -  jobs will be growing  -  working Australians will find it easier to make ends meet and the carbon price will be in place.
The history of our country, our politics, our party, is this: great reforms endure.
And in the end, everyone says they were a great idea.
That day may seem a long time away while we are in the midst of this debate.
But in twelve months' time, how smart will it look to be promising to bring to a shuddering halt investments being made in solar energy and other renewables?
Or to throw people who work in new, cleaner businesses out of their jobs and on to the streets?
How smart will it look to take tax cuts off working people who are better off because of them?
Particularly when the Opposition promising to do these shocking things believed in putting a price on carbon when it was in Government?
Indeed when every other living Liberal leader has previously supported putting a price on carbon?
Perhaps history is a better guide than today's histrionics.
One of the proudest days of Bill McKell's long life must have been 17 October 1949.
When as Governor-General he went to Adaminaby with his great Labor mate, my great predecessor, Prime Minister Ben Chifley, to fire the first blast of the Snowy Hydro Scheme, the vast project he'd done so much himself to prepare.
The Snowy is one of the great nation-building achievements of the twentieth century in Australia.
It's become an icon of one of our greatest periods of shared national purpose and achievement and surely our most beloved renewable energy project.
But when Chifley was putting the Snowy bills through Parliament, the then Opposition Leader Menzies quibbled and wavered and found excuses to raise questions.
He was too sophisticated a figure for an aggressively negative campaign of the kind we see from the modern Liberal Party  -  but my conclusion from the record is that had Menzies been Prime Minister by then, he would have proposed a very different Snowy Scheme, if he'd proposed one at all.
Well, the Snowy had already begun when Menzies became Prime Minister in 1949 and Menzies didn't turn off the tap.
In fact his Government worked for years to finish what Chifley and McKell had begun.
One of the proudest days in this nation's life was the passage of the Native Title Act in 1993.
Surely no single piece of Australian legislation has done more to right wrong than that great law.
I was privileged to speak in Parliament last month on the twentieth anniversary of the High Court's Mabo decision and I saw the Liberal leader say, in essence, that the opponents of the Native Title Act which followed had been proven wrong.
Including, presumably, the handful of his own MPs still in the House who said, no when that great reform came to a vote in 1993 and none of them will say they would vote against it today.
That will be the story of pricing carbon  -  because really, that's always the story of reform.
In the end, the doomsayers always have to admit they were wrong.
In the end, the only question is whether it takes them twenty years or two.
And in the end, great reform endures. 



I thank Joy Murphy Wandin for the welcome to country, and join her in honouring the First Australians with whom we share this land in a spirit of Reconciliation.
Mr Adam Gilchrist, Chair, National Australia Day Council; my Parliamentary Secretary, Senator the Hon. Jan McLucas; other distinguished guests; and a special welcome to so many former recipients of the Australian of the Year awards here today.
We all shine in the light of your generosity and selflessness.
Friends, today we ask Australians to once again take a moment to think about who has caught their hearts and minds this year, and who should therefore claim the title of next year's awards across the four categories:
 * 	Australian of the Year
 * 	Senior Australian of the Year
 * 	Young Australian of the Year, and
 * 	Australia's Local Hero
The Australian of the Year awards remind us of the importance of maintaining and enhancing national traditions which celebrate all that is wonderful and all that is defining, about being Australian.
And about acknowledging and recognising what is best in us through a representative few.
These awards, part of our national fabric now for more than half a century, remain a salient reminder that it is people who make a nation.
Those who are born here.
Those who move here for a better life.
We should never take for granted, not so much that we are a lucky country, but that we are lucky to live in this country.
We owe it to ourselves and to those who dream of sharing the country with us to be our very best and to shine a light on those who inspire us, challenge us and make us want to be better people.
People who hail from all walks of life.
And people who may be your neighbours, your co-workers, your peers, your mentors, your competitors or someone you have simply admired from afar.
People who shine in science and medicine, philanthropy, sport, the arts and much more.
From young Australians who inspire us with their enthusiasm and the hope they bring to our future.
To senior Australians who bring such depth of experience and dedication that we can only marvel at their enduring and ongoing legacy to the community.
And the local heroes who want nothing more than to make a difference in their own community and see change for the better.
Often they want no fuss.
Well I am sorry to say a bit of fuss is needed.
Which is why I now officially encourage all Australians to take advantage of this opportunity to share the stories of people that they know, or know of by nominating them for the 2013 Australian of the Year Awards.
And therefore shining a light on someone they think we should all see.
Thanks to our major sponsor, the Commonwealth Bank, for more than 30 years of support for the Australian of the Year Awards.
And without further ado, it is now my pleasure to declare nominations for the Australian of the Year Awards 2013 officially open. 



PM: I want to acknowledge first and foremost the work of Shayne Neumann, in his capacity as the Member for Blair, and Bernie Ripoll in his capacity as the Member for Oxley, in bringing us here today.
We literally wouldn't be here for this announcement if it wasn't for Shayne and Bernie. And both I and Parliamentary Secretary Catherine King can talk about their persistence, indeed insistence, that we came to this community and made a difference for its future. So thank you for your very fierce advocacy for your local community.
These two great local representatives share a community vision for this place, and in this wonderfully planned community where so many people make their home, it's a vision that's shared broadly across the community and has been very driven by Maha and his team.
It's a vision of a community where people can come and make their lives and be able to get the services that they need. So we've looked out on the great schools, and I've had the opportunity to talk to young Holly about being a school kid in this community and the great school she goes to.
But there has been something missing, and that has been the ability for people to get care for cancer in their local community.
Unfortunately too many Australians are going to confront the problem of having cancer during the course of their lives, and all of us know from our personal experience from our family and friends people who have had to confront cancer and getting cancer treatment.
For local community members now, that can be not only a daunting personal experience with all of the fear and all of the stresses and strains that come with having an illness, but it can also be an experience about spending a long time on roads away from family and friends looking for treatment where you can get it, but because it's not available in your local community you have to travel.
So people have had to travel to the south of Brisbane, to the Mater Hospital, they've had to travel to the Princess Alexandra Hospital. Indeed some people have had to make the huge journey to Toowoomba in order to get treatment.
And if you just stop and think about it for a moment, what it would feel like, to know that not only do you have to think about your health and deal with all of those issues of confronting illness, but to get the treatment you need, the chemotherapy or whatever treatment is required, you have to travel a long distance every time you need that treatment.
So that has been a real service gap here. Shayne and Bernie have consistently said that service gap needs to be filled, so I am very proud to be with them and my colleague Catherine King to announce today that we will commit over $21 million to building the Springfield Cancer Care Centre right here. In fact it's going to be right across the road.
I want to acknowledge the generosity of Maha and his team in donating the land to put it on. That is really a contribution of around $2 million. Thank you very much for your generosity in making that happen.
This money will mean that a cancer care centre will be available for this community. Where they already come for services, they will be able to get that support if they need it during a very difficult time of their lives.
I think this is good news for the local community, I know if fits in with the local community's vision about its future.
We're here today because the local members Shayne and Bernie have understood the need for this new service, and it really is a great delight to be here and able to announce that we will fund it and get it done.
So thank you very much to everyone who's come to celebrate with us, and I'll hand back to Shayne who is able to say that he's been arguing for this for a long period of time.
I was joking before if you don't get confronted by Bernie and Shayne in the corridors in Parliament House, every time you look down at your phone there's a text or a message! So it's all worked, thank you for your advocacy, and good news today.
Thank you very much. 



PM: Thank you very much and thank you for making me feel so welcome. And thank you for having me in your place. It's been a special night to be here and to look at the arts centre, to see the dancing and to get to talk to people who make this community so strong. So thank you very much for welcoming me here.
I'm joined here by Gary Gray, who is a very frequent visitor and when he's not here, he's always talking up this community and the changes that are happening here and the real strength that is in this community.
Now I'm here, basically because I love visiting here. I had the opportunity to come around two years ago and thought then that it was a very special part of Australia and wanted to come back. Gary's been urging me to do so, and I'm going to enjoy the time that I've got here this evening and tomorrow.
I'm going to enjoy it in part, because what I see here is really a vision of the kind of future we want overall for our nation. You've taken your place and you've made sure that it's got stronger. You've taken your place and understood the benefits of diversifying its economy. And it's great to be joined by the representatives of the local chamber who have worked so hard to do that.
You've taken your place and you've understood the opportunities for it in this changing century that we live in. This century of change in our region; a century of economic growth in our region. And our whole nation, but particularly this part of our nation, is well-placed to prosper from those opportunities.
So whether it's the mining, whether it's the tourism, whether it's the food industry, whether it's the very exotic and wonderful things that happen here, whether it's the stuff that actually goes to making up everyday life, the stuff that we always need, your economy is supplying it, and going from strength to strength.
So I want to congratulate you for that.
I also want to congratulate you on the work we've been able to do in partnership through the East Kimberley Development Package. We've worked with the State Government, but most importantly, with you to see change in this region. And the dimensions of the change, I think, are very profound.
It's been delivered because of the vision and hard work that has happened here locally. It's one thing for us to be in Canberra and to take the decisions necessary to make funding available. It's another thing for that funding to go to the right projects, to have them delivered on time, to have them delivered through a community-driven process, to have them delivered in a way which means that they will be meaningful for this community, not only this year but for many long years into the future.
So, I want to congratulate you on all of the work that you've done to make sure that that development package makes a long-term difference to this community.
I'm looking forward to having the opportunity to just say hello to as many people as possible, and to have a chat while I'm here; to see the future issues for this community through your eyes. But once again, thank you for making me so welcome.
I did want to say one thing to you tonight, which is a bit of news for the community that I hope will be received as good news. And I particularly wanted to say it with Jeff Gooding here, from the Shire of Wyndham East Kimberley and to thank him for the work that he did on the recovery taskforce when you faced floods.
And I hope it will be received as good news that we, the Federal Government, will provide $14 million towards the replacement of the Big McPhee Bridge, which was forced to close because of those floods in March 2011, due to the major structural damage that was incurred.
The Western Australian Government is committed to providing the remaining $11 million so once again, I think, another example of the kind of partnership we're now so familiar with  -  Federal Government, State Government, working with this community.
So I'm looking forward to the rest of the evening. I had a great time here when I came in 2010. I well remember John Farnham on stage  -  he was looking pretty hot by the end of the night. I mean that in the temperature sense, not in any other sense.
A bit of a cooler evening this evening, and a good evening to spend some time talking and saying hello.
Thank you very much. 



I was here in February, and since then you've had a real triumph with the exhibition to honour Patrick White's centenary, which closed relatively recently on 8 July.
That was a vivid reminder that this building's life-force is drawn from words  -  millions and millions of them.
Words that make you think; words that make you wonder; words that may even change your life; words by Australian authors, many now long gone.
But our cultural institutions are not just collectors of heritage. They are part of a living tradition of artistic excellence.
They are home to artists and writers who believe in their work and who believe in their nation and its creativity.
They believe that our nation's very soul is our creativity.
In these awards  -  and in this the National Year of Reading  -  we're celebrating excellence in writing.
Writing is perhaps the loneliest of art forms, and one of the hardest.
Indeed it was Patrick White who said: 'I am constantly meeting ladies who say, how lovely it must be to write, as though one sat down ... after breakfast, and it poured out like a succession of bread and butter letters, instead of being dragged out, by tongs, a bloody mess, in the small hours.'
So, writing a solitary and sometimes a frustrating pursuit.
We've all seen the films where the writer crumples up endless pages or faces a typewriter with a blank sheet sitting forlornly trying to get the words to come.
Today, that might be a computer screen or a tablet but the demands it imposes on the writer's creative resources are the same.
Fortunately for us, there are many a-ha' moments and we are richer for it  -  that richness that comes from the intensity of the craft of writing.
It was John Keats who said, the excellence of every Art is its intensity'.
For writers, that means drawing upon your experiences and your emotions  -  something that can often be painful and even physically draining.
It's important for you to know how much we value what you do and how much we appreciate what your families go through as you do it.
The consolation lies in the fact that your words will still be here long after we are all gone.
They will have formed an indelible imprint capturing what mattered and what caught our collective imagination in the early 21stcentury.
Friends, the Prime Minister's Literary Awards are now in their fifth year and I'd like to think they've already become a tradition that will be nurtured and respected by all who occupy this office.
This year, of course, we've introduced a range of reforms to make the awards even better.
We've introduced a poetry category that has received an amazing 56 entries in its first year  -  and that's not surprising.
Because, a country that can produce the likes of Kenneth Slessor, Les Murray and Judith Wright certainly deserves a poetry prize and I'm very glad in these awards we now have one to celebrate Australian writing and Australian poetry  -  a very special addition.
This year too, at Minister Crean's insistence, we've split the prizes so the short-listed nominees all get a sum of money as well, and that's well deserved too.
We've also recognised Australia's great historians as part of the Literary Awards.
And, moving with the times, we've opened up the Australian History Prize to formats other than books  -  things like multimedia and videos.
In this age of tablets and smartphones, it's not the format that matters  -  it's the words.
The words that speak to us, inspire, anger, inform and challenge us and perhaps even make us cry.
If you can do those things  -  and the writers in this room most certainly do  -  then we live in a very fortunate country indeed.
To the winners and nominees  -  my warmest congratulations, you make us rich in the things that count the most.
And now it's on with the announcement of those winners.
Thank you very much. 


Melbourne
E &amp; OE proof only
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Friends, we are here today because of those who are not.
We are here to be the voice of those whose voice was stilled by the greatest crime humanity has ever known: the Shoah, the Holocaust.
It was of such moment, of such horrific magnitude, that the world can and should never be the same again.
A part of us must always be on guard, always aware, because we know the depths to which even educated men and women  -  an advanced civilisation  -  can, and did, sink.
How quickly it can happen. How irreversible the consequences. How deep the legacy of grief.
In the decades since the Shoah, this community has so often come together to pay tribute to those who were lost.
In more recent times, I have been called upon by the Jewish community, to honour the memory of two extraordinary individuals who fought against the darkness.
Two extraordinary stories that give us an added dimension of the Holocaust and its lessons for us as human beings.
I was deeply moved by the story of Irena Sendler.
She saved some 2500 Jews, mainly children, from the Warsaw Ghetto and death at the hands of the Nazis.
As Irena herself described, I sent most of the children to religious establishments.  I knew I could count on the Sisters.
Extraordinarily, she carefully preserved the names of each of those children by writing them on pieces of paper and burying them in jars.
Eventually Irena Sendler was discovered, imprisoned by the Nazis and brutally tortured.
They broke her legs, but not her spirit.
Indeed, she never betrayed a single life, and after the war, retrieved her shards of paper and tried to unite survivors with parents.
But almost always, the parents had been exterminated at Treblinka.
I could have done more, Irena said. This regret will follow me to my death.
But she did so much, and her singular acts of courage properly saw her named as Righteous Among the Nations.
The memory of Irena Sendler has been recently honoured here in Melbourne through a magnificent concert inspired by her selfless deeds, and sponsored jointly by the Governments of Poland and Israel and their Ambassadors to our country.
This year, we are also marking the centenary of the birth of Raoul Wallenberg  -  so well known as one of the most heroic and courageous individuals of the 20th century.
His story has been often told but never grows dim.
Raoul Wallenberg single-handedly used his position and authority as a Swedish diplomat in Nazi-occupied Hungary, to save, in just a six-month period, 100,000 Jews from murder.
On one night alone, by defying the orders issued by Adolf Eichmann, Mr Wallenberg saved 70,000 lives.
For these reasons, Raoul Wallenberg has also been recognised as the Righteous Among the Nations by Yad Vashem in Jerusalem, and has been named an honorary citizen by the State of Israel, the United States, Canada and Hungary.
I am very glad that their stories have been recounted here in Australia this year, because we must never fail to appreciate the meaning of selfless and tireless devotion to human life, and the meaning of moral courage.
Indeed, the stories of Irena Sendler and Raoul Wallenberg pose for us the question whether each of us would have shown the same determination to act under such horrific circumstances, even though others did not.
Fortunately it is a question most of us will never have to face.
But there is one moral and civic response to the Holocaust that does concern us all: we must ensure the Holocaust remains as a sign and warning for all generations  -  especially as we face the possibility of a world without the survivors.
Therefore we must be the witnesses for the witnesses.
We must be the custodians of the records, the stories, the artifacts and the places that denial can never overcome.
This is why this museum, which I was privileged to visit this afternoon, is so important.
The more time passes from the Shoah, the more imperative it is to ensure that memories do not fade. That history is not re-written. That the Holocaust and its meaning is represented to every generation. That we never fail to bear witness.
This is the mission of the Jewish Holocaust Centre and its counterparts in Australia and around the world.
But no place speaks more starkly or hauntingly about the Shoah than Auschwitz-Birkenau.
It is, perhaps, the most infamous place on Earth.
The train tracks with their deadly terminus.
The barbed wire enclosing the stark rows of flimsy wooden barracks.
The sign that immortalises history's most brazen lie.
And the low, looming buildings with such wickedness at their heart.
Friends, in one sense, Auschwitz is so painful it would have been easier to demolish it.
But retaining that place was the harder, better choice.
Auschwitz-Birkenau is an irrefutable fact. It cannot be airbrushed from cognition. It cannot be denied.
It is a place that must command our attention and timeless moral concern.
All the camps where the Holocaust was perpetrated are places that make us profoundly uneasy, profoundly uncomfortable  -  they are places that afflict our souls.
And they are places where our conscience must reside.
So friends, when the Prime Minister of Poland wrote to me requesting a contribution from Australia to the Auschwitz-Birkenau Foundation, you know what my response would be.
With the support and advocacy of Mark Dreyfus and Michael Danby, I'm proud to say Australia has joined the community of nations by contributing half a million dollars to the Foundation's perpetual fund.
The intention of the fund is simple: to ensure that the Foundation will never want for money so that Auschwitz-Birkenau will always be conserved.
We make this gift because Auschwitz is a place and a story for all humankind and for all time.
From it and the other camps, six million deaths cry out through the ages for justice and for remembrance.
The enormity of their loss must not be forgotten.
So we pledge, once more, here today, joining with people of goodwill in every country to say, never again. Never, ever again.


Sydney 
E &amp; OE proof only
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Too often the cost of electricity is talked about in two completely separate public conversations.
One conversation is about power bills.  There's a very concrete discussion going on at the kitchen table, in the school carpark and in the front bar, about this.
Power bills have become the new petrol prices: not just an essential of life that always seems to be going up, but a vital commodity, where what we consume each day, or pay every quarter, seems beyond our control.
The other conversation is about energy markets.
A very complex discussion at Cabinet tables and around board tables  -  dividend policy, reliability standards, peak demand.
A discussion both informed by, and leading to, the commissioning of a great deal of detailed work on the nature of the problem of higher prices, its causes and possible solutions  -  from officials, governments, industry and analysis.
While that talk has gone on, prices have gone up  -  have gone up far and fast.
But now, we are better placed to act. 
First, because much of the vital policy work is nearing completion, including the Federal Government's Energy White Paper.
Second, because the round of price determinations starting next year will begin setting prices for years to come.
And thirdly, and importantly, the last Council of Australian Governments meeting convinced me that there is an opportunity to act through COAG before the end of this year.
This begins with a very human problem.
People are paying a lot more  -  in some states, bills have gone up almost a thousand dollars in just a few years.
It is very clear that working Australians, pensioners, the sick, the aged, people who need the most help, the people Labor Governments are elected to represent. These are the people who are feeling the most pressure.
Meanwhile, some states, like New South Wales and Queensland, are doing very well out of this financially and their revenue from some electricity assets is growing much faster than in the private sector.
So it is also very clear that the States can, and should, do more to cut future price rises.
All this means power price increases need to slow down and there is an opportunity to do that now.
An opportunity finally to get the facts on the table  -  and then to get something done.
We have a chance to make our clean energy future a smart, affordable energy future.
It's absolutely natural that public discussion of power prices today should include the facts about the price on carbon.
Australia needed to put a price on carbon pollution: to tackle climate change, to seize a clean energy future, using our bountiful access to solar, wind and other clean energy, to not be left behind as the world acted.
When the government priced carbon, we forecast an electricity price impact on consumers of around ten per cent  -  a forecast which has now become reality.
So yes, Australia did need this ten per cent increase in retail prices. And help with tax cuts, family payments and pension increases.
Achieving a price signal for big businesses to change the generation mix to cut pollution. Funding investments in a clean energy future.
That was in the national interest. 
Most Australians pay no more as a result. 
But while we were developing and delivering the clean energy future package and putting a price on pollution, something else was happening at the same time.
Carbon price excluded, the average electricity bill went up by at least 48 per cent in the last four years.
And ordinary businesses and households have been entirely uncompensated for these significant cost increases.
This is the difference: Australia needed a carbon price.
Australia did not need price increases of fifty per cent or more for households over the last four years  -  and Australians can't afford the same kinds of increases over the next four years.
Now, I know there are complex factors driving aspects of these price increases.
The catch-up from years of infrastructure underinvestment.
The growth in peak demand.
Changes which have raised reliability standards and which have come at a high price.
And of course, there's the pragmatic, patchwork design of National Electricity Market itself  -  a complex mix of co-ordination and competition, public and private ownership, national and state regulation.
But, recognising that complexity, appreciating the conflicting objectives and incentives, and taking into account the long-term factors at play, I want to say very clearly: the last four years' price rises cannot continue.
Fifty per cent price increases in many states over four years  -  linked to demonstrable inefficiencies in resource allocation in the market.
Or in this state, New South Wales  -  nearly seventy per cent increases.
With half the extra cost due to increased network charges.
People are paying much more for the so-called poles and wires  -  not to produce electricity but just to move it around the system.
A long term trend of price increases like this cannot be sustained.
Not economically, not socially.  No market can sustain this, let alone a market which delivers one of the essentials of life.
It's a huge cost to our economy.
Just last Friday, the Productivity Commission released its advice on the sixteen reform priorities which business leaders, state and federal leaders asked it to review earlier this year.
The Commission found that effective implementation of energy market reforms is the single most likely to deliver gains. If there are large network inefficiencies and excessive regulated prices, then there would be major resource savings and national benefits from lower electricity prices. Even small price reductions would have significant impacts.
That's the Productivity Commission's economic advice.
And it's a real threat to fairness in our society.
As a recent AGL Energy review noted, while wealthier households can cut power costs through more efficient devices and solar panels, the poorest customers are exposed to the full cost of the increases.
As a Labor Prime Minister, I feel very deeply concerned about the plight of pensioners and poorer families who spend a greater proportion of their income on power.
The less disposable income you have, the harder it is to manage large lumpy bills, like power bills.
And buying clean energy appliances  -  everything from new and more efficient whitegoods to rooftop solar panels  -  is plainly easier if you earn more.
Solving these kinds of problems in people's real lives is exactly the kind of thing Labor Governments are elected to do.
So I am determined to get a plan in place to prevent unnecessary price rises in future.
It is also important Australians have the facts to explain why this is happening.
At the bottom of all this is this economic reality: the market for supplying energy services in Australia needs to be more efficient.
Take the current handling of peak power demands.
One quarter of all retail electricity costs  -  more than $500 a year for a typical family  -  is spent to meet the costs of peak events that last for less than two days each year in total.
One sixth of our national electricity networks  -  $11 billion in infrastructure  -  caters for peak events that last for barely four days per year.
It's like building a ten lane freeway  -  but with two lanes that are only used or needed for one long weekend.
It's a very good thing that more Australians can afford air conditioners to cool their families on our hottest days, in fact it's partly a tribute to their own hard work and the prosperity we've built through reform.
It's a very bad thing that the supply side response to this is so deeply costly and inefficient, and it's a clear argument for reform to go further.
Or take the current approach to ensuring secure supply.
Here, there are big forces at play.
Large scale electricity infrastructure established in the post-war period is reaching the end of its useful life and this is a very substantial component of the network.
My challenge, to industry, regulators and state governments, is this: your job now is to ensure that you respond to this with efficient investments.
Investment which gets the balance right between affordability and reliability.
We know that isn't happening today.
New South Wales has already asked the Australian Energy Market Commission to investigate how consumers value this trade-off between reliability and cost.
The review of Queensland's electricity network chaired by Darryl Somerville in 2011 found that smarter reliability requirements could reduce the requirement for capital expenditure by suppliers and ease the price impacts on consumers.
Most compelling of all, the Australian Energy Regulator itself, in the State of the Energy Market Report 2011 released in December last year found the regulatory framework has led to some price increases that are difficult to justify consumers are paying more than necessary for a safe and reliable energy supply.
That's the independent regulator, part of the ACCC, speaking.
At the heart of all this is a simple market design problem: a clear regulatory incentive to overinvest in infrastructure and pass on costs to consumers.
Indeed, in many places around Australia, the State Governments both own lucrative electricity assets and regulate parts of the electricity market.
The comparison between the private and public owned utilities shows the States are doing very well financially out of this arrangement.
Following the recent round of price increases, revenue for network enterprises wholly owned by State Governments is up fifty per cent over the previous five year period.
This was in a period when revenue for the rest of the market players grew less than thirty per cent.
In other words, revenue to the States went up nearly twice as fast as revenue to the private network operators.
This has hit consumers hard.
A typical household in New South Wales is paying over a thousand dollars more for power every year compared to four years ago.
And while due to a number of factors electricity demand is falling overall, families and pensioners are facing higher prices  -  even for those who are trying to do the right thing and cut their use.
For too long, some State Governments have been increasing their revenue at the expense of the family electricity bill  -  that has to stop.
Given all those facts and given the regulator itself says the present regulatory framework has led to price increases which are difficult to justify, how can we doubt Australians are paying more than they should for electricity?
So let's act.
First, let's give people more power over what they pay for power.
A typical suburban house today doesn't even have smart meters to measure peak demand, much less to help people control it.
People need and deserve more choice and control.
Already, the Federal Government has taken important steps to do this.
But we want to put even more effective control in the hands of energy users, in the hands of working people, pensioners, owners of small businesses.
The National Energy Customer Framework includes strong protections for Australians who are struggling to pay their electricity bills.
These include requiring fair contracts, better information in bills, and making sure customers know what they are signing up to when they begin a contract.
It also means people who can't pay their bills will get consistent protections across Australia  -  including the option of payment plans.
And as part of the Customer Framework, the Australian Energy Regulator operates its Energy Made Easy website, providing objective, free comparisons to help customers get the best energy deal for them.
The runaway success of the Big Electricity Switch campaign is a great example of the benefits this approach can achieve.
Entrepreneurial spirit, media support and online information have enabled nearly a quarter of a million Australians to be offered discounts as high as 16.5 per cent.
It's a remarkable story  -  a terrific tribute to One Big Switch and to the Daily Telegraph which has sponsored the campaign.
And it's a remarkable illustration of what supported and informed consumers can achieve.
But today the full benefits of the Customer Framework and the Energy Made Easy website are confined to Tasmania and the ACT, where governments have signed up.
The other States must now get on board.
The States should sign up to these protections for households  -  and this extra information  -  today.
Particularly New South Wales, where legislation has actually passed the Parliament, but the State Government continues to delay commencing and implementing, for no apparent reason.
Alongside the Customer Framework, the Australian Energy Market Commission's Power of Choice review is looking at how the design of the National Electricity Market can be reformed so that consumers have more control.
The Commission is due to make practical recommendations for changes to regulation which can help families, business and industry make informed choices about the way they use electricity and manage their bills.
All of us  -  Federal and State  -  must commit to acting on their recommendations as soon as they are made.
And the Federal Government is directly investing in demonstrating smart electricity networks.
In time, these will allow people to have far greater control over their own household electricity use, along with far more information about their own needs.
People should be able to use what they want when they want it and cut out expensive services they don't need.
Picture a smart phone app that means you can load the clothes dryer or a dishwasher before you leave home  -  and then turn it on when a low cost rate becomes available during the day.
Or consider new technology so home air conditioners can switch themselves between high and low power mode, keeping a house cool while limiting use in high-cost periods of peak demand.
Or in the same way many people use a travel agent or a mortgage broker to get the best bargains, small businesses could hire a clean energy adviser to analyse the data about their business's energy consumption and find a better deal. 
In Newcastle, under our Smart Grid Smart City trial, the CSIRO has installed battery storage devices and gas fuel cells, hooking up existing solar systems and linked electric vehicles to real time energy information
In South Australia, ETSA is building on its early success with a more sophisticated suburb-scale trial of the practical technologies, operating arrangements and cost structures.
These technologies  -  smart, affordable, clean energy technologies  -  are real and they are operating now.
These are important new ways for consumers to control what they pay for power.
There must also be new pressures on network operators to cut costs.
As I noted earlier there is a great deal of detailed work already in train in energy policy, above all, our White Paper. 
But leaders have a responsibility to set the goals and the timelines for that kind of detailed policy work.
So at COAG we asked for two very specific pieces of work to be done.
First, for Energy Ministers to make sure these reviews focus on achieving efficient future investment which does not result in undue price pressures on consumers and businesses.
That is, we made the policy goal for all the existing work crystal clear: slow down the price rises.
Second, for the inter-jurisdictional Business Advisory Forum Taskforce which COAG set up in April this year to tell us what additional changes are needed to the design of the electricity market to ensure investment is efficient and to protect the poorest customers.
Today I want to drive this momentum for change further.
I've written to the Premiers and Chief Ministers to say that I want all that advice drawn together and on the table for First Ministers to consider  -  and then I want solutions on the table for COAG to adopt  -  by the end of the year.
So when COAG meets next  -  I will be urging the Premiers and Chief Ministers to consider the advice and to act.
The inefficiencies that exist in the current system cannot be ignored.
Even decisions made this year will reap benefits over several years to come  -  so we must get on with the job now.
I want real decisions this year to guide price determinations beginning next year.
My preference is to work co-operatively with the States through COAG to deliver a better outcome for consumers.
We won't lightly use the big stick of regulation, of stronger powers for the Energy Regulator and the ACCC.
But it's a stick we hold and which we'll use if required.
One way or another, we're going to get this done.
This is the future of the price of electricity in Australia.
More efficient investment.
More empowered consumers.
Real delivery from the States and Territories on our agreed priorities for change.
Much slower price rises over time.
This is the future of Australian energy market reform.
New ideas and new understandings of the possibilities smart technology holds.
Energy services, not just electricity supply.
Clean generation, productive distribution, efficient use.
A rational, efficient price signal to cut carbon pollution.
Remaking the mix of power generation ... and remaking the networks which deliver power services.
More renewable energy, more distributed generation ... better management of demand.
And in turn, this is a smart, affordable, clean energy future.
The bad news is, today, Australians are paying more than they should for electricity, because of the price rises that have come without a dollar of assistance.
The good news is, we can do something about it.


Sydney 
We're all here in a spirit of joy and celebration to say we are so proud of you, welcome home.
We want you to be back in the warm embrace of the Australian nation and your family and friends.
So it's a tremendous opportunity to be here to share this moment.
You've only been gone a few weeks but it's been so vivid, each of those exciting days. It probably seems to many of you like it's a lifetime.
Some, like Malcolm Page, have capped a brilliant career with gold, and he's being welcomed back in fine style by his family here including young Alex, holding up his sign, welcoming his uncle back.
Others, like Brittany Broben, won unexpected honours and congratulations to her  -  such a young woman, such a fine achievement.
And yet others almost reached the top of that mountain only to find that there's another summit for them to climb.
But no matter what medal you're wearing around your neck today, or whether you're not wearing a medal at all, you are carrying the greatest of honours.
You're Olympians.
That's members of the elite band that was founded by Edwin Flack in 1896.
What an amazing thing, to have the opportunity to go to the Olympics and to represent your nation.
We're proud of each and every one of you.
Each of you is able to say something none of the rest of us will ever be able to say.
You'll be able to say, I was there. I wore the green and gold.'
Others will admire or envy you, they'll listen to your stories, they'll read of your triumphs and disappointments, but only you will ever know what it was like to actually be there.
And for those who have been quick to rush out with the criticism, London in 2012 has been a remarkable result by any measure.
Tenth on the medal tally out of 204.
Our nation, still in the top ten.
Still fighting, still striving, still challenging the world and proudly doing it.
So as you get to move back home, whether Sydney's your home or you're on an onward journey today, I want to say to each and every one of our athletes thank you for your efforts, thank you for your sacrifices, thank you for all the perseverance and discipline that got you there.
You've given something incredibly special to your country.
And to those with dreams and ambitions still to be fulfilled, have a good rest and then get straight back to the training.
You did great things in London in 2012, and I know you're going to do even greater things in Rio in four years' time.
Welcome home, one and all. It's an absolute delight to be with you this morning.
Thank you very much.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
 [ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Friends, welcome to Canberra. I love your conference logo  -  the whole world in your hands. It's so true.
You teach our children. You build our future. The whole world is in your hands. No pressure!
Timing is everything  -  and you do meet in interesting times. This year will bring the biggest decisions on school education in the life of this Government.
Of course, you know that we are all working together through an exhaustive and consultative process as we prepare those decisions. And as we work through those issues together, there's a balance to strike.
When you are talking about something as important as our children's future, our nation's future, you take the time to get it right  -  and we are.
The current system of schools funding is tremendously complex, and that means that even changes to simplify it have complex elements.  So this does take time.
I've worked hard in Government to maintain a close and continuing partnership with your sector .
But keeping that discussion open and real can mean we stay at the table longer to get better outcomes together.
Equally, I know you need to plan for the years to come.
I also know that you're looking ahead right now to budget for your schools in 2014 and beyond. 
So all this does take time, but I know that this needs resolution soon.
These days of preparation will over the next few weeks lead to days of decision and action.
Given all that, I'm not here today to tell you exactly what our decisions will be.
Instead, I want to tell you why those decisions are so important to me and how we will keep working together to achieve change.
Everyone should be clear about my purpose in commissioning the Independent Review of school funding.
This Labor Government has doubled federal education funding.
This Labor Government has driven change in schools harder and faster than any before.
This Labor Government commissioned the Independent Panel to deliver further detailed advice.
Their Report is an opportunity, one we deliberately created to give Australian children a better education.
To give our children better schools. To build on Labor's achievements in education for our children in the past five years.
Because Australia doesn't just need a Gonski response. Australia needs a plan for continuing improvement in our schools.
My goal is not simply to reform school funding.
My only interest in school funding is using school funding to drive improvement in school performance, to get all of our children a higher quality education.
And yes, reform is a good word, one which describes much of what Australian Governments must do, one which describes some of the most important aspects of my own agenda in office.
But in truth, it's not a word which is underused in Australian politics.
Our plans for schools are about improvement, not just change.
Australia doesn't just need a reform to the school funding system.
Australia needs a plan for school improvement, a plan which gives schools the resources you need to get better results for the kids you teach.
So those are the plans which we are preparing now. And they will be good news for independent schools. You know that, because you know me.
For a long time, my highest goal in politics was to be Education Minister and to make a difference in schools  -  2007 brought me that opportunity and you saw what I did with it.
Above all  -  you saw that as Minister, I made a difference for every school. For Australia's sake, I had to.
When I became Education Minister in 2007, school standards in this country were slipping.
By 2009, international tests like PISA, the Program for International Schools Assessments, showed we had been falling behind.
Our top students weren't doing as well as they had  -  and the gap between the top and bottom performing students was growing.
Worst of all? We weren't even measuring our results nationally.
At the end of 2007, I couldn't have told you which were the schools that needed the most help.
That was just unacceptable to me.
Our kids were falling behind.  Our economy was missing out. Other countries were sprinting past us in the education race.
And we didn't even have the stopwatch to tell us how fast we had to run to catch up.
So Federal Labor got stuck in.
We conducted new tests and published new information  -  for every school.
NAPLAN: annual, nationwide measures of how our students perform in the core skills of reading, writing and maths.
The My School website: rich, comparative information about NAPLAN results and school communities, giving parents and students the information they need to work with you.
We strengthened support for the basics  -  for every school. Specialist literacy and numeracy teachers, homework clubs, personalised learning plans and stronger links with parents and the local community.
Paid for through the $540 million Literacy and Numeracy national partnership and the $1.5 billion Low SES School Communities national partnership.
We lifted teacher quality  -  for every school. The first ever professional standards for teachers and principals, ongoing opportunities for professional development and programs to attract top graduates to the profession.
Agreement to a performance and development framework for every teacher  -  which will include an annual performance appraisal, clear feedback and support throughout their career. Paid for through the $500 million Teacher Quality National Partnership.
We began giving principals more powers to lead their schools. An area in which we can all learn much from your sector's success.
More powers in the hands of school principals and the local community through our Empowering Local Schools scheme.
Almost 1000 schools will have more say in staffing, budget, governance and maintenance over the next two years.
We started developing a new national curriculum  -  for every school. Every Australian student should benefit from the same high quality teaching and learning, no matter where they live.
We invested in new facilities  -  for every school. We have delivered computers to every high school in the country  -  more than 900,000 of them  -  and now every student from years 9 to 12 has access to digital learning.
We have built new classrooms, libraries, science labs and school halls through our hugely successful Building the Education Revolution program.
I am sure when they built the Library at Alexandria there was someone who wrote an editorial questioning the cost. Funnily enough, if so, the editorial hasn't been preserved for posterity, but the memory of that library has been.
The bottom line?
Under Labor, federal education funding doubled in four years. And we didn't do it by division, we did it by addition. Every school benefitted. 
This wasn't something I could do alone or the Government could do alone.
In all these changes, independent schools have been more than just engaged and co-operative.
You've supported the national education agenda  -  in many areas, you've led the way.
Precisely because I've pursued ambitious plans to lift standards in all schools, I've needed the support of leaders in all schools to get it done.
Many of the changes we've pursued have been controversial  -  most of them have been opposed in sections of the Parliament  -  some of them have been criticised in sections of the profession.
So I am incredibly proud of the way that as we've gone through this big journey of change, independent school leaders have been a partner with us, with me, in every step of the way.
You have never said go slower or don't go as hard, every stage of the journey you have urged us on, because you want to see the best for the kids you teach at every stage of their education.
Programs like the National Partnership for Low SES School Communities and the Literacy and Numeracy National Partnership helped more than 1 in 5 independent schools.
Two hundred and twenty five independent schools in communities around the country got extra help to address the needs of struggling students.
Even though it has meant a lot of work for you, new requirements, new demands on your staff and on your parents, you've always been there for the big changes that go with the extra resources.
Your sincere and complete support for progress in Australian schools has been vital to the success of our approach. And it has been a success.
Take that National Partnership for Literacy and Numeracy. And in year 3 Reading, 70 per cent of all schools funded under the program improved. 
In Year 5 Numeracy, 75 per cent of schools funded under the program improved.
Or take our investments in indigenous education under our great national project to Close the Gap.
Between 2008 and 2011, the proportion of indigenous students achieving at or above the national minimum standard significantly increased in Reading in Years 3 and 7, and in Numeracy in Years 3 and 5.
And NAPLAN results from 2008 to 2011 show that Australian school students are now making good progress across the board and results are lifting across the country.
For example, Year 3 students have shown statistically significant improvements in reading, grammar and punctuation.
And Year 5 students have shown statistically significant improvements in numeracy.
These things were achieved by Australian students, teachers, principals and schools, because the Australian Government helped all of them.
Not some schools, all schools. Not some kids, all kids.
That's my record as Minister and Prime Minister: I've never looked at a big independent school in an established suburb and thought that's not fair.
I look at a big independent school in an established suburb and think that's a great example.
I've never looked at a new independent school in a coastal town and thought why aren't those kids at the public school.
I look at a new independent school in a coastal town and think I'm glad this Government is giving those kids the support and standards they need.
You know that I've supported you and your schools because you've seen me do it: when I've been with you in your classrooms and your staffrooms, delivering the new computers and opening the new libraries.
I've spoken about BER's huge importance to you. Consider the scale of our program in its historical context.
Think back to that first, famous Menzies science laboratories program which gave so many independent schools a historic boost.
A genuine new frontier in Australian policy, it was an investment in your schools which, in today's dollars, would be valued in the hundreds of millions.
Our Building the Education Revolution program made an investment in your schools worth easily ten times as much. So I'm proud of the partnership and the friendship we share.
It's common to discuss all these questions of public support for the schooling of individuals in the specific context of education.
But I actually think this is a much bigger question of the relationship between citizen and nation.
I believe Government support for a child's education is one of the entitlements of citizenship.
No matter how rich or poor your parents are or where you go to school, our nation should provide a basic degree of support to your education: because you are Australian, because you are part of the whole.
Now naturally, one way this idea of an education entitlement derived from citizenship takes concrete form is in school funding.
There should be Australian Government support to educate every Australian child  -  in the poorest and most remote school  -  at the best known and best resourced school.
That's why our funding model will recognise the diversity and uniqueness of Australian schools and will support the choices parents make about the best school for their child.
That's why our plans will deliver funding security for your schools. All students, regardless of school, will be funded on a consistent basis for the first time.
Every independent school in Australia will see their funding increase under our plan.
This plan will lift school standards, not school fees. And this universal commitment, this idea of a citizen's entitlement to education, is not just how I see the funding question  -  it is how I see the work on school standards as well.
As Prime Minister of this country, I feel a deep responsibility to ensure every child in Australia has the education they deserve.
I feel accountable to every Australian parent and child to do everything I can to make sure their school is a great school.
And not just to seventy per cent of them  -  to a hundred per cent of them. We govern for all and when I worry about standards and work to improve them I do that for all.
But of course, in the end, while I'm the Prime Minister  -  you're the principals.
I can take the national lead and make the case for change, Government can increase resources and make detailed plans  -  but only you can lead the teachers and teach the kids.
That's why I've worked so hard to work with you  -  and why your partnership with Government is so important to us.
In the end, our plans to improve Australia's schools are all about helping  you improve Australia's schools.
So we'll support principals, lift teacher quality, expand parent information, increase funding: because that all helps you.
The key to the success of our plan to improve every Australian school is the plans you make to improve your school.
That is why  these coming weeks of decision and action on school standards are so important to me.
Because we have a chance to do more than just end the era of the public-private debate: we can start the era of the school standards debate too.
Every student will matter.  We will have the best teachers in every classroom.  School principals will be outstanding leaders.All students will study the same curriculum.  Every school will be a digital school. 
Parents and the community will know more about their local school.  Decisions will be made locally.  Schools will become community hubs.
Every Australian school will have the money it needs to do a great job. Struggling schools will get extra help. Put it another way.
I never forget Unley High, a great school then and now, where so much of my success in life began, but where other kids sat at the back of the room and did make work and were left behind.
It's thinking about the needs of the kids both at the front and the the back of the room that drives me on to improve Australian education. And I know the kids who struggle aren't only in Unley High.
They're at Saint Spyridon College at Unley  -  a terrific Greek Orthodox primary school, got a lot of green in NAPLAN 2011  -  one of your members.
And there are kids with real need at St Monica's up in Walkerville, and there are kids who need help at Scotch, too  -  there are.
There are world-beating independent, Catholic and public schools in every part of Australia.
There are independent, Catholic and public schools in every part of Australia which need more Government help.
There are kids with real needs, in every Australian school. There are kids with real gifts, in every Australian school.
Our vast and diverse nation defies every stereotype and clich and our thinking about the future of education should never be governed by anything but the real best interests of every child.
They are why we are going to get this done.



E &amp; OE
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Women of the Australian Women's Land Army, I've been told to refer to you as the Land Army Girls. So from the Head Girl, I'm very pleased to be with you today for this very, very special occasion.
I'm pleased that so many of you were able to come to Canberra. I'm sorry it's so cold, but we've put some sunshine on for you to show you that with the sun shining you are going to receive a very warm welcome.
And you're here in Canberra to be recognised in the capital of the nation you served so well.
I'm aware that some of you have journeyed a long way to be here, I've talked to people from many parts of the nation, so hello.
And that long journey here might have been filled by memories, as you journeyed, of all those years ago, when you journeyed from your homes and families to the farms and fields where you were needed the most.
You went to take up the work of the men who had left for the front. Some of them were your fathers, brothers, or even sons.
In doing so, you brought victory closer, just as if you had picked a rifle yourself.
Now I know a thing or two about working in traditionally male domain.
But the life I've been privileged to lead is only possible because women of courage like you were there first; in the tough years, the desperate years, when the nation faced its ultimate test.
You helped Australia pass that test.
And today  -  here in the nation's heart  -  we thank you.
I know it's been a long time coming, these words of thanks, and so I pay tribute for the advocacy to get us here today, the advocacy from Parliamentary Secretary Senator Jan McLucas who has just spoken so beautifully, and before her, Maxine McKew.
To Senator John Faulkner, who's played such a role in getting us here today, my thanks. And to the wonderful Peggy Williams who always had faith that her campaign would succeed.
It has.
The campaign has succeeded and it has succeeded with the full measure of our gratitude today.
Ladies, each of you will return home with these certificates graciously signed by the Governor-General, and with booklets created by the Australian War Memorial and, above all, with a commemorative brooch to wear.
I know you will wear those brooches with a great deal of pride.
And I really hope, I genuinely hope they prompt younger Australians to ask you what they mean, because you'll be able to tell them.
You'll be able to say I answered the nation's call. I stood up to be counted when Australia needed help the most.'
And a new generation will learn of the remarkable things you did and the remarkable women you are.
So today, on behalf of all Australians, I thank you for your generosity and your service.
The Australian Women's Land Army has achieved a lasting place of honour in the history of our nation.
May it be celebrated  -  truly celebrated  -  for many years to come.
Thank you very much.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED
It's a pleasure to join you tonight and I pay tribute to the AiGroup for its informed advocacy towards a stronger and more productive economy.
It's one of the most important debates we can have.
A lot of people have had a lot to say about productivity.
Tonight, I want to have my say.
Yes, higher productivity is how Australia will remain competitive and reap the advantages of the Asian Century.
As Professor Paul Krugman famously said, Productivity isn't everything, but in the long-run it's almost everything.
But too often the concept of productivity is forced to carry more weight than it can possibly bear.
It's become shorthand for old and stale agendas that have nothing to do with our genuine productivity challenge.
Too much ideology.
Too few facts.
So tonight I want to join AIG and other respected commentators like Ross Gittins in calling for a mature and sophisticated perspective based on the facts.
I start with the single most important fact: the level of labour productivity itself.
Fact: Australia's level of labour productivity ranks above South Korea, Japan, Canada and the UK.
Fact: Australia is one of the top 12 international performers when it comes to labour productivity levels.
Fact: In the year to March 2012, labour productivity grew at its fastest annual rate in a decade.
Fact: Exclude mining and utilities, labour productivity grew by a healthy annual rate of 1.7 per cent in the seven years to 2011.
Of course we can't read too much into quarterly or annual productivity figures.
Nor should we imagine that labour productivity can't be further improved.
Of course it can.
Productivity is the race that never ends.
But let's also keep things in perspective.
Unlike the early 90s, today we conduct this debate from a position of strength:
With 800,000 jobs created since 2007.
Half a trillion dollars in the investment pipeline.A combination of GDP growth, low inflation, low unemployment and low official interest rates not seen since 1964.
Along with steady wages growth, high profit share and relatively low levels of industrial disputation.
A gold medal performance, so vastly at odds with much recent reporting.
Yes our overall productivity rate has fallen over the past decade.
And there are some fairly common-sense reasons for that.
Not lazy or militant workers.
Not restrictive industrial legislation.
But a sharp multifactor productivity decline in mining and utilities, with some impact from agriculture as well.
Recently, the Productivity Commission and the Reserve Bank concluded that much of the decline in multifactor productivity growth could be attributed to these sectors.
The Productivity Commission attributes the productivity fall in those three sectors as high as 70 per cent of the overall decline.
In mining, because new investment takes years before it leads to output and because miners are accessing lower quality or less accessible deposits.
In utilities, because there has been increasing capital expenditure, often well beyond levels suggested by demand.
In agriculture, because our worst drought in a century led to falling agricultural output.
Many of these temporary factors are working their way through the system.
For example, agriculture has been the sector with the largest productivity growth since 2007-08.
Likewise, mining productivity will increase in the longer term as major projects move into production.
But the explanation goes further.
We're also recovering from a decade of neglect because our predecessors failed to invest in skills, infrastructure, communications reform, and federal-state regulatory reform.
Hawke and Keating bequeathed to the Howard government an impressive record of reform in all these areas.
We received no such inheritance.
These are the facts.
And friends,
Here's a myth: Individual contracts and the associated legislative regime boosted productivity.
They didn't.
ABS data show that multifactor productivity experienced virtually no growth when Work Choices was law.
The workplace model that best drives productivity improvements is enterprise bargaining.
As Saul Eslake has observed: productivity only happens as a result of the decisions that are made and implemented in places of work.
That is why enterprise bargaining has been the shared basis in three out of our four industrial regimes since the Keating era.
The fourth  -  Work Choices  -  is the outlier.
Workplace flexibility to increase productivity is the common thread that has delivered results.
That's why enterprise bargaining is the cornerstone of the Fair Work Act.
The success of that model was borne out in the recent Review that concluded:
key outcomes such as wages growth, industrial disputation, the responsiveness of wages to supply and demand, the rate of employment growth and the flexibility of work patterns have been favourable to Australia's continuing prosperity.
Yes, we can refine the Act to better meet its objectives.
So the Government is keen to consult with industry and unions on the Fair Work Act Review.
But labour regulation is not the whole story.
We need to take a much broader view of productivity rather than putting more focus than is warranted on our workplace arrangements.
That means accepting once and for all that you don't achieve productivity by cutting wages and conditions.
That just makes for poorer workers, and arguably more unhappy, less trusting and less motivated workers as well.
Not must it mean losing jobs.
Our record productivity growth cycle in the mid-90s showed you can grow productivity and grow employment together.
The Hawke-Keating era was indeed a remarkable time: rising high school retention rates, a huge lift in university enrolments, rapid adoption of new technologies, and the first wave of enterprise bargaining.
In other words, a golden age of productivity secured by working smarter:
Smarter people.
Smarter technology.
Smarter processes.
Smarter management.
These are what truly build productivity in a mature, advanced economy that competes on quality, not on price.
We did it then.
We can do it again.
That's why as Australia ventures upon the Asian Century, we are shaping a productivity agenda built around five factors.
The five pillars of productivity: infrastructure, innovation, tax, deregulation and skills.
On infrastructure, we've doubled the roads budget and increased investment in rail tenfold in just five years.
In fact, infrastructure investment is up 42 per cent in real terms since the Howard Government.
Look at high-speed broadband.
Each 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration can add 1.3 per cent to a high income country's GDP.
A great case for why Australia needs the NBN and structural separation too.
Turn to innovation.
We know that Australian businesses that innovate are twice as likely to report increased productivity.
Yet Australia ranks poorly on the proportion of businesses collaborating in innovation compared to other OECD countries.
And our level of management expertise is relatively low, as first identified by Karpin in 1995 and highlighted in last week's McKinsey report as well.
On tax.
We know an efficient tax system cuts compliance costs and gives incentives to invest for the future.
We now have a menu of savings measures on the table to enable a cut in company tax.
In government, we now only fund new measures by re-prioritising existing funding, and this applies to corporate tax as well.
Any reduction must be fully offset within the business tax system.
So you can have a rate cut agreed before Christmas.
But the government cannot want a corporate tax cut more than the business community does.
On deregulation, we've removed 1,650 Commonwealth legislative instruments, with another 12,000 to go over the next year.
In transport, we are taking 23 regulators and replacing them with just one for each sector  -  maritime, rail and heavy vehicles.
On a wider canvas, we've completed 20 of the 27 COAG Seamless National Economy reforms.
I strongly urge you to press the Premiers to work toward completing the remaining ones, especially National OH&amp;S laws and National Occupational Licensing.
Then we can tackle the next big wave of regulatory reform discussed at the Business Advisory Forum and agreed by COAG in April.
None of those five pillars are more important than skills.
I know AiG has made skills a consistent priority, and indeed you helped drive the creation of the Workforce and Productivity Agency this year.
But yours has been a rare voice for skills in recent productivity debates.
Last week for example, we received the Foreign Investor Perspective report from the International CEO Forum.
It referred to education just twice, and then only briefly in passing.
Yet nothing is more critical to Australia's future economic success than education, skills and training.
Independent modelling by KPMG Econtech in 2010 shows that lifting human capital could increase per capita income by around $4,000 over the three decades to 2040.
A 2005 study from Britain found that a one percentage point increase in training increases labour productivity by around0.6 per cent.
Yet in the decade before we took office, education and skills were neglected in Australia.
This Government has put in five years of determined effort and long-term reform to turn that situation around.
Those efforts are beginning to bear fruit.
Apprentice and trainee numbers rose by 17 per cent between 2007 and 2011, while VET student numbers were up 13 per cent.
We're on track to see 40 per cent of Australians aged between 25 and 34 hold a bachelor's degree by 2025.
Just last week we learned five Australian universities are now among the world's top 100  -  giving us the fourth most successful higher education system globally.
None of these changes has come about by accident.
They are the result of investment, policy reform and very hard work by people in those sectors to deliver better outcomes.
In the long run, the performance of Australia's schools will be one of the greatest influences on our economic performance.
Australia has great schools that compare well with other countries.
But international evidence shows we are slipping behind.
Four of the world's top-performing school systems are now in our region: Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Shanghai.
These systems have dramatically improved their performance through rapid and transformative change.
Between 2000 and 2009, Australia slipped from equal second to equal seventh in reading and from equal fifth to equal 13th in maths in the OECD's PISA rankings.
In addition, the gap between our highest-performing students and the lowest performers  -  too often from disadvantaged backgrounds  -  grew wider.
I suspect a lot of our skills shortage among adults today is a result of the decade of neglect we inherited.
Australia cannot remain an economic powerhouse unless it also wins the education race.
We have a unique and diverse school system of which we should be proud.
We don't need to imitate systems where high student performance comes at a high human cost.
Improving our schools doesn't mean adopting every practice from Shanghai or Singapore, or Finland for that matter.
We don't want a system with much larger class sizes.
And our students don't have to adopt the high-pressure study cultures we see in some countries.
But we do need to follow what works.
We know, for example, that the systems improving fastest ensure their students have rigorous subject knowledge and independent reasoning and problem-solving skills to go with it.
And these systems have been pursuing strategies to pay attention to what works in the classroom and make sure teachers are able to do more of it.
We need to adopt those strategies and shape them into a uniquely Australian form of excellence.
That means focusing relentlessly on the things that improve performance and make a real difference to educational achievement.
The international evidence is clear about what drives excellence in schooling:
A high quality curriculum.
Highly skilled teachers able to focus their teaching precisely on what each student needs to learn.
Systematic use of performance information to drive continuous feedback and improvement.
Empowered school leaders able to focus resources on student outcomes.
And strong partnerships between schools and the wider community, reinforcing high expectations of all students.
These are priorities that we have focused on relentlessly since 2007.
We have put in place the foundations of an Australian school system that can excel throughout this century.
And we know that these policies can make a difference because the results are already starting to show.
For example, in our National Partnership for Literacy and Numeracy, 70 per cent of participating schools increased the number of children performing above the national minimum standard in Year 3 reading, and 80 per cent of schools increased the percentage of children in Year 5 numeracy above the national minimum standard.
The transparency we introduced through the My School website now shows how individual schools have lifted their performance to significantly higher than other schools with similar students.
We need to turn these positive movements into a sustained, national effort to improve student results:
This is isn't just an issue for school sectors, teachers or parents  -  it's a business issue.
It demands the full and active involvement of employers because you have a fundamental interest in school performance.
So much of our productivity challenge is an education challenge.
And I want you to be part of the solution.
I'm proud to outline tonight the contours of our productivity reform strategy to set Australia up for the Asian Century.
Of course, there is still much more to do  -  productivity is a task that by definition is never done.
That's why in coming weeks and months we will deliver the Asian Century white paper and our Industry and Innovation Statement, working with AiG and other stakeholders on the Manufacturing Leaders Group.
We'll keep a firm hand on outlays to ensure the budget comes into surplus.
And we'll consider changes to the Fair Work Act to ensure its objectives of fairness and productivity continue to be realised.
What we won't do is be party to stale old battles based on assertion, not evidence.
Our nation doesn't have the time or the luxury for such a phoney debate.
Let's have the real thing.
An informed, fact-driven debate about the true drivers of productivity in an advanced, mature economy that needs to move quickly up the value-chain.
That's the high road to lasting productivity outcomes, just like we did in the early 1990s.
The high road paved with facts, leaving the myths far behind.
In the spirit of the good work we have done together, I ask you to join us on that journey, and let's create a more productive and prosperous nation together.
Thank you very much.


Parliament House, Canberra
E &amp; OE
It is a great pleasure to be able to welcome you all here to Canberra tonight, and to be able to speak.
Fifty years since the several Australian branches of the British Medical Association merged and created our own national medical association, it's a night to celebrate.
For fifty years you've been advocates  -  not just on behalf of your members but in the broader cause of health in Australia.
Five decades as protectors of practitioners' independence and as promoters of ethical behaviour of the medical profession. 
Five decades of medical research and education through the widely respected Medical Journal of Australia.
Still a world-leading scientific publication, still Australia's only peer-reviewed general medical journal.
And of course, half a century in your most important role, which is being there to advocate for the medical profession.
It's quite an achievement that your association, representing your profession, who does from time to time relieve pain for others but give pain to governments, is held in such a respected light.
You've given us the occasional headache, and it's not just this government but governments before. But that's a testament to the power of your advocacy.
Can I congratulate you too on the launch of your history  -  More Than Just A Union.  With a title like that I'm looking forward to your application to affiliate with the ACTU. It can't be that long away! 
I have been working with the AMA for a long time, not for all of those five decades but for around ten years since I became Labor's Shadow Health Minister.
I have had productive dealings with all your Presidents.
In office we loved contrasting the style of 'Wild Bill' with the more mild-mannered but very persistent Mukesh.
And it's good to be able to be with you and think about some of that past, but also to look to the future together.
And in looking to the future I want to speak to you about two important areas where we are doing and continue to do so much good work, and they are the areas of Indigenous health and in smoking. 
But I can't let tonight go by, here with an audience of medical professionals, without making some comment on the cuts in Queensland's public health system, and particularly what's happening to BreastScreen Queensland.
I was amazed earlier this month to read the news and I have to say that my honest reaction when I read it was, that can't be right, that's a misreport and it will be corrected.  Well unfortunately, thinking it was a misreport was wrong, and the news is still shocking.
It shows me, and it should show us, how important national investment in health remains and how vigilant we must be to protect the progress we've made, particularly in women's health.
Women must have the right to health care and women must have the right to choose.
So the Federal Labor Government will be there supporting women's health.
Whether it's the independence of the TGA's decisions in regulating fertility treatments, whether it's allowing our foreign aid budget to include spending on family planning, whether it's supporting a woman's right to choose through Medicare-funded services, that's my commitment to Australian women as Prime Minister.
And I know the profession will be there with us.
And I know you're there with us on those issues, you will be there with us on Indigenous health.
Together, we are making progress towards Closing the Gap.
The AMA Indigenous Health Report Cards have been influential in guiding health policies for Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islander peoples for more than a decade now.
They have had a significant influence in our efforts to Close the Gap.
Of all the targets in Indigenous advancement, Closing the Gap on life expectancy by 2031 remains the most challenging of all. Of course in this room we know and understand that.
Progress towards the other health, education and employment targets are providing strong foundations to help us lift life expectancy.
And the life expectancy target is the longest term of the six  -  it is a twenty-five-year target.
We particularly recognise that Closing the Gap in life expectancy in the Northern Territory is enormously difficult.
The challenge is a very large one, but it is a challenge Government does not face alone.
The AMA has been a champion for improving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health.
Your recent AMA Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Audit Report is only your latest important contribution to policy and practice, and I thank you for it.
You've played a key role in the national debate and just as important, you've played a vital role on the ground, in the communities, with our Indigenous people.
And our public investment is designed to work with you.
Our Stronger Futures in the Northern Territory health initiative is a comprehensive health package to deliver better primary health care, dental and allied health services to more than 65,000 Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory.
Funding for alcohol and other drug workers in communities which help develop Alcohol Management plans is part of the approach.
Expanding primary health care services through Aboriginal Controlled Health Organisations, is also a feature of the approach, with around 250 full-time staff delivering medical, nursing and allied health services in around 80 primary health care clinics.
An integrated health program for hearing for Indigenous children, focusing on remote communities, boosting audiology outreach and improving service co-ordination.
Oral health services for Indigenous kids are there too with a new focus on prevention.
Support for around 450 health professional placements in remote areas each year through the Remote Area Health Corps is also working.
And support for Mobile Outreach Service Plus, for four new communities, providing mental health services in the Northern Territory over the next two years and we're also proud to support three new Indigenous Health Research Centres.
It's a lot of work in a lot of areas, but one where we know progress is being made. 
It's critical that we talk about this progress, and that when we come together in gatherings like this we reflect on it.
It's critical that we speak out strongly on this progress to the Australian community, because the greatest threat to the progress of Indigenous Australians is the false notion that we can't make a difference, that nothing ever works.
You've seen things that work; I've seen things that work, and we should share them.
We can make a difference, we know we can, and we are making a difference with more to do.
In Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory the Indigenous mortality rate declined by 36 per cent from 1991 to 2010  -  and there was a significant narrowing of the gap in mortality rates with non-Indigenous Australians. 
Four years into a twenty-five-year project, health outcomes, employment outcomes, education outcomes are improving.
They need to, and they need to keep improving and to improve more quickly.
It's a big challenge to Government, a big challenge to you, but I take great confidence from your resolve to keep at it and keep making a difference where it is needed most.
Closing the Gap is a generational project.
It's a journey of countless short steps  -  not a journey where there are single days of brilliant victory.
But in the fight for better health in our country, there are some of those shining days, and as Tanya said, last Wednesday was one of them.
The High Court rejected the legal challenge by big tobacco to our plain packaging laws.
We won.
We won a victory for every Australian who has lost someone to a smoking related illness.
And we won a victory for every parent who worries about their child picking up this deadly and addictive habit.
Big tobacco threw everything at stopping this  -  and they failed.
They took out advertisements in national newspapers threatening that taxpayers would foot the bill for their legal action against plain packaging laws.
They lost.
So badly, that they had costs awarded against them.
Philip Morris Tobacco even took legal action against me, personally, trying to obtain copies of privileged legal advice about the policy at the Administrative Appeal Tribunal.
They lost that too.
And the news bulletins and front pages around the world have told the story.
You know better than anyone what a determined opponent big tobacco has been.
Even as late as the end of the 1980s, when they stopped saying smoking was harmless, they notoriously said that it was only as harmful as cooking potatoes on a stove top.
But the message here and around the world is now clear:
You can beat big tobacco.
You can't do it alone.
You can't do it without courage.
You can't do it without seeing the task through.
But with leadership, with evidence, with persistence, you can get it done.
As a friend of mine said to me, I wasn't really sure if plain packaging would actually be effective in cutting smoking until I saw how hard the tobacco companies fought against them.
Our fight against the death and disease smoking causes doesn't end there.
We have increased the tobacco excise.
We have invested around $100 million in support for Indigenous communities to reduce smoking rates.
Millions of dollars have been invested in anti-smoking social marketing campaigns.
We are restricting internet advertising of tobacco products in our nation and reducing the duty free allowance for tobacco products that we bring home.
Together we are building the world's toughest regime on smoking.
It's obvious, when we talk about these issues, that we're all on the same page and I thank you for your support along the way.
It's also obvious that we don't always agree, that's a given in a democracy.
But your expertise and advocacy is invaluable and there are so many areas where our goals and methods are shared.
Not just tobacco.
You are a staunch defender of our public hospitals.
Your support for the National Disability Insurance Scheme is greatly appreciated.
My Government has put a lot of effort and funding into medical training.  We have provided a record number of training places, and you've supported us as we've done it.
Your pressure on the States to provide more intern places and ease bottlenecks in the system in the years to come is important.
You are making a great contribution in the public health area.
Your voice is heard across the board  -  obesity, alcohol and drug abuse, immunisation, the health of asylum seekers, climate change and health, anti-bullying messages, food labelling, the social determinants of health, mental health.
Just this week your statement on health and the criminal justice system is a good example of how far and wide you go in the public policy debate.
Your call for a National Strategy for Health and Climate Change and recognition of the threat climate change poses to the health of Australians is another.
That's a broad body of work. And it touches and helps many of the more disadvantaged and vulnerable in the community.
A lot has changed in the AMA in the last fifty years, and a lot's changed in our nation too.
But what hasn't changed is the importance of your service and your voice.
So welcome again to Canberra, and I hope you have a very enjoyable evening.
Thank you very much.


Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I'm a proud Australian but I'm a proud Victorian too. In Australia, I adopted a country. In Victoria, I adopted a State. I came here three decades ago and found the place to call home. I'll grow old here waiting for the Dogs to win the flag!
So you could say I'm an optimist. An optimist by nature. An optimist for this State. We've seen tough times before and found the courage to reshape our future. In 2012, it's time to do it again.
Friends, The theme of this conference is Victoria at the Crossroads'and there's much truth in that. But I'd adopt a different characterisation and say Victoria isn't so much at the crossroads but at the starting line.
The starting line of the economic race in the Asian Century. The starting line of a new economic order following the GFC.
From growth fuelled by debt to a focus on deleveraging.
From fossil fuels to renewable energy.
From analogue to digital.
From Europe and North America as the economic centre of gravity to Asia.
These transitions are unstoppable.
The rise of China, India and the ASEAN nations alone amount to a change on par with the Industrial Revolution.
It is bringing a huge lift to Australia's national income and downward pressure on inflation.
But it also brings patchwork economy pressures that will be with us for the foreseeable future.
They include, obviously, the strong Australian dollar but also intensifying competition and ageing capital stock.
The resulting economic transition is very real.
For example, manufacturing has lost around 30,000 full-time jobs in the past five years.
At the same time, employment in services has increased by more than 100,000 full-time jobs.
So this can be a growing economy but it will be a changing economy as well.
Friends, This is not a future Victoria needs to fear.
Even now, a decade into the expansion of mining, Victoria's fundamentals are resilient.
Under pressure but resilient.
Victoria's year-on-year growth has been on par with national GDP growth, and exceeded it in 2010-11.
Victoria has consistently delivered almost a quarter of Australia's national output over the past decade.
Unemployment in Victoria at June was 5.5 per cent, not far above the 5.2 per cent national average.
And Victoria's exports of goods in 2011-12 was recently reported as growing at 10 per cent, faster than the national rate.
So the Victorian economy is holding its own.
Victoria has been written off before as a rust-belt' state left behind by structural change.
But it has, in fact, re-emerged with a diverse, broad-based economy which includes dynamic manufacturing and primary industries and new service and knowledge-intensive sectors.
The evidence is all around us.
Victoria, with Melbourne as its capital, can proudly call itself Australia's sporting and cultural heartland.
We've seen major urban growth in Melbourne's north and west, and regional cities like Geelong, Ballarat and Bendigo offering great lifestyles.
Victoria has done so much to position itself as a smart economy that builds on its most precious resource  -  its people:
You've attracted one of only 11 IBM research centres in the world.
You've got Australia's top ranked university.
You've won recognition as a UNESCO City of Literature.
You're a leader in philanthropy and social innovation, hometo great organisations like the Brotherhood of St Laurence.
You've a got an institution  -  the CRC for Advanced Composite Structures  -  that helps Boeing to develop cutting-edge new technologies for its planes.
And Melbourne is ranked in some surveys as the most liveable city on earth.
So yes, with all those accolades and attributes, I am certainly an optimist for Victoria.
But friends, I don't just make this judgement on past or present achievements alone.
It is no use lamenting lost golden ages, real or imagined.
Instead, we must focus with hard heads and rigorous minds on the true sources of productivity for a mature economy entering the Asian Century.
Here's a measure of what that century implies: Asia's middle class will soon be bigger than the middle classes of the rest of the world combined.
That means our neighbours will want interesting places to take their holidays.
They will increasingly want a high quality educational services.
They will pay a premium for high quality food and wine, especially with clean and green' credentials.
They will seek financial and legal services to manage their growing wealth and provide safe-haven security.
They will seek entertainment from the cultural industries, which will only grow as the number of platforms expand.
And their business leaders will seek research and industry collaboration as they seek to move up the value chain.
At the same time, our own changing needs will drive continued growth in industries like health, education and community services over the next 50 years.
Indeed national employment demand in health and social assistance will be more than double that of mining over the next five years  -  240,000 versus 100,000.
Victoria is well positioned in each of these areas.
We approach the starting line with advantages.
But as Tim Colebatch pointed out this week, we must be tough, resourceful, patient and creative.
Friends, We know none of these successes are possible without the investment and collaboration of the public sector.
Not bigger government but smarter government.
Supporting the drivers of growth and productivity in a modern economy:- education and skills, innovation, industry, infrastructure, clean energy, regulatory and tax reform.
Some of those drivers like the NBN are economy-wide.
Others involve huge new investments in local infrastructure like the Regional Rail Link and widening the Western Ring Road.
Or getting rid of regulation, like our National Seamless National Economy agenda which, if fully implemented, stands to save $1 billion a year in Victoria over the longer run.
Yet others involve targeted support to specific industries like manufacturing, for which we make no apology.
Indeed manufacturing is the lifeblood of employment, exports and economic activity in so many parts of Victoria.
It's also a major jobs multiplier in the supply chain, in the export chain, in the banking and services chain.
Our status as an advanced economy is unthinkable without manufacturing.
Yes, the high dollar is causing pain, and regrettably we can't support every firm or save every job.
But we're also seeing the structure of Victorian manufacturing reveal competitive strengths as it is tempered by change: In those areas linked to the Australian resources boom.
In those involving higher skilled workers.
In those advanced technology sectors such as machinery and equipment, as well as chemicals and plastics.
And in the automotive sector we're seeing the emergence of cars like the Territory and Cruze that Australians vote for with their wallets supported  -  I'm proud to say  -  by government co-investment.
Innovation and collaboration are the way to embed these outcomes for the future.
Just as we have a national competition policy, we need a national collaboration and partnership policy.
The recent Manufacturing Taskforce report represents a bold vision for the future.
Our Industry and Innovation Statement will involve working together with employers and unions to make that vision a reality.
I look forward to launching the Statement in coming months.
Friends, I'm a proud supporter of smart industry policy.
But I'm also quite prepared to say there's something even more important, and that's education.
We hear so much talk about industrial relations reform from businesses and commentators convinced it's the magic bullet.
But it's not.
In a high wage economy with strong labour standards and widespread community expectations as to working conditions, it can never be the panacea some commentators imagine.
I'm tired of hardworking Australian employees being told they are the cause of our productivity challenge.
And I'm certainly sick of lectures on productivity by the Liberal Party when some conservative governments can't find the will-power to pass even basic measures like national OH&amp;S laws and national recognition of trade qualifications.
So IR is not the magic bullet.
But there's something that is far more powerful and transformative: education and training.
Consider this fact: Low-skill roles will only make up seven per cent of new jobs over the next five years.
The future belongs to well-trained workers in well-managed firms, using the latest technology and supported by high-quality enterprise agreements.
The economists call this human capital.
I call it not letting any child or any school fall behind.
Either way, the effect on our economy is dramatic.
If the states and territories fully implement our COAG education reforms, we stand to increase GDP by 6.2 per cent, a national average of $10 billion by 2040.
More than $2 billion of that could flow to Victoria alone.
To put it another way, meeting the COAG goal to increase the number of young people who complete Year 12 could generate an average annual gain of around $11 billion.
The benefit not only flows to the economy but to individualsas they lead more prosperous and purposeful lives.
ABS data shows a person with a Certificate III level qualification or higher earns, on average, at least 10 per cent above the weekly wage of people without those qualifications.
In some cases, they could earn up to double.
NATSEM modelling shows university graduates earn70 per cent more over their lifetimes than someone who only finished Year 12.
Yet today, disadvantaged children in Australia are two years behind their peers in reading and writing by Year 9.
These are the kids who drop out.
Who don't acquire skills.
Who don't engage with the workforce.
Educational disadvantage is a human failure and an economic failure.
We can't have a high skill, high wage economy while there is such a waste.
But the problem isn't just confined to lower performing students.
Australian education results improved modestly but our competitors in Asia have been improving even faster.
So our relative international performance has fallen since 2001.
The respected Programme for International Student Assessment or PISA comparisons show we have slipped from equal 2nd to equal 7th in reading.
From equal 5th to equal 13th in maths.
Think about it this way.
When we dipped to twentieth on the medal tally half way through the Olympics, there was talk about whether sport should be compulsory in schools.It's a fair debate.
But remember this: when I became Education Minister national testing of English and Maths wasn't even compulsory in all our schools.
That was only four years ago.
Now, with NAPLAN and MySchool, we can tell the schools where students most need help.
So instead of arguing about whether we got enough gold medals, let's have an informed debate about how we can improve all schools across our nation.
And let's be clear on what that extra effort must entail.
It's not just about funding. 
Money alone cannot be sufficient, and funding is always just the servant or the tool.
The key is quality -  and how we improve it.
So I'm talking about a national plan for school improvement, which gives schools the resources they need to get better results for all students.
To make every teacher a great teacher.
And to make every school a great school.
Friends, The success of post-school education in Australia stems from the strong foundations provided through good schooling.
However some of the problems that students face in post-school education also have their origin in earlier years.
Young people lacking basic skills for work or traineeships.
Apprentices who drop out before getting their ticket.
Students who need remedial teaching in first year at university.
I think about the people in the region I represent.
Where education equals emancipation.
Without skills, a storeman in Werribee can't get a job in the mines.
Without a decent school education, his daughter can't get one of our new places at university.
If we get schools right, we can get skills right.
That's critical because we're pouring massive new resources into VET and higher education.
The number of Commonwealth supported higher education places in Victoria has risen by 28 per cent since 2007.
We've put $18 billion into VET nationwide since 2007,29 per cent of it in Victoria.
And we'll invest an additional $1.75 billion nationwide over the next five years to reform the VET system.
It therefore defies belief that the Victorian government should be cutting TAFE funding here in a State facing much of Australia's competitiveness challenge.
I can think of few things more calculated to harm Victoria's economic future.
It's also ironic that the Premiers agreed at April's COAG meeting to reforms aimed at boosting the quality and reach of vocational training.
Three weeks later, the Baillieu government delivered a budget that slashed $300 million per year from the State's TAFE Institutes.
Given all I've said about structural change and opportunity in Asia, that was just crazy.
A complete betrayal of every Victorian who wants to get ahead.
The Australian Education Union state president Mary Bluett described these cuts as an act of economic vandalism.
She was right on the mark.
Those cuts are particularly savage in towns like Warrnambool, Morwell and Mildura where local TAFEs are such an integral part of the economic fabric and also the social fabric.
But they're also a heavy blow for the dual-sector institutions like Victoria University and Swinburne.
You've spent 25 years pioneering a unique hybrid model, only to have your efforts undermined when they are needed the most.
The four dual sector universities in Victoria could lose more than $100 million by the end of 2013, more than $30 million at VU alone.
That's nearly 20 per cent of VU's TAFE income, an absolute body blow.
In the race of the Asian Century, it's like having ball and chain around your leg.
So friends, We get training cuts from our State Government counterparts here in Victoria.
Cuts to industry assistance and clean energy pledged by our Opposition counterparts in Canberra.
And no doubt they will seek to fill their funding black hole with cuts to higher education like they did in 1996 as well.
So not only does Victoria face an economic challenge.
It faces a choice as well.
Between those who will impair Victoria's future by their narrow, mindless, short term cuts.
And those who will deliver a plan for Victoria's future.
To build and nurture its strengths.
To ensure this State continues to be a crucible of innovation, reform and investment for the future.
A state where we win the economic race by winning the education race.
And, most importantly, where we win these races together.
Because in the Australia I lead, no State, no region, no person should be left behind.
And I'm here to say loud and clear today: Victoria will not be left behind.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Welcome to The Lodge  -  this old and beautiful residence  -  and yes you're right, it's in need of a few renovations, I've had some comments on the paintwork as we've moved around.
But this old and beautiful residence is used by our Prime Ministers including me, and what that really means is it belongs to you, it belongs to all Australians.
I'm delighted to have the opportunity to be able to commend to you the magnificent work in this garden, and 25 years of magnificent work in opening up the gardens of Australia by Open Gardens Australia.
It's great to do so here in this garden city that is our nation's capital  -  turning a grand old 100 in just a few months' time.
It was Rudyard Kipling that once described his nation as a garden.
He took care to note that beautiful and nourishing gardens aren't made by sitting in the shade and saying Oh, look how beautiful it is'.
I think he was right.
Gardens are a lot like nations because so many of the skills required to cultivate a beautiful garden are the same skills that are required to build a nation.
To produce a beautiful garden like those you'll be opening to the public this year requires a great deal of forethought, detailed planning and a healthy amount of ambition, and I think from the discussions I've had some sitting on your nerves!
The gardener must commit him or herself to a task that won't see any benefit for quite some time.
Because first comes the hard work, bending your back to till the soil and investing your resources of seeds, fertiliser and water in just the right place, at just the right time.
Sometimes these investments pay off.
Sometimes nature throws up something completely unexpected.
But as in life, we learn from experiences and we grow wiser for it.
The patience and perseverance that it takes to grow gardens and nations are not always valued in the modern world.
Too often, in our rush to deal with all the noise in our lives, we skip past those important lessons that everyone should learn.
If new generations were to miss these fundamentals, or if we were to forget them, then it would be a great loss to all of us.
Thanks then, to the gardeners.
They plot a course, put in the work and weather all the storms that come their way. 
The reward is a quiet place where we can reflect on life and its lessons; to remember what's important; and to quite literally stop and smell the roses.
I'm very thankful that Mike and his team here at The Lodge do such a great job in providing such a place of beauty and restfulness, just as the people who come and visit open gardens across Australia will be thankful for the enrichment that it brings in their lives.
I'm also thankful to those in the media who take their knowledge and passion for gardening and share them freely.
People like the legendary TV presenter and journalist Colin Campbell, who sadly passed away this week.
So many gardens around the nation reflect Colin's insight and enthusiasm, especially in Queensland.
I know many people will be remembering him as they celebrate Open Gardens Australia this year.
It will indeed be a remarkable garden season. We've had good rains.
And regions affected by floods and bushfires are bouncing back with resilience.
So to all of you  -  and I've met a considerable number  -  who are opening their gardens to the public, it's almost time to put away the shovels and the secateurs; almost time to open your front gates with pride, knowing all the hard work has paid off and we are a richer, better nation for what you have created.
I very proudly launch Open Gardens Australia in its 25th anniversary year, and I warmly wish Open Gardens Australia and each of you every success in this season.
Thank you for joining me here this morning.


Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
When St Vincent's was established 155 years ago, cancer was almost always a death sentence.
The Sisters of Charity could bring comfort.
But not hope.
We just didn't have the medical knowledge.
Today, Australia leads the world in cancer care.
In the last two decades alone, the survival rate for many common cancers has increased by 30 per cent.
And we're doing better every day.
We have hope.
We have hope because of people like Rob Sutherland, Allan Spigelman and their colleagues around the world.
Outstanding researchers and clinicians who have made beating cancer their life's work.
When you come to work each morning, you come burdened with some very grim knowledge.
One hundred and twenty Australians will die of cancer today.
Another 300 will be diagnosed.
Those statistics demand a response from each of us as citizens and from the nation as a whole.
That is why since 2007, this Government has committed over $2.5 billion to infrastructure, medicines, screening and research to build a world-class cancer care system including $70 million to help build the facility we're standing in today.
In a federal budget stretching into the hundreds of billions,that may not seem much.
But in your hands, it is enough to create a place to work miracles.
To create a place of hope.
And friends, I want to say that is not the end of our ambitions for this site.
This corner of inner city Sydney may be small in area but it's very great in impact:
 * 	St Vincent's public and private hospitals;
 * 	The Garvan;
 * 	Sacred Heart Hospice;
 * 	The Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute;
 * 	The Kirby Institute;
 * 	And the wonderful work of the Nelune Foundation; and
 * 	I acknowledge Nelune Rajapakse's presence here today
Per square metre, perhaps the greatest concentration of medical care and research excellence in the nation.
Today I want to announce a new member of your family with the placement of the nation's third National Prostate Cancer Research Centre here in Darlinghurst.
It's a cause that's very close to Wayne Swan's heart and I'm to join him and Minister Plibersek in making this announcement today.
This third National Prostate Cancer Centre is a collaboration between St Vincent's Prostate Cancer Centre, St Vincent's &amp; Mater Health and the Garvan Institute.
You all know what a prestigious win this is for these three organisations.
You know the international research interest it will attract.
There will be less suffering and grief because of the work that will be done in this new institute, just like the Kinghorn Centre.
There will be new knowledge and new discoveries.
Better collaboration between these institutes, and indeed your colleagues around the world.
Above all, there will be personalised, multi-disciplinary carefor patients because the journey of cancer can be so complex and demanding.
So this must be their centre.
Their place of comfort.
Their place of hope.
And because of what happens here, the things we can't cure and treat today, we will be able to cure and treat in the future.
It may not happen this year or next.
But you don't build places like the Kinghorn Centre for months or years, but for decades.
This is an investment in decades.
An investment in hope.
Supported by many generous donors, led by the Kinghorn family itself.
And staffed by the some of the most brilliant minds in our land.
So, proud of your work  -  and confident in what you will achieve; I declare the Kinghorn Cancer Centre officially open and wish it every success.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
The hundreds of workplace leaders who've gathered here tonight from around the country and to the work you're doing to grow in numbers and strength and ideas.
Yours is the model of a modern labour union.
Committed to the oldest union principles.
Sharing, sticking together, the strong in the workplace protecting the weak.
Organising always, working with the employer when you can, fighting when you must.
And committed to the future of unionism too.
To responsible leadership which sees the future, understands where change is necessary, ensures change is delivered for the many, not the few.
When people ask how should modern unions drive change in their members' interests I say: look at the way the CPSU engages its members and delivers for them.
And you do it in two distinct and vital ways.
Your contribution to the cause of labour through the movement and the Party is enormous.
Your contribution to the cause of Australia, in the Australian Public Service and your other workplaces, is indispensable.
In the same way, here addressing you all, I do wear two hats.
When I get along to dinner with the tee dubs or the miscos I can safely tell them to stand up for themselves and not to go easy on their boss. 
Here, I'm not quite so gung ho!
But for all that, I know that here, I'm among friends: because of the values we share.
The values I have always seen in the CPSU and your predecessors, in my life's work in the labour movement  -  the values I recognise in all of you here tonight  -  the same values I see in the public servants I work with and rely on every day.
A bright passion and a deep enthusiasm for the life of public service.
That enthusiasm and passion in you is the same fire that drives me on, that drives everyone in my Government on, every day in office, to build a strong economy, to make a fair society.
What you do matters to Australia and to every Australian.
Ours is a remarkable nation.  That didn't happen by accident.
Australians worked for it, you worked for it, our public sector worked for it.
Of course some of our advantages are natural  -  natural wealth and location. 
But I see our greatest advantages as human ones.
In world terms, we're a top ten country on many measures.
Openness to international ideas, public institutions that operate free from corruption, the list goes on.
And we're a top two country on measures that are most important to us. 
Like political stability, social mobility, human development.
We've worked for those things and we've done it our way.
We don't work exactly as others do. 
We've always seen the public good, the public interest, the public sector, in our own distinctively progressive and Australian way.
Just one example: the way we regulate banks, very different than the US for instance. 
It works, we've got four of the ten AA minus' rated banks in the world here.
And it works because of you.
Those banks are regulated by public servants.
The same is true of so many areas where our nation has achieved good things.
No developed country emerged from the global financial crisis stronger.
The political decision to take strong and immediate action was the vital beginning.
But make no mistake, the best thing we did then was to get the best advice.
The Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz called our stimulus packages:
One of the most impressive economic policies I've seen.
But he went on:
Not only was it the right amount, it was extraordinarily well structured, with careful attention to what would stimulate the economy in the shorter run, the medium term and the long term ...
When I look around the world, it was, I think, probably the best-designed stimulus program in the world and you should be happy that in fact it worked in exactly the way it was designed to work.
That was a Nobel Prize winner talking  -  and he was talking about you.
That stimulus was designed and implemented by public servants.
And the same is true across so much of Australian life.
Who got the relief payments to the flood victims?  A public servant.
Who makes sure older Australians are cared for and safe in aged care homes?  A public servant.
Who keeps our planes flying and our airports safe?  A public servant.
Who helped Australians caught up in the earthquakes in New Zealand or Japan  -  who works to alleviate the suffering of the world's poorest in the Pacific or Afghanistan?  A public servant.
For that matter, who shows a group of school children a Sidney Nolan painting of Ned Kelly?
That person is a public servant too.
And to put it mildly  -  none of those people is in it for the money.
I know you make sacrifices, you move your families between cities, your forego higher private sector salaries.
And perhaps the most demanding sacrifice of all  -  all the time you spend at work and away from those you love.
You do it all for a reason.
For that passion, for that enthusiasm, that we share.
So I really do want to salute you for your life in public service.
And like anything that's important, the stakes are high, and sometimes the decisions are hard.
That's true of the decisions we make together, as public servants and ministers, true of the advice you give us, true of the work you do to implement our plans.
That work is sometimes hard but we get through it together.
That's also true of the areas where we negotiate as employer and employees.
Big decisions we work through, changing our workplace, improving how government works, and of course, balancing budgets.
You'll have discussed a lot of those issues while you're here and I'm sure you've been frank.
And it's important that I say clearly, I believe the latest round of APS bargaining showed us that we need a clearer bargaining framework and that before the next round more pre-bargaining work should be done.
And that I say, we will work with you to develop a more flexible and fact-based approach to lifting public sector productivity, through the Public Service Commission and the Strategic Centre for Leadership, Learning and Development.
And to achieve increased commonality of terms and conditions for APS employees.
I know you'll keep pressing us in areas where we don't agree and where you're making a case for change.
Whether that's how the efficiency dividend works or how agencies fund pay rises or the balance between agency and central bargaining.
We'll keep talking about all of it and I know you'll keep working for your  members' interests.
With all that understood, I'm proud that the Australian Government is a good and fair employer of around 170 000 Australians.
As a Labor Prime Minister, fairness at work is central to my task.
What I see as I look around Australia today, is that this is at risk. Profoundly at risk.
The decisions made by new State Liberal Governments in the past eighteen months have shown that dramatically.
First, remember what State Liberals say before their elections.
Barry O'Farrell: we will need more public servants, not less.
Ted Baillieu: absolutely no reduction in public servants.
Campbell Newman: no forced redundancies.
Then, look at what they do after elections.
In NSW the Liberal Premier has cut.
Almost 250 police.  Funding to 272 special needs schools. 
More than 400 hospital beds. One hundred child protection workers.
In Victoria the Liberal Premier has cut.
$481 million from the education budget. $300 million from TAFE.  $25 million from community health services.
In Queensland the Liberal National Premier has cut.
$400 million from roads.  30 beds from the Prince Charles Hospital in Chermside. 
$80 million from Metro North Health District. $22.8 million from the education budget. $2.5 million from services to protect vulnerable children.
He's even dismantled BreastScreen Queensland, a cut so brutal I honestly didn't believe it when I first read the reports.
The bottom line?
10,000 public sector jobs in NSW  -  gone.
25,000 public sector jobs in Queensland  -  gone.
That's how the Liberals roll.
Now, I would come here to warn you that Tony Abbott will do to the APS what the State Liberals are doing to their public services.
Because first term conservative governments are like that.
But  amazingly, it's actually worse than that.
Last week the Coalition announced plans to gift core Federal responsibilities to the Liberal States.
They won't just copy the Premiers  -  they'll actually hand you over to the Premiers.
In their own words, to cut thousands of federal public servants from the payroll.
Again, take their word for it, from Shadow Minister Robb: these plans are not incremental  -  they are huge  -  they are more radical than what happened when the Howard Government was elected in 1996.
Now  -  think about those brutal cuts delivered by State Liberal Governments which promised more public servants, not less.
And think about what they're doing to the industrial conditions of the public servants who remain.
What is going to happen if a Federal Liberal Government is elected which in Opposition already boasts of huge, radical cuts and from Opposition already promises thousands of public servants will go?
The difference could not be more plain.
Labor stands for jobs, the Liberals stand for cuts.
And in the words of your own campaign  -  cuts hurt.
I am just astonished by the total disrespect of conservatives for the public service, for expert advice.
Andrew Robb, who wants to be Finance Minister, tells the Australian Financial Review that much of the bureaucracy does no more than "leave a paper trail, to cover backsides".
That the problem in the public service is bad apples.
Campbell Newman, the Queensland Premier, is asked in Parliament why he's cutting public service jobs and says that his job is to get the poopa scoopa out every day of the week.
And that's all of a piece with a populist politics that rejects expertise and independent advice, whether it's from scientists, economists, lawyers, engineers, architects, pretty much anyone they don't agree with.
The public service doesn't deserve that.
Just like you don't deserve another 1996.
You don't deserve it  -  the country can't afford it.
My vision in Government, my Labor vision,  is very different.
And the reality of how we've governed and worked with you is very different.
The Australian Government and the Australian Public Service has worked together.
And we've worked with the whole public sector.
Many of you here tonight, Telstra, Australia Post, Medibank, the ABC, and of course the two Territory government services.
You've all served the Australian public.
To deliver better services, to engage better with citizens, to make government simpler and more efficient, to build your skills.
And the Government has relied enormously on your advice and expertise to meet the big challenges to our nation's wellbeing.
To restore balance to Australian workplaces.
To grow jobs and to build a strong economy.
To set the nation on the path to a clean energy future.
To get equal pay for caring workers.
To build hard infrastructure for the future, like the NBN.
To achieve hard policy reform for the future, like the MRRT.
And we'll only need you more for the work ahead.
In our plans for school improvement.
In our plans to care for our ageing generations.
In our plans for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
There's much more to do.
I look forward to doing them together.


Rarotonga
Thank you very much to the Secretary General. I'm pleased to stand here today with my fellow Pacific leaders and with Michelle Bachelet, from UN Women, for an important announcement about gender equality in our region of the world, in the Pacific.
We stand here today wanting to enter a new partnership for gender equality.
We know gender equality is not a marginal issue. It's not just about fairness to women, but it's also about economic development and empowerment.
We know that societies only reach their full potential if women are politically participating as equals; that's a key indicator of social governance.
We know that food security is advanced by enabling women to work in the agricultural sector.
We know that if there was a better distribution between men and women of agricultural work, that up to 150 million more people would be nourished around our globe.
And we know, too, that a key indicator of economic advancement is the full inclusion of women in the life of a nation.
So  gender equality is the right thing to do; it's also the clever thing to do, and I am delighted that leaders are working here at the Pacific Island Forum for change and for gender equality in our region. Today, through a declaration on gender equality that will come from the Pacific Island Forum, and through the initiative that I'm announcing today, we will see further change. 
Now whilst we have been working on gender equality in our region, there's no doubt that significant challenges still remain in the Pacific as significant challenges remain for countries around the world:? In the Pacific, women hold five per cent of parliamentary seats. That's compared to a global average of 18 per cent;? women account for just one in three people in formal employment across substantial parts of the Pacific;? And violence against women and poor maternal health outcomes are only too prevalent in our region of the world.
But we also know change is possible, and change is occurring here and internationally.
Some countries in the Pacific have achieved gender parity in primary education.Working in partnership with regional governments, UN Women is making a difference through things like the Pacific Markets Program.
And we do know that there are nations, including Papua New Guinea, that have taken important steps forward to including women in their parliament. So change is possible.
Today I am pleased to announce that we will support further change through a partnership of more than $300 million over the next decade.
These funds will be directed to a number of purposes to increase the inclusion of women in the lives of nations in the Pacific.
Most specifically the work that this money will fund will include: empowering women to participate in the political life of their nation by enabling training and support for women who want to involve themselves in leadership processes. This money will go towards assisting the Pacific Markets Program that's already making a significant difference.
It's a simple idea, but if women can bring their produce to market, if they can bring their economic labors to market, they can earn money which makes a difference for them, for their families and ultimately for their nation.
In order to do that, markets need to be safe spaces with lighting, with water supply, sanitation and waste disposal, and women need to be able to participate in the governance and leadership of market places. And so this money will help finance such initiatives.
This money will assist with survivors of violence overcoming the experiences that they have lived through and finding safety and protection. And underpinning all of this work will be information campaigns and programs through churches, local governments and at markets to change perceptions of women's roles and women's lives, and men's roles in communities to assist women and men to live together as equals.
The Pacific is already on its way to empowering women, but this is the work of generations. Australia is pleased that we are able to support a decade-long partnership, and I have no doubt that we will continue to see further change for women in the region in which we live.
Thank you very much.


Canberra 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY                                                         
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Today, I am here to talk about our children, their education, their lives and their future.
As I speak, more than three million children are at school and millions more will follow them in the years to come.
On their behalf, I call on you to join me in a national crusade to give those children a better education and a better future.
Education transforms lives. I know because it transformed mine.
The story of my parents' lives is a story of education denied. 
My parents were born around the time of the Great Depression and their earliest memories are of World War II. 
My father, despite winning academic prizes and scholarships, left school at fourteen.  His family couldn't afford not to have him working.  My mother suffered ill health as a child and her schooling suffered too.
Despite their schooling history, both are intelligent and well-read and have lived successful and happy lives.
But born in a different era, or into different circumstances, my mother and father would easily have succeeded at university and pursued professional careers.
As an adult, I understand their stories aren't unusual for their generation.
But as a child, their stories were my world, the backdrop of my life.
Because my parents had hungered for education, they wanted their daughter to enjoy all its benefits.
And so as a young girl, I was painstakingly taught to read by my mother before I went to school.   As luck would have it the public schools I was zoned to attend were great schools. 
I liked school and succeeded at it.  I had some great teachers, a group of friends focussed on doing well, a family ready to support me in every way.
But even in great schools like Unley High, I was conscious of the kids who struggled, who got left behind.  Indeed achievement and underachievement were obvious  -  due to streaming and stigma. 
I was in the top class, others were in classes routinely and  cruelly referred to as  veggie class'.  We were marked for success  -  they were marked for failure.
And in the days before it was commonplace for children with disabilities to be mainstreamed into schools, the one girl with a disability led a lonely life.  I have frequently reproached myself for not spending more time with her.
My parents' life stories are of education denied.  And I saw education's full power denied to some of my school mates.
I have always been conscious of being the lucky one  -  my life story is of education's transformative power.
So from my earliest years, the life changing unfairness of being denied a great education has struck me as a moral wrong.
For me, eradicating that moral wrong is what drove me into politics and drives me still.
All these years later, from the perspective of the Prime Ministership, I understand much more about what makes and what denies a great education than when I first started protesting against cutbacks to university funding as a student activist at Adelaide University.
And today, I want you to see what I see when I look at our nation's schools  -  I want you to hear what I hear when I talk to business leaders and the leaders of nations around our region.
Above all, I want you to share my passion and adopt my plan of action for improving our schools and our children's lives. I fought a ferocious battle as Education Minister to create My School and to get each of us, all of us, more information than we have ever had before on the education of our children.
On my first day in Government, no one in this nation could have given you the list of our best performing schools or our worst performing schools.
I was told that couldn't be fixed.  I was faced with political resistance from all sides.  But now you can get more information than our nation has ever had before on Australian schools on your smart phone.
I was determined to win the My School battle because I always believed that the more we knew about our children's education, the more we would be driven to improve it. 
Now we have the information from My School and other sources like international tests across the OECD, we must face up to the truths it is revealing.
The first truth is we have to aim higher for every child in every school.
Four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region and we aren't in that coveted top five.
To take one telling example, the average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
The second truth is we particularly need to improve the education of our poorer children.
By year three, 89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average.
These are not children raised in extremes of violence, neglect or disadvantage. 
Just kids whose parents pack their lunch, take them to school on the way to work and expect they're being taught to read and write while they're at school.  And they're not.
Today, unless those kids from the poorest quarter are brilliant, they are getting below average results in reading.
And once they are behind, far too many of them stay there.
By year nine, the average child from the same battling family is two years behind children from the most well-off quarter of Australian homes in reading and maths.
I see the faces of these kids in the school across the road from where I live in Altona. 
We shouldn't be letting them down.
And the third truth is we are failing our indigenous children.
There are about 18,800 indigenous school children in very remote Australia.
Today in very remote Australia the average indigenous child is still reading below a year three level in year nine.
And for any one tempted to shrug their shoulders and say that's bad, but I don't have school-aged kids, so it's someone else's problem', contemplate this  -  we cannot have a strong economy and prosperous future if the skills of our workforce lag behind the skills of our competitors.
Leaders of Asian nations tell me when I meet with them of their relentless focus on education, of how, even as they drag people out of poverty, they are determined to shape their future economic success by driving their children to the top of the class.  
We mightn't want to replicate the methods of their schooling systems but you have to admire their drive for results.
Business leaders tell me about skill shortages today and how the future will demand higher and higher skill levels. 
Put bluntly, our businesses will be unable to compete if our children's education keeps falling behind.
To win the economic race, we must first win the education race.For our children to get the jobs of the future, we must give them a great education now.
And we can get it done. Change is possible. 
I can prove it to you because we have already created change. 
Take Cowra Public School. A rural primary school in the central west of New South Wales with around 370 students  -  nearly twenty per cent of the kids are Aboriginal.
The 2009 national testing scores showed Cowra's year three kids were at best level, and sometimes behind kids from comparable schools.
The Government ensured the school had that information but it was only the starting pistol.
The principal Brad Tom, the teachers, the parents and the kids were the ones who had to run.
The Kindergarten teachers used phonics to teach reading.
The school hired 6 extra School Learning Support Officers to run individual reading tutorials. 
They sat with every struggling child, every day, for half an hour.
One on one, side by side, uninterrupted, their fingers running along under the lines on a book, sounding out words, patiently and practically teaching how to read.The whole school community got stuck in. 
And it worked. 
In 2010 and 2011, Cowra's kids went from being level with or behind kids at comparable Australian schools to catching up  -  and often being in front.
Step by step, year by year: this is school improvement.
Or take Braybrook College in Melbourne's West.
A thousand kids from a disadvantaged district, with parents and grandparents from every part of the world, more than 600 from families in the poorest quarter of Australian homes.
A battling school community that knew it could do better for the kids who need school the most.
So we gave Braybrook targeted funding to support their improvement plans.
Four extra literacy lessons every week in year seven and eight.
Seven hundred and twenty two computers plus funding for external staff to help the teachers use them well.
We brought the school library into the digital age  -  and Building the Education Revolution gave Braybrook a new science lab.
And it worked.
Now, the school's mean VCE score is above the state average  -  up 6 points, to 30.1, in eight years.
Last year, almost seventy per cent of Braybrook's year 12 students were offered a place at university.
This is school improvement.
When I went there with the local Member Nicola Roxon and the Education Minister, Peter Garrett, the week before last, the principal Geraldine Moloney told me that having us there was the second most exciting day in the school's history.
The most exciting was last year  -  when for the first time ever, Braybrook had two kids get perfect scores in a VCE subject.
These are two quick examples. 
There are so many more.
Take Glenala State High at Ipswich, St Mary's at Warren in New South Wales, or Beechboro Christian School in Perth.
Where what we have done  -  new buildings and computers, national curriculum and better quality teaching, more empowered principals and whole school improvement plans, a greater focus on literacy and numeracy  -  and more money  -  has made a difference.
Where every day these schools are showing change is possible  -  and transforming lives.
And in thirty or forty years' time, maybe one of their students will stand here as Prime Minister and tell their story.
In the meantime  -  perhaps you could invite a few of our Teach for Australia alumni to speak  -  the highest performing graduates who have gone teaching in schools like Katherine High School, Manor Lakes College and Calwell High School and transformed children's lives.
But ten or a hundred or even a thousand great examples are not enough. 
We don't need a warm inner glow or an inspirational movie plot  -  yes I liked Mr Chips too, though when I think of a great teacher today, I'm more likely to think of Jihad Dib at Punchbowl Boys High School  -  what we need is improvement in every single one of our nine and half thousand Australian schools.
I want each of you, the whole of our nation, to join me in this crusade.
First, I want our nation to dedicate itself to an education goal we can measure, a goal that will galvanise us, a goal we will work together to achieve.
Second, I want our nation to commit to a National Plan for School Improvement, which will achieve that goal for our children. 
Third, I want us to commit to fund Australian schools in a way that puts a child's needs at the heart of our funding decisions. So how high should we aim for our nation's children?
Every day in classrooms and homes around the country, we ask our children to aim high.  We set goals for them, we test and measure their progress towards achieving that goal.
They are the kids, we are the adults.  How can we in all good conscience impose such discipline on them if we aren't prepared to impose it on ourselves?
This is why I announce today that before the end of this year, I will introduce a bill to our Parliament: To enshrine our nation's expectations for what we will achieve for our children, our vision of the quality of education to which our children are entitled and our preparedness to put success for every child at the heart of how we deliver and fund education. 
By 2025, I want Australian schools to be back in the top five schooling systems in the world. 
By 2025, Australia should be ranked as a top 5 country in the world in Reading, Science and Mathematics  -  and for providing our children with a high-quality and high-equity education system.
Currently, Australia is ranked 7th on Reading and Science and 13th on Mathematics and is rated about 10th on providing a high-quality and high-equity education system.
So today I am setting an ambitious goal.  I have set our sights on 2025 because that gives us thirteen years  -  the time it usually takes a student to complete his or her schooling  -  to make Australia among the best in the world.
The Parliament and the people will become accountable to this generation of children and every generation to follow. 
It was an Act of our Australian Parliament that truly created Australian citizenship: when the Nationality and Citizenship Act came into force in 1949 Ben Chifley was the first to receive a citizenship certificate.
The Australian Education Act will establish our nation's support for a child's education as one of the entitlements of citizenship  -  it will state our great aspirations for school education reform.
It will be the most important Bill of 2012 and the most important Act of 2013.
It is the gift of the Australian people to our children.
To reach our legislated national goal, today I am also announcing that the Government is committed to a National Plan for School Improvement.
We will take everything we have learned about getting better results for our children to every school in Australia.
We will ask the States and Territories and Catholic and Independent schools to sign up to new requirements: Lifting teacher quality, including requiring more classroom experience before graduation and higher entry requirements for the teaching profession. More power for principals, including over budgets and staff selection. More information for parents through My School.
These are practical improvements you can touch, see and feel.
Nothing matters more to the quality of a child's education than the quality of the teacher standing in front of the class room.
I want that teacher to be someone who loves the job, who is of the highest calibre, who got the best training and support as a new teacher, who continuously hones their skills, who is delighted to have their skills measured and areas for improvement highlighted.
Under our plan, you will need to be at the top of your class to get in to a university teaching course. 
I want our nation to resound with the voices of parents saying to their teenage children: "Hadn't you better start hitting those books  -  after all you want to get in to teaching."
Instead of new teachers floundering or drifting away from teaching, they will be equipped for the classroom though practical experience during training and two years of support once in school.
Our young teachers will also have the support to ensure classroom discipline, to deal with bullying and cyber bullying, to prevent one or two disruptive children ruining school for all the others in the class.
And all of our teachers will be reviewed annually in their school, a thoroughgoing assessment of their skills and where they need to improve. 
Every school will have a school improvement plan and will be held to account against it.
We ask the children at school to face up to being measured and urged to improve, we are going to ask the adults to do the same.
Under our plan, children will be able to able spend longer in the school with breakfast clubs and after hours activities. 
Reading, writing, maths will be the foundation stones, taught, tested, improved.
Every child falling behind will get a personalised learning plan.
Principals will be empowered to lead their schools, making decisions that get improvements unencumbered by stifling bureaucracy.
Over the months ahead, we will legislate for our goals and for the framework for delivering the National Plan for School Improvement in schools.
And we will always respect that change is actually brought about day by day, minute by minute, on the ground in schools by principals, teachers and parents. 
So as we negotiate the detail of school funding and agree to the details of school improvement, we will harness the great insights of principals, teachers and parents around the nation.
There's no button you press for school improvement  -  schools are human organisations  -  but the change makers need to know you're on their side. 
And I am  -  prepared to fight alongside them and for them, to fight for change.
One of the biggest fights we had in creating My School was ensuring the site not only gave you details about a school's community and its results, but also about how much money each school gets.
I fought that fight and won it because I understood that funding mattered.
Not as an end in itself but as a means to an end  -  to improving schools.
It always seemed clear to me that if we could lay out transparently before the Australian people examples of schools teaching similar children but getting wildly different amounts of money and wildly different results, people would start asking the right question: "Can we make sure as a nation that every child's education is funded appropriately so they can succeed?"
I think we've done that  -  and now the Independent Review of Funding for Schooling has helped us answer this question.
Today I announce that the Government will adopt the Review's core recommendation that every child's education should be supported with a benchmark amount of funding: a new Schooling Resource Standard based on what it costs to educate a student at the schools we know already get strong results.
And that extra needs should be met through a system of needs loadings  -  extra funding, per student, to help students from low SES backgrounds, indigenous students, students with disability and students with limited English skills, as well as to help with extra costs for small and remote schools.
Funding should recognise that children are individuals, not standardised widgets. 
This is not just about disadvantaged kids, not just about gifted kids, it's about all students.
The resources needed to get a great quality education for children vary. 
And improving every child's education will need more resources in the future than have been available in the past.
The Government has not accepted every aspect of the Gonski model: above all because we want funding for all  schools to continue to rise.
But we agree with that broad standard plus loadings structure and that is the new model we will adopt for funding all schools.
It is a model that strips away all the old debates about private versus public and puts children at the centre of the funding system. 
Children with their individual strengths and needs.  
Children in whatever school their parents have chosen for them.  Children in every part of the nation.
It is a model that I will now take to the States and Territories, to Catholic and Independent schools, in order to win their support.
Currently, the Federal Government provides about thirty per cent of the public funding to schools and the States and Territories fund about seventy. 
So, it is a model that challenges all of us, the Federal Government and State and Territory Governments to change and to find more resources for education. 
Specifically, the Independent panel challenged all Governments to provide an extra $6.5 billion annually in today's money.
Should this be done? 
I believe as a nation we should aim to make new money of this order available to our nation's schools, provided we can ensure that every dollar of the money makes a difference by having an appropriate transition to the new system and tying the money to improving schools. 
In addition, everyone in our schools and State and Territory Governments must be prepared to play their part for change.
There should be no blank cheques.
The money should be for better results for our children not more jobs for bureaucrats.
State Governments must put in their fair share. 
No sleight of hand, no fiddling of the books to substitute Federal funding for cuts by the States.
And we should take the time necessary to get the right result.
We're proposing a six year transition to the new system and a thirteen year goal for the education of our nation's children.
Change of this scale takes time. Our schools are already funded for next year so the beginning of change will be in 2014.
New funding will be contingent on States and systems agreeing to and delivering school improvement  -  and school improvement takes time.
This is not a reform to a regulation through a stroke of a pen.
This is improving the performance of nine and a half thousand Australian organisations, our schools.  Lifting the skills of hundreds of thousands of teachers.
And then actually teaching children.
How long that takes is never simply a question of will, or of resources. 
Inherent to the task is time  -  not just to get it right, but just literally to get it done.
Education is a patient investment. 
Improving our schools will require our patience and determination.
It will also require some tough budget choices, for all levels of Government.
I am prepared to make those choices but I want the Australian people to understand that today I am asking them to support not just our goals for school improvement but the tough budget choices that go with that.
Governing is and has always been about setting priorities  -  and I want to make very clear this is not just one of my priorities, but one of the country's priorities.
As a Government, our minds will focus on keeping our economy strong and delivering jobs for working people and help for their loved ones while our hearts will beat strongly for our nation's children and Australians with a disability.
Head and heart will combine in a stronger and fairer future.
Those children with a great education will become the deliverers of prosperity in a high wage, high skill future. 
Australians with disabilities will be included in our nation's life and workplaces.
Together, as a nation, we can and will be good at this.
Making the right choices, even when they are hard.  Being fair to each other.  Building the future.
Look at the tough choices we have already made to fund our Labor priorities.
We got rid of the dependent spouse tax offset.
We got rid of tax breaks for golden handshakes.
We slashed tax concessions on super for high income earners.
We ditched the millionaires' dental scheme and fringe benefits loopholes for executives away from home.
We means-tested the private health insurance rebate.
Big controversy, big headlines, big criticism the right thing to do, the Labor thing to do.  And you'll see more of it.
And you'll see me asking the States and Territories to share my passion for improving our schools and putting our children first. 
I will personally lead these discussions and my aim is to settle the funding model through COAG processes. 
I want to conclude these discussions by the time of the first COAG meeting next year. 
But I won't be held to ransom by States who aren't genuinely committed to reform  -  and I am prepared to work quickly with those States and systems who share my commitment to school improvement.
And as I pursue this work, as the Government drives for change, the centre of our plan will be the children, their schooling, their future.
So the girl standing alone in the corner of the playground is noticed and the boy sitting silent in the back row learns.
So words of encouragement and community applause are heard as often for the stars of mathematics as they are on the sports field and in the music hall.
So the principal knows every student by name ... and every parent knows their child's teachers' names.
Our plan will ensure that the humane goals of education will remain supreme.
From a little boy's first book to a decade later when he first finds an unexpected irony in a Shakespearean sonnet.
From a little girl's first times-table to a decade later when she realises that a curve she's mapping describes a real world behaviour she's observed, but never understood.
In a study group, unearthing a new fact about our past ... and sharing new opinions on the historical controversies of today.
And our plan will make our competitors in the region sit up and notice.
Our kids catching Shanghai's kids.
More patents, more clever exports, another Nobel Prize.
Our schools in the top five in the world.
A national crusade, a chance for change, education transforming the life of every child.


National Press Club, Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
	Today, I am here to talk about our children, their education, their lives and their future.
	As I speak, more than three million children are at school and millions more will follow them in the years to come.
	On their behalf, I call on you to join me in a national crusade to give those children a better education and a better future.
	Education transforms lives. I know because it transformed mine.
	The story of my parents' lives is a story of education denied. 
	My parents were born around the time of the Great Depression and their earliest memories are of World War II. 
	My father, despite winning academic prizes and scholarships, left school at fourteen.  His family couldn't afford not to have him working.  My mother suffered ill health as a child and her schooling suffered too.
	Despite their schooling history, both are intelligent and well-read and have lived successful and happy lives.
	But born in a different era, or into different circumstances, my mother and father would easily have succeeded at university and pursued professional careers.
	As an adult, I understand their stories aren't unusual for their generation.
	But as a child, their stories were my world, the backdrop of my life.
	Because my parents had hungered for education, they wanted their daughter to enjoy all its benefits.
	And so as a young girl, I was painstakingly taught to read by my mother before I went to school.   As luck would have it the public schools I was zoned to attend were great schools. 
	I liked school and succeeded at it.  I had some great teachers, a group of friends focussed on doing well, a family ready to support me in every way.
	But even in great schools like Unley High, I was conscious of the kids who struggled, who got left behind.  Indeed achievement and underachievement were obvious  -  due to streaming and stigma. 
	I was in the top class, others were in classes routinely and  cruelly referred to as  veggie class'.  We were marked for success  -  they were marked for failure.
	And in the days before it was commonplace for children with disabilities to be mainstreamed into schools, the one girl with a disability led a lonely life.  I have frequently reproached myself for not spending more time with her.
	My parents' life stories are of education denied.  And I saw education's full power denied to some of my school mates.
	I have always been conscious of being the lucky one  -  my life story is of education's transformative power.
	So from my earliest years, the life changing unfairness of being denied a great education has struck me as a moral wrong.
	For me, eradicating that moral wrong is what drove me into politics and drives me still.
	All these years later, from the perspective of the Prime Ministership, I understand much more about what makes and what denies a great education than when I first started protesting against cutbacks to university funding as a student activist at Adelaide University.
	And today, I want you to see what I see when I look at our nation's schools  -  I want you to hear what I hear when I talk to business leaders and the leaders of nations around our region.
	Above all, I want you to share my passion and adopt my plan of action for improving our schools and our children's lives.
	I fought a ferocious battle as Education Minister to create My School and to get each of us, all of us, more information than we have ever had before on the education of our children.
	On my first day in Government, no one in this nation could have given you the list of our best performing schools or our worst performing schools.
	I was told that couldn't be fixed.  I was faced with political resistance from all sides.
	But now you can get more information than our nation has ever had before on Australian schools on your smart phone.
	I was determined to win the My School battle because I always believed that the more we knew about our children's education, the more we would be driven to improve it. 
	Now we have the information from My School and other sources like international tests across the OECD, we must face up to the truths it is revealing.
	The first truth is we have to aim higher for every child in every school.
	Four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region and we aren't in that coveted top five.
	To take one telling example, the average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
	The second truth is we particularly need to improve the education of our poorer children.
	By year three, 89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average.
	These are not children raised in extremes of violence, neglect or disadvantage. 
	Just kids whose parents pack their lunch, take them to school on the way to work and expect they're being taught to read and write while they're at school.  And they're not.
	Today, unless those kids from the poorest quarter are brilliant, they are getting below average results in reading.
	And once they are behind, far too many of them stay there.
	By year nine, the average child from the same battling family is two years behind children from the most well-off quarter of Australian homes in reading and maths.
	I see the faces of these kids in the school across the road from where I live in Altona. 
	We shouldn't be letting them down.
	And the third truth is we are failing our indigenous children.
	There are about 18,800 indigenous school children in very remote Australia.
	Today in very remote Australia the average indigenous child is still reading below a year three level in year nine.
	And for any one tempted to shrug their shoulders and say that's bad, but I don't have school-aged kids, so it's someone else's problem', contemplate this  -  we cannot have a strong economy and prosperous future if the skills of our workforce lag behind the skills of our competitors.
	Leaders of Asian nations tell me when I meet with them of their relentless focus on education, of how, even as they drag people out of poverty, they are determined to shape their future economic success by driving their children to the top of the class.
	We mightn't want to replicate the methods of their schooling systems but you have to admire their drive for results.
	Business leaders tell me about skill shortages today and how the future will demand higher and higher skill levels. 
	Put bluntly, our businesses will be unable to compete if our children's education keeps falling behind.
	To win the economic race, we must first win the education race.
	For our children to get the jobs of the future, we must give them a great education now.
	And we can get it done. Change is possible. 
	I can prove it to you because we have already created change. 
	Take Cowra Public School. Arural primary school in the central west of New South Wales with around 370 students  -  nearly twenty per cent of the kids are Aboriginal.
	The 2009 national testing scores showed Cowra's year three kids were at best level, and sometimes behind kids from comparable schools.
	The Government ensured the school had that information but it was only the starting pistol.
	The principal Brad Tom, the teachers, the parents and the kids were the ones who had to run.
	The Kindergarten teachers used phonics to teach reading.
	The school hired 6 extra School Learning Support Officers to run individual reading tutorials. 
	They sat with every struggling child, every day, for half an hour.
	One on one, side by side, uninterrupted, their fingers running along under the lines on a book, sounding out words, patiently and practically teaching how to read.
	The whole school community got stuck in. 
	And it worked. 
	In 2010 and 2011, Cowra's kids went from being level with or behind kids at comparable Australian schools to catching up  -  and often being in front.
	Step by step, year by year: this is school improvement.
	Or take Braybrook College in Melbourne's West.
	A thousand kids from a disadvantaged district, with parents and grandparents from every part of the world, more than 600 from families in the poorest quarter of Australian homes.
	A battling school community that knew it could do better for the kids who need school the most.
	So we gave Braybrook targeted funding to support their improvement plans.
	Four extra literacy lessons every week in year seven and eight.
	Seven hundred and twenty two computers plus funding for external staff to help the teachers use them well.
	We brought the school library into the digital age  -  and Building the Education Revolution gave Braybrook a new science lab.
	And it worked.
	Now, the school's mean VCE score is above the state average  -  up 6 points, to 30.1, in eight years.
	Last year, almost seventy per cent of Braybrook's year 12 students were offered a place at university.
	This is school improvement.
	When I went there with the local Member Nicola Roxon and the Education Minister, Peter Garrett, the week before last, the principal Geraldine Moloney told me that having us there was the second most exciting day in the school's history.
	The most exciting was last year  -  when for the first time ever, Braybrook had two kids get perfect scores in a VCE subject.
	These are two quick examples. 
	There are so many more.
	Take Glenala State High at Ipswich, St Mary's at Warren in New South Wales, or Beechboro Christian School in Perth.
	Where what we have done  -  new buildings and computers, national curriculum and better quality teaching, more empowered principals and whole school improvement plans, a greater focus on literacy and numeracy  -  and more money  -  has made a difference.
	Where every day these schools are showing change is possible  -  and transforming lives.
	And in thirty or forty years' time, maybe one of their students will stand here as Prime Minister and tell their story.
	In the meantime  -  perhaps you could invite a few of our Teach for Australia alumni to speak  -  the highest performing graduates who have gone teaching in schools like Katherine High School, Manor Lakes College and Calwell High School and transformed children's lives.
	But ten or a hundred or even a thousand great examples are not enough. 
	We don't need a warm inner glow or an inspirational movie plot  -  yes I liked Mr Chips too, though when I think of a great teacher today, I'm more likely to think of Jihad Dib at Punchbowl Boys High School  -  what we need is improvement in every single one of our nine and half thousand Australian schools.
	I want each of you, the whole of our nation, to join me in this crusade.
	First, I want our nation to dedicate itself to an education goal we can measure, a goal that will galvanise us, a goal we will work together to achieve.
	Second, I want our nation to commit to a National Plan for School Improvement, which will achieve that goal for our children. 
	Third, I want us to commit to fund Australian schools in a way that puts a child's needs at the heart of our funding decisions.
So how high should we aim for our nation's children?
Every day in classrooms and homes around the country, we ask our children to aim high.  We set goals for them, we test and measure their progress towards achieving that goal.
They are the kids, we are the adults.  How can we in all good conscience impose such discipline on them if we aren't prepared to impose it on ourselves?
This is why I announce today that before the end of this year, I will introduce a bill to our Parliament: To enshrine our nation's expectations for what we will achieve for our children, our vision of the quality of education to which our children are entitled and our preparedness to put success for every child at the heart of how we deliver and fund education. 
By 2025, I want Australian schools to be back in the top five schooling systems in the world. 
By 2025, Australia should be ranked as a top 5 country in the world in Reading, Science and Mathematics  -  and for providing our children with a high-quality andhigh-equity education system.
Currently, Australia is ranked 7th on Reading and Science and 13th on Mathematics and is rated about 10th on providing a high-quality and high-equity education system.
So today I am setting an ambitious goal.  I have set our sights on 2025 because that gives us thirteen years  -  the time it usually takes a student to complete his or her schooling  -  to make Australia among the best in the world.
The Parliament and the people will become accountable to this generation of children and every generation to follow. 
It was an Act of our Australian Parliament that truly created Australian citizenship: when the Nationality and Citizenship Act came into force in 1949 Ben Chifley was the first to receive a citizenship certificate.
The Australian Education Act will establish our nation's support for a child's education as one of the entitlements of citizenship  -  it will state our great aspirations for school education reform.
It will be the most important Bill of 2012 and the most important Act of 2013.
It is the gift of the Australian people to our children.
To reach our legislated national goal, today I am also announcing that the Government is committed to a National Plan for School Improvement.
We will take everything we have learned about getting better results for our children to every school in Australia.
We will ask the States and Territories and Catholic and Independent schools to sign up to new requirements:
 * 	Lifting teacher quality, including requiring more classroom experience before graduation and higher entry requirements for the teaching profession.
 * 	More power for principals, including over budgets and staff selection.
 * 	More information for parents through My School.
These are practical improvements you can touch, see and feel.
Nothing matters more to the quality of a child's education than the quality of the teacher standing in front of the class room.
I want that teacher to be someone who loves the job, who is of the highest calibre, who got the best training and support as a new teacher, who continuously hones their skills, who is delighted to have their skills measured and areas for improvement highlighted.
Under our plan, you will need to be at the top of your class to get in to a university teaching course. 
I want our nation to resound with the voices of parents saying to their teenage children: "Hadn't you better start hitting those books  -  after all you want to get in to teaching."
Instead of new teachers floundering or drifting away from teaching, they will be equipped for the classroom though practical experience during training and two years of support once in school.
Our young teachers will also have the support to ensure classroom discipline, to deal with bullying and cyber bullying, to prevent one or two disruptive children ruining school for all the others in the class.
And all of our teachers will be reviewed annually in their school, a thoroughgoing assessment of their skills and where they need to improve. 
Every school will have a school improvement plan and will be held to account against it.
We ask the children at school to face up to being measured and urged to improve, we are going to ask the adults to do the same.
Under our plan, children will be able to able spend longer in the school with breakfast clubs and after hours activities. 
Reading, writing, maths will be the foundation stones, taught, tested, improved.
Every child falling behind will get a personalised learning plan.
Principals will be empowered to lead their schools, making decisions that get improvements unencumbered by stifling bureaucracy.
Over the months ahead, we will legislate for our goals and for the framework for delivering the National Plan for School Improvement in schools.
And we will always respect that change is actually brought about day by day, minute by minute, on the ground in schools by principals, teachers and parents. 
So as we negotiate the detail of school funding and agree to the details of school improvement, we will harness the great insights of principals, teachers and parents around the nation.
There's no button you press for school improvement  -  schools are human organisations  -  but the change makers need to know you're on their side. 
And I am  -  prepared to fight alongside them and for them, to fight for change.
One of the biggest fights we had in creating My School was ensuring the site not only gave you details about a school's community and its results, but also about how much money each school gets.
I fought that fight and won it because I understood that funding mattered.
Not as an end in itself but as a means to an end  -  to improving schools.
It always seemed clear to me that if we could lay out transparently before the Australian people examples of schools teaching similar children but getting wildly different amounts of money and wildly different results, people would start asking the right question: "Can we make sure as a nation that every child's education is funded appropriately so they can succeed?"
I think we've done that  -  and now the Independent Review of Funding for Schooling has helped us answer this question.
Today I announce that the Government will adopt the Review's core recommendation that every child's education should be supported with a benchmark amount of funding: anew Schooling Resource Standard based on what it costs to educate a student at the schools we know already get strong results.
And that extra needs should be met through a system of needs loadings  -  extra funding, per student, to help students from low SES backgrounds,
indigenous students, students with disability and students with limited English skills, as well as to help with extra costs for small and remote schools.
Funding should recognise that children are individuals, not standardised widgets. 
This is not just about disadvantaged kids, not just about gifted kids, it's about all students.
The resources needed to get a great quality education for children vary. 
And improving every child's education will need more resources in the future than have been available in the past.
The Government has not accepted every aspect of the Gonski model: above all because we want funding for all  schools to continue to rise.
But we agree with that broad standard plus loadings structure and that is the new model we will adopt for funding all schools.
It is a model that strips away all the old debates about private versus public and puts children at the centre of the funding system. 
Children with their individual strengths and needs.   
Children in whatever school their parents have chosen for them.  Children in every part of the nation.
It is a model that I will now take to the States and Territories, to Catholic and Independent schools, in order to win their support.
Currently, the Federal Government provides about thirty per cent of the public funding to schools and the States and Territories fund about seventy. 
So, it is a model that challenges all of us, the Federal Government and State and Territory Governments to change and to find more resources for education. 
Specifically, the Independent panel challenged all Governments to provide an extra $6.5 billion annually in today's money.
Should this be done? 
I believe as a nation we should aim to make new money of this order available to our nation's schools, provided we can ensure that every dollar of the money makes a difference by having an appropriate transition to the new system and tying the money to improving schools. 
In addition, everyone in our schools and State and Territory Governments must be prepared to play their part for change.
There should be no blank cheques.
The money should be for better results for our children not more jobs for bureaucrats.
State Governments must put in their fair share. 
No sleight of hand, no fiddling of the books to substitute Federal funding for cuts by the States.
And we should take the time necessary to get the right result.
We're proposing a six year transition to the new system and a thirteen year goal for the education of our nation's children.
Change of this scale takes time. Our schools are already funded for next year so the beginning of change will be in 2014.
New funding will be contingent on States and systems agreeing to and delivering school improvement  -  and school improvement takes time.
This is not a reform to a regulation through a stroke of a pen.
This is improving the performance of nine and a half thousand Australian organisations, our schools.  Lifting the skills of hundreds of thousands of teachers.
And then actually teaching children.
How long that takes is never simply a question of will, or of resources. 
Inherent to the task is time  -  not just to get it right, but just literally to get it done.
Education is a patient investment. 
Improving our schools will require our patience and determination.
It will also require some tough budget choices, for all levels of Government.
I am prepared to make those choices but I want the Australian people to understand that today I am asking them to support not just our goals for school improvement but the tough budget choices that go with that.
Governing is and has always been about setting priorities  -  and I want to make very clear this is not just one of my priorities, but one of the country's priorities.
As a Government, our minds will focus on keeping our economy strong and delivering jobs for working people and help for their loved ones while our hearts will beat strongly for our nation's children and Australians with a disability.
Head and heart will combine in a stronger and fairer future.
Those children with a great education will become the deliverers of prosperity in a high wage, high skill future. 
Australians with disabilities will be included in our nation's life and workplaces.
Together, as a nation, we can and will be good at this.
Making the right choices, even when they are hard.  Being fair to each other.  Building the future.
Look at the tough choices we have already made to fund our Labor priorities.
We got rid of the dependent spouse tax offset.
We got rid of tax breaks for golden handshakes.
We slashed tax concessions on super for high income earners.
We ditched the millionaires' dental scheme and fringe benefits loopholes for executives away from home.
We means-tested the private health insurance rebate.
Big controversy, big headlines, big criticism the right thing to do, the Labor thing to do.  And you'll see more of it.
And you'll see me asking the States and Territories to share my passion for improving our schools and putting our children first. 
I will personally lead these discussions and my aim is to settle the funding model through COAG processes. 
I want to conclude these discussions by the time of the first COAG meeting next year. 
But I won't be held to ransom by States who aren't genuinely committed to reform  -  and I am prepared to work quickly with those States and systems who share my commitment to school improvement.
And as I pursue this work, as the Government drives for change, the centre of our plan will be the children, their schooling, their future.
So the girl standing alone in the corner of the playground is noticed and the boy sitting silent in the back row learns.
So words of encouragement and community applause are heard as often for the stars of mathematics as they are on the sports field and in the music hall.
So the principal knows every student by name ... and every parent knows their child's teachers' names.
Our plan will ensure that the humane goals of education will remain supreme.
From a little boy's first book to a decade later when he first finds an unexpected irony in a Shakespearean sonnet.
From a little girl's first times-table to a decade later when she realises that a curve she's mapping describes a real world behaviour she's observed, but never understood.
In a study group, unearthing a new fact about our past ... and sharing new opinions on the historical controversies of today.
And our plan will make our competitors in the region sit up and notice.
Our kids catching Shanghai's kids.
More patents, more clever exports another Nobel Prize.
Our schools in the top five in the world.
A national crusade, a chance for change, education transforming the life of every child.


Perth
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's great to be back in Perth  -  the city that says so much about where our nation is headed.
It's great to be back talking with the mining industry  -  the sector that says so much about how we will get there.
I'm here because AMEC's member companies are the explorers; the discoverers.
If it's there, you'll find it.
If you find it, you'll dig it up.
You are tough and resourceful.
Qualities I know a bit about myself.
And so I meet with you here today in a genuine spirit of respect and shared concern.
Nothing has preoccupied me in public life more than how we ensure our nation remains prosperous and opens up that prosperity to all our people.
Yes, last week we saw some outstanding capital expenditure figures.
Mining investment was $47 billion in 2010-11.
$82 billion in 2011-12.
It's set to hit $119 billion by the end of this financial year.
That's 13 times higher than before the mining boom, much of it from overseas.
Let's make sure Australia's door remains open to foreign investment based on clear national interest rules, rather than the populist posturing we see in some quarters.
We can also take heart from Monday's exploration data, which showed that trend exploration expenditure rose 3.1 per cent in the June quarter, up 23 per cent on the same quarter last year.
But I know there is uncertainty out there as well  - 
From depressed conditions in Europe and the US.
From a softening of growth as China prepares for its new leadership and rebalances its economy.
And from the rise of resource competitors elsewhere in the Southern Hemisphere.
These factors are being reflected in commodity prices, with coal and iron ore coming off their highs.
And some of the stuff close to your hearts and hands  -  like zinc, nickel and mineral sands  -  are suffering set-backs as well.
I also know that investment decisions are becoming more complex as projects become more complex.
But let's be clear.
Reports of the mining boom's death have been exaggerated.
This is a boom with three distinct phases:
A prices boom - which is now passing.
An investment boom - still to reach its peak as seen in those remarkable capex figures.
A production boom - as all that effort comes to fruition in the years and decades ahead.
I talk of "decades" because the Asian Century stands firmly behind the peaks and troughs of the business cycle.
It's a transformation on the scale of the Industrial Revolution.
It's happening on our doorstep.
And it's not even half-way done.
China is still - in broad terms - only 50 per cent through its process of urbanisation and industrialisation.
JPMorgan chief China economist Haibin Zhu recently noted Chinese demand for Australia's resources would slow but remain at a very high level over the next five to 10 years.
Likewise, Rio Tinto CEO Tom Albanese said recently that Europe would contribute to a "soft demand period" until early next year, while China's industrialisation would drive healthy commodity prices for decades.
Again that word "decades"; and that's just China.
India is yet to undertake the most dramatic stage of its rise.
To say nothing of the development we expect to see in South-East Asia, South America and Africa over the next 50 years.
That's the race we're in.
A race that's ours to win or lose.
Friends,
It was famously said that Battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton.
It could be said that the race of the Asian Century will be won in the classrooms of Kent Street Senior High School down the road from here and its sister schools around the nation.
Our 9500 schools are the crucible where Australia's economic future is being forged.
That's why I was so proud yesterday to launch the Government's National Plan for School Improvement.
Nothing is more important to our future.
Because schooling equals skills equals jobs.
High skilled, high paying, high value-adding jobs.
And a mining conference is a great place to explain why higher school standards will make us winners in the Asian economic race.
Think about this way.
You are risk-takers  -  renowned for your drive and determination.
But what about our teachers.
They turn a four-year-old who has just graduated from pre-school into a twenty-four-year old engineer who has graduated with world-class mining skills.
Teachers see the potential in kids, you see the potential in a landscape.
You invest in mines.
They invest in minds.
Both yield big returns but only by playing it smart.
It wasn't luck that built a mining industry.
It was skill.
Our human endowment realising the possibilities of our natural endowment.
Great engineers.
Great geologists.
Great technicians.
Great tradies.
It's the common ground we share here today.
To put it simply:
You want skilled workers in Australia.
I want working Australians to have skills.
It would take a special sort of contrariness for us to find a way to disagree about that.
But we don't.
Some of my most productive discussions have been with the mining industry about skills.
I know that the struggle for skills raises your costs and blows-out your timelines.
When you undertake a big project, you can line up the funding, the approvals the equipment but still be left asking  -  where do I get the people?
Government action is part of the answer.
That's why our new HECS for Skills plan and our $700 million National Workforce Development Fund matter.
It's also why things like the Jobs Board matter.
There are more than fourteen hundred jobs on offer at the moment.
Australians need to be willing to take those jobs  -  and they are.
Over sixteen thousand job seekers are registered on the Jobs Board.
These are hardworking Australians looking to your industry for a chance.
The nation as a whole is looking to you as well.
Yes, migration has a place but it is not going to be the cure-all that some may think.
Why fly workers in from Manila or Shanghai when they could be flying in from Hobart or Adelaide, especially given the softening of construction and manufacturing in many parts of the nation?
Why hold job expos in the eastern states of America when you could be holding them in the eastern States of Australia.
I don't want the mining industry to hire a single foreign worker if there is an Australian worker who can do the job.
The heavy lifting will need to be done by the skills system and by your own efforts, in conjunction with the Commonwealth and State Governments, to attract more domestic labour to the opportunities on offer.
Of course, I recognise it's not always as easy as that.
Many Australians have the ambition to work in your industry but not the skills.
In some cases their lack of skills goes beyond VET certificates to the foundational skills of reading and writing and the whole ability to learn in a formal setting.
I see that among the unemployed in my own electorate in Melbourne.
I see it  -  and I'm angered by it.
These men and women are a lost educational generation.
The cohort our system has failed.
And because only seven per cent of future new jobs will be unskilled, a lack of skills is a passport straight to the dole queue.
We do still have a great education system.
But as places like China and South Korea aim higher, our educational performance is falling behind, especially in those key areas of science and maths.
Even our top students are not quite achieving what they did a decade ago.
Nothing should keep a leader, indeed a mining executive, awake at night more than improving the quality of education in this country.
Consider my in tray when I became Education Minister five years ago:
We didn't have nation-wide testing of English and maths.
We didn't have a national curriculum.
No way to reward top teachers.
No national plan to devolve more power to school principals. 
We didn't know the names of the worst performing schools or how to find them.
The only thing worse than seeing those results is hearing the Coalition say there is no problem and we should just stick with the status quo.
Well, we knew there was a problem, and here's what we did about it:
We doubled Federal investment in education.
Introduced new teaching requirements for literacy and numeracy.
A National Curriculum.
Measure to attract high quality teachers and empower principals.
New research into high performance and how it can be spread to every school.
We made NAPLAN testing universal and compulsory.
And we published the results on the Internet so every Australian can see the results.
You can look the numbers up right now and they'll tell you this:
Australia's school results are good but not good enough.
Over the last decade, we've fallen from 2nd to 7th in reading and from 5th to 13th in maths.
The average 15 year old maths student in Australia is more than two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
And children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are two years behind children from the most well-off quarter in reading and mathematics by Year 9.
That is just not acceptable to me. 
It should not be acceptable to you as the employers of Australia.
Or as the parents of Australia.
That's got to change  -  and it's going to change.
The blueprint is the Gonski Report, done not by an academic but by a hard-headed businessman well at home in the nation's boardrooms.
The first comprehensive funding review in 39 years.
Gonski tells us the same thing that the Karmel Report told us all those years ago:
Some Australian schools don't have the resources they need.
So we need a resource standard that ensures every school has the funds it needs to do the job.
Karmel thought we'd get that standard in place by 1979.
I'm just glad we'll start getting it in place from 2014.
But Gonski is not just a funding review.
It's an historic opportunity to stop school resources being the issue and instead make school improvement the issue.
By giving every school a benchmark funding allocation, the issue of resources can finally be taken off the table.
Performance stays on the table.
That's why I've called it a National Plan for School Improvement.
It will do all those things industry has been advocating for years:
The best teachers appointed, appraised and appreciated.
Strong principals with the right powers.
A strong ethos of learning in the school.
Using data to make sure all students are learning.
A strong partnership with parents and the community.
And the resources our teachers and principals need.
These are the things that will improve all our schools  -  government and non-government, religious and secular, city and bush.
Like any company here today, we have a strategic goal behind our thinking:
A child starting school next year will graduate in 2025  -  thirteen years' time.
That's as long as it can take to plan a big resources project.
You understand a thirteen year pipeline of investment in mines. 
I have a thirteen year pipeline of investment in minds.
So by 2025 I want Australia to be back in the top five countries educationally.
Getting there won't be easy.
It will take money for sure; but as we saw with the NDIS, the availability of money depends on the availability of will-power and cooperation.
Now the mining industry knows a thing or two about lobbying.
Let's say you can be influential when you get together.
So use that tremendous organising power to say to the Premiers and Chief Ministers: get on board with Gillard's plan.
This plan requires a nation-wide effort.
A nation-wide effort to get schooling right, and to keep it right.
Remember friends,
It's no accident that our National Plan for School Improvement is being announced in the same year we launch our White Paper on the Asian Century.
The two are linked, and they are linked fundamentally.
There is no question about whether we have a boom.
The issue is whether we make it last.
My school improvement plan is a plan to make the boom last.
Along with all our other work in broadband, infrastructure, clean energy, innovation, universities and skills, tax reform and deregulation.
It's the sophisticated, evidence-based package that will ensure the productivity of the future.
Not by raking over old debates or transporting us back on a cosy tide of mythology to an imaginary past.
Remember what Australia was really like five years ago:
Inflationary pressures were building and interest rates were high.
The tax take was at a record high as well.
Households were borrowing more than they saved.
Industry was complaining about skill shortages and falling educational standards.
You didn't have the infrastructure you needed.
And we didn't have a broadband plan two decades after the World Wide Web had been invented.
All that despite the biggest growth in national income our economy had ever seen.
Thoroughly unworthy of the great nation we are and can be.
We've set out to fix all that.
To identify the drivers of growth in a mature, developed economy where we compete on quality and value-adding.
To get beyond this myth we can ever drag our wages and taxes low enough to match our Asian competitors on price.
We can't.
And we wouldn't want to.
For two hundred years, we've worked hard to build what we have today.
A prosperous, advanced, resilient economy that offers wealth and opportunity for its people.
If you want to find the government and the party that has a plan for the future of such a country, look for the outfit that has a plan for education.
We have that plan.
And if we hew to the right path, it will take us where we need to go.
It requires something else too.
Something the kids down the road at Kent Street Senior High understand because it's their school motto: Courage.
We didn't get where we are as a nation by cringing in the face of challenges.
Or wrapping ourselves in the comfortable blanket of nostalgia.
Winning in the Asian Century will take courage.
It's not a journey for the faint-hearted.
And I don't believe for a moment there's a single faint heart in this room.
So I present to you my plan for educational improvement today as business leaders, as parents, and as citizens who hold high hopes for the future of our nation.
It's a plan to win the economic race by winning the education race.
And I believe with every fibre of my being that we can win those races.
We're good enough
We're smart enough.
Let's show we're courageous enough as well.


Vladivostok, Russia
I'm happy to describe what's going on in our country though I think nations are always going to find their own pathways forward.
I would start by commenting, we've just seen from the video presentation that education is a gender question across the region and across the world. Too often it's women who miss out on education. It's a development question and so the level of education available to people in the developing world is not the same as the developed world. But the perspective we take in our own nation, it is a quintessentially economic question.
The standards of our education today are going to define how prosperous a nation we are for tomorrow. And so we have taken a very hard-headed approach to reforming education which has brought some of the tools which would be very familiar in the private sector and applied them to public policy.
Most particularly, we have insisted on transparency at every level of education. Early childhood education, we are making the quality of our childcare centres and early learning centres transparent to parents. We focussed a great deal on transparency in school education where the results of national testing are now available for all of our nine and a half thousand schools together with a great deal of information about the socioeconomic status of the children at the school, what the school conceptualises it's mission as, attendance rates, whole-school plans  -  these things are all available on what we call the MySchool website and you can contrast and compare between similar schools and the national average on testing.
We're bringing that same kind of transparency to our vocational education and training system through the MySkills website and the same transparency to our universities so that prospective students and employers can see quality and outcomes across universities.
That transparency is then partnered with the setting of goals  -  we have a set of 2020 goals about the performance of our education system. The numbers of Australians with vocational qualifications, the number of Australians with undergraduate or higher qualifications, and just last Monday I have joined to those 2020 goals a goal for 2025 that Australia's schooling system would be in the top five in the world.
Currently on the international testing, the PISA rankings run by the OECD, we've got a good education system but we have seen our schooling system start to slip behind and as other nations have worked to strengthen and reform their system.
And we have been particularly focussed on the fact that living in this region of the world where we will see so much of the globe's history written in the next hundred years and particularly the shifting of economic weight to this region, there are four schooling systems that are getting results in PISA testing above Australia's. They are Hong Kong and Shanghai and South Korea are getting results above Australia's so we are obviously concerned about that and wanting to focus on improving our schooling system.
In terms of the tools of reform, we believe a lot of innovation happens on the ground so the best thing that Government can do is support that innovation and change rather than try to micro-manage what happens in the classroom.
We have been huge investors in better quality teaching including attracting the best graduates to get into teaching through an initiative you call called Teach for Australia and we are now going to broaden that initiative by insisting on higher literacy and numeracy standards for people who go into teaching.
We've set quality standards for teaching in universities and we're also focussed on quality of teaching in vocational education and training and we have set qualification requirements for the people who teach preschool-age children.
We've also focussed a great deal on the impact of disadvantage. We know that children from poorer homes can get a great education but that you have to focus on it and put more resources into it. We are therefore on a journey to move our school funding system so that the child's needs are at the centre of the system and extra resources are available for the teaching of all students but particularly the teaching of students from disadvantaged homes and indigenous Australians.
We focussed on getting people from low SES backgrounds into universities and we've enjoyed some considerable success at that. We've embraced new teaching methodologies, we have national curriculum, we ran what we called the Digital Education Revolution to turbo-charge the number of computers in schools.
When we needed economic stimulus in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis we focussed a lot of that capital into education, not just schools but we've really revolutionised capital in vocational education and training and in universities.
So we're bringing this combination together on a journey of change. We're not done yet, we've got a lot more to do to reach our ambitious goals for 2020 and 2025, but it's very much a driving focus of what Government at the national level is delivering for the Australian people.
In our region we partner with the countries around the region in aid and development work which is focussed on education, but we also are big exchangers both at research and at the student level. I think the statistic is 175,000 students from the APEC countries are studying in Australian universities and vocational education training today. We would be looking to increase that number and we think the focus here at this APEC meeting on the mobility of students, staff and institutions setting up in each other's country's is a really a very important vision of the future.
So it's a great passion of mine, I know it's a great passion of everybody in this room and education, we believe, is the central driver of change for our own nation and for the region in which we live. 


Brisbane
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's good to be amongst friends at the end of what has been a long and sad week.
I want to, through you, thank the Labor family for all of the expressions of condolence and support that I and my family have received at this difficult time.
My father, John, was a great Labor man.
He came from the coal mining valleys of Wales, he came from a life of hardship and he came with hope and courage and determination to make a life here in this land of wonderful opportunity.
And he found that opportunity.
He found a vocation that he loved as a psychiatric nurse providing care and concern and support for others, to people who needed that support the most.
He believed in public service. He always believed how important it was for people to give their lives to public service and to do good for others.
He believed in opportunity and the sharing of it. He had received opportunities in this country but he never wanted to close the door behind him.
He wanted to see that opportunity shared.
He was a Labor man through and through.
He believed in Labor, he believed in me, he believed in you, and your recognition of his passing has been truly heartwarming for me. Thank you.
Friends, you meet here this weekend with a great purpose for Queensland: the long march back.
Proud of your achievements in fourteen years in office.
Humbled by the judgment of the people and the State you serve.
More willing than ever to fight the good fight and absolutely determined to offer Queensland the choice of a good Labor Government in 2015.
Because after this week you don't need me to tell you:
Queenslanders deserve better than this.
The human cost of the LNP's state budget is dreadful.
Fourteen thousand Queensland jobs will be lost because of the decisions of just a few.
It seems that everyone in the State knows someone who fears for their job today.
So Queensland Labor has a great responsibility, to fight these job cuts, to fight this conservative Government, to give Queenslanders hope, to offer them a real choice at the next state election.
And Queenslanders do want a real choice.
They are taking a long hard look at what the LNP in Government really means. 
Our job is clear. To govern well, to govern for all.
And as Federal Leader, I can tell you, you meet here with another great responsibility: to our whole nation.
You will be on the front line in the fight to come in 2013.
For my part, I can promise you this: we are giving you a Labor program to work for, a plan for our nation you will be proud to fight for and defend.
Your Labor Government is building this nation's future. 
Day by day, piece by piece, a future that will see Australians be the winners in this century of growth and change in our region of the world.
A future of cleaner energy.
Access around the nation to the infrastructure of the future, to high speed broadband.
A future of higher skills leading to higher paid jobs.
A future of opportunity and prosperity which we can build together and share together.
Your Labor Government is delivering today as we build for tomorrow.
A strong economy, a budget surplus, job creation.
Fair workplace laws where your rights at work are protected for the future.
Expanded ports, new railways and roads.
Extra support for families and for small businesses, higher super, paid for by the returns from the minerals every Australian owns.
Higher pensions, help for carers, more choice and security in care for all our people as they age.
And delegates, next year when you walk the streets and knock on the doors and even when you climb trees to hang posters and stand on highways waving wobble boards you'll be able to say this: a vote for Labor in 2013 is a vote for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Nothing could be more natural to Labor than this plan.
The disability system we have today is unfair, it's underfunded, it's fragmented and it's inefficient and we can fix it.
At COAG in July, we saw how hard this will be: without leadership from Labor Governments, it will never get done.
At the end of that COAG meeting only your Federal Labor Government and Labor in South Australia, Tasmania and the ACT had agreed to launch sites for the NDIS. 
It took days of public pressure and private talks to get the conservatives in New South Wales and Victoria to agree to help.
And delegates the LNP government here in Queensland still has not agreed.
Campbell Newman must not be allowed to draw a Brisbane Line through the NDIS.
And we  -  the women and men of Labor  -  won't let  him.
We will give people with disabilities a better deal.
We are going to get this done.
Delegates, our commitment to care for Australians with disability reflects our essential Labor passion that no one be left behind.
Australians are entitled to know that in times of hardship government has got their back.  
And Labor Governments always have.
In times of economic turbulence, like the global financial crisis, you can rely on Labor to protect our nation.
In times of personal need, when you fear you may fall, in sickness, with disability, you can rely on Labor to build the safety nets that catch you.
But people look to us for more and as Labor believers we understand our Labor cause runs deeper. 
Labor is always the party that strives to create and share hope and opportunity.
So our vision for education reflects our deepest dreams for every child, our fundamental Labor drive to ensure that everyone can get ahead.
So you can say this, out on the stump, every day next year: A vote for Labor is a vote for a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
And delegates, you will be able to say this too:
A vote for Labor is a vote to give every child more hope and more opportunity and to improve every Australian school.
All my life, I have been conscious of being the lucky one  -  my life story is of education's transformative power.
But even in great schools like Unley High, I saw education's full power denied to some of my schoolmates.
The life-changing unfairness of being robbed of a great education has always struck me as a moral wrong. 
I know you feel that too and together we are on a national crusade for change.
A moral imperative fuels our crusade  -  but it's teachers and the principals who show us our line of march from here.
Queensland's schools, public, Catholic and independent, are full of great teachers and leaders.
And this morning Angelo Gavrielatos from the Australian Education Union introduced me to some of the public system's best.
I saw Margaret Gurney from Goodna State School again.
We first met back in 2011, after the floods.
Half the children in her primary school come from the poorest quarter of Australian homes.
Many are Indigenous and Margaret focussed on lifting indigenous achievement in her school.  Regular health checks, oral language development, greater awareness in the school as a whole of those kids and their needs.
She created adult education classes  -  so the parents, the kids' most important leaning coach, are confident themselves.
I met Corrine McMillan from Glenala State High School in Durack.
This was a tough high school in a tough area. It took a terrific principal to lift it up.
Working with the local Vietnamese community, bringing on a Pacific liaison officer, offering breakfast at school events, getting parents involved. 
And doing a great job with her indigenous students.
Building a school where all kids turn up and turn up with their homework done.  Where more kids are staying on to year 12, more kids are going on to TAFE and lots more to university.
Corrine and her school richly deserved the recognition they got yesterday following the publication of NAPLAN results.
I met Andrew Thompson from Ipswich West Special School.
A brilliant and compassionate man who told me how with the right support from government, his school can genuinely teach children with the most profound disabilities and can create real opportunities for children to seize the potential they do have in life.
And I have been privileged to meet so many others. 
I already know Llew Paulger from Redbank Plains State High School  -  we met at Community Cabinet in July.
And he's here, with Tony Maksoud from Berrinba East State School and Belinda Leavers from Loganlea State High School and Jody Stehbens from Kruger State School and Roz Bowd and the "Gonski mums".
Along with more great principals and teachers than I can name.
Friends, I've been proud to work with them to change children's lives, to give them hope and opportunity.
MySchool, low-SES partnership, literacy and numeracy work, teacher quality. Computers in schools. Building the Education Revolution, National Curriculum, Teach for Australia.
Lifting standards for every child in every school, equipping them for the jobs of the future.
But Margaret and Corrine and Andrew and Llew - they are the people who can tell you what difference all that has made.
Ask them when you see them today.
About the kindies who are reading better, the young girls who are doing science in new labs and maths on new computers, the teenage boys who are staying longer in school about the Queensland families whose kids are aiming for apprenticeships and degrees, for well-paid skilful work.
These are our great principals and teachers: in our great national crusade to improve schools, they carry the banner high.
Working with them, we know from what has already been achieved that we can transform the lives of children.
If you give one child a better education you change a life.
If you give every child a better education, you change a nation, you change the future, you make it stronger and fairer.
For every child, for every school, for our nation's future, we are going to get this done.
We will dedicate our nation to getting back in the top five schooling systems in the world by 2025. 
We will commit our nation to a National Plan for School Improvement, which will achieve that goal for our children. 
Lifting teacher quality, more power for principals, more information for parents.
And we will  fund Australian schools in a way that puts a child's needs at the heart of our funding decisions.
And to those Liberals who say no to change, who want to see cutbacks rather than our schools at the cutting edge, we have gathered together here to say we will fight you, we will beat you, for our children we are going to get this done.
Delegates, our plan to care for Australians with disability is a great Labor plan.
Our plan to improve Australian schools is a great Labor plan.
And you know what the other side always say about great Labor plans.
First it's a bad idea  -  then it's a good idea but it'll cost too much  -  then, finally, oh no, they'd never get rid of it. Honest.
Just one thing - they might need a quick commission of audit to check over the books.
And then, if they win, they bring down their first budget.
Delegates, the cost in jobs of this is already shockingly clear.
But as Labor people, we are also genuinely shocked by the kind of values these cuts reveal.
Because of course, we're a party of government, we deliver budgets, we know it's hard.
We make tough decisions to bring a budget to surplus and to keep it there  -  those decisions are being made in Canberra right now.
And when we do that, we prove that if you have the right values, the right priorities, you can budget responsibly and help the people who need it most.
We know you can because that's what we've done: our budget is coming to surplus and we've cut taxes for working Australians.
What we don't ever do is conduct ourselves like the conservatives who enjoy delivering the cuts.
These blokes who crow about it and crack jokes about it and lick their lips as they do the dirty work ... and who show their true values in the cuts they make.
They've cut the Rural Fire Service  -  the ultimate frontline services.
They've cut palliative care beds  -  care for the dying.
They've cut the children's guardian.
They've cut domestic violence services.
They've even dismantled BreastScreen Queensland.
A cut so brutal I didn't believe it when I first read the reports, and so sad I still don't want to believe it now.
That's the difference between their values and ours.
Labor Governments cut millionaires' dental schemes  -  Liberal Governments sack ambulance officers.
And this is why Newman's budget razor is Abbott's curtain raiser.
Labor brings budgets to surplus responsibly, carefully, cutting waste, getting the priorities right.
The Liberals and Nationals always cut too much and they always cut the wrong things.
They devastate families, damage businesses, hurt communities.
Understand this: Tony Abbott and Campbell Newman are following the same game plan, every hour, every day.
Oppositions which just say no never achieve good things for working people.
Conservative oppositions which just say no are using that one short word to hide a plan to cut services and jobs.
And this is why I say to you in Queensland today, you do now have a special responsibility to Australians as a whole.
You will be fighters on the front line next year, but you are already more than that.
You are the sentries who can tell Australians what's at risk, what could be coming.
You've seen it. Tell your story. Make sure they know.
Every working Australian must know in 2013 what happened in Queensland in 2012.
In 2013 Australians will have a choice.
A clear choice between two visions of our nation's future.
Do you want a high-wage, high-skill, high-value-add society where everyone gets a chance?
Or a race to the bottom, cutting wages, cutting conditions, everyone going backwards, the weakest scrambling for two dollars a day.
Do you want a budget surplus, job creation, a strong economy?
Or a downward spiral of cuts, job losses and decline.
Do you want progressive government informed by reason with a plan for the future?
Or a regime of aggression and negativity with a secret plan for cuts?
You know my answer.  I know your answer.
Delegates, carry this message to the nation in 2013.
At every door, on every corner, over every back fence, in every front bar.
If you want a National Disability Insurance Scheme  -  you must vote Labor.
If you want a plan for school improvement  -  you must vote Labor.
If you want a stronger and fairer future  -  you must vote Labor.
And as every Queenslander knows today: if you want jobs not job cuts  -  you must vote Labor.
Friends, the fight is on, it's the fight of our lives, let's get out there and win it.


Parliament House, Canberra
In 2012 the process of post-war migration reached 'retirement' age - 65 - the full span of a working life.
Sixty-five years since the first post-war migrants landed on our shores and began the greatest change to our country's texture and fortunes since European settlement.
Those first migrants in January 1947 were British tradesmen, who'd left the bombed out cities of their old land to help build the newest city of their new nation.
When one of the new migrants saw the empty fields of this capital, he asked jokingly where's Canberra?
And one of the locals replied, with greater meaning than they probably intended, you're here to build the place.
They weren't just here to build offices and houses.          
They came to help build a nation.
That's what migration is: an act of nation-building. And multiculturalism is how we make it work.
Multiculturalism is not just the ability to maintain our diverse backgrounds and cultures.
It is the meeting place of rights and responsibilities. 
Where the right to maintain one's customs, language and religion is a balanced by an equal responsibility to learn English, find work, respect our culture and heritage, and accept women as full equals.
Where there is non-negotiable respect for our foundational values of democracy and the rule of law, and any differences we hold are expressed peacefully.
Where old hatreds are left behind, and we find shared identity on the common ground of mateship and the Aussie spirit of a fair go. 
What we saw in Sydney on the weekend wasn't multiculturalism but extremism.
True multiculturalism has a very different face.
It is the face of a new migrant studying hard in an English language class.
Working two jobs to put their kids through school.
Or lining up to vote for the very first time.
True multiculturalism includes, not divides.
It adds more than it takes.
In the end, multiculturalism amounts to a civic virtue since it provides us with a way to share the public space.
A common ground of inclusion and belonging for all who are willing to toil with hearts and hands.
And because it always summons us toward a better future, multiculturalism is an expression of progressive patriotism in which all Australians, old and new, can find meaning.
Those first post-war migrants understood these things in times much tougher than our own.
This generation must understand them as well because our multicultural achievement is too precious to be brought into question by the reckless actions of a few.
Remember, migration and multiculturalism aren't just another set of policies than come and go with the tide of politics and events.
They are nation-building commitments which transcend partisanship and politics, to stand at the core of our identity as Australians.
My predecessor Ben Chifley understood that when the first migrants came here to Canberra.
Chifley and our founding Immigration Minister, Arthur Calwell, met these young migrants outside what is now Old Parliament House.
Chifley also went out to the camp where they lived - anonymously and without a secretary or guard - to see how the men were being looked after.
There's a striking symbolism in those young brickies and carpenters being welcomed by the nation's Prime Minister in the heart of our democracy.
These gestures were not accidental.
They were the deliberate actions of leaders who understood what they had done by bringing those 200 tradesmen to Australia.
They knew they had begun a journey that would transform our nation forever.
A journey we must continue in the spirit it was begun.
Friends,
I am part of that journey.
I am one of the migrants who has made Australia's story their own, and I told my story at the Council's launch a year ago.
I told of the brave decision my parents made to leave everything that was close and familiar to venture upon a new and unknown land.
I told of how we arrived to be welcomed by a warm and generous people.
I told of how my parents taught me and my sister the value of hard work to earn our keep and do our best.
So I stand here before you today as the very proud daughter of John and Moira Gillard.
Migrants.
My late father spoke of the modest aspiration he brought to our prospects in Australia.
But in his long life, he came to learn that remarkable things can happen in a remarkable country.
Millions of other migrants know it too.
Years and decades of hard work, and suddenly your son is a doctor.
Your grandson is a judge.
Your daughter is Prime Minister.
It's what happens when you seize and shape the future rather than shrinking in fear of it.
If there is one Australian who understands these things only too deeply, it is Frank Lowy.
Frank's pathway was indescribably hard.
From Czechoslovakia and the perilous streets of occupied Hungary to France, Cyprus and Mandate Palestine.
Surviving the horrors of the Holocaust that claimed his own father's life.
Facing years of uncertainty in the aftermath of war.
And finally coming to Australia to begin the longest and greatest chapter of his incredible life.
Frank, you are, indeed, an extraordinary Australian.
And your family's life tells a great Australian story.
You couldn't get the education you deserved.
All your boys went to university.
You couldn't always find enough food or clothing as a child.
Now you enjoy prosperity beyond any childhood dreams.
Your father was a humble travelling salesman who did it tough during the Depression and wartime years.
Now you own the greatest retail network on earth.
You couldn't enjoy Europe's cultural riches because of the Nazis.
Now your son is President of the NSW Art Gallery.
All this because of that single decision you took to emigrate six decades ago.
This is the point upon which our whole multicultural experience turns: decisions and choices.
From those epic decisions like Chifley and Calwell's first big call around the Cabinet table.
To our millions of individual decisions as migrants to undertake the journey.
And our countless choices as Australians to extend our hands and share our home.
They are the brave decisions that start as a glimpse through a keyhole and end up swinging open a wide and welcoming door.
Together they form one of our nation's greatest stories, and to explore it further, I am proud to introduce the inaugural AMC lecturer: a distinguished Australian.
The wise and generous Frank Lowy.


Sydney
It's great to be here to share this celebration with you.
Two decades ago was indeed a remarkable time for telecommunications.
In 1992, the World Wide Web was just months old. Our first ISPs were starting up.
Telstra was created and Optus came to our shores as part of the reforms that also gave rise to Macquarie Telecom.
And a year later, cable TV was introduced.
This was the beginning of the digital revolution that would change our economy and our society forever.
So much so that as Prime Minister I can read my Cabinet papers on an iPad, I can trouble my staff with emails from my BlackBerry and I can lecture at length on the benefits of the Application that enables you to count rows when you're knitting on your iPad.
Anybody who wants to hear the full lecture about the merits of the row counter App can see me afterwards. It mightn't be for everyone but it will be for some of you.
So the benefits of the digital world are compelling and they were spoken about this morning very eloquently in terms of people with disabilities and what I can mean for their lives.
Economically, the Internet directly contributes $50 billion a year to our economy and that's set to increase to $70 billion by 2016.
Each 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration can add 1.3 per cent to the GDP of a high-income country.
And yet here in our own nation, as a share of GDP, the Internet generates around 25 per cent less in Australian than our peers in other developed markets.
That's a sign we didn't get everything right in the '90s.
By leaving Telstra as a vertically integrated monopoly, and only cabling up the richest areas of our cities, the biggest and hardest parts of the job we needed to do were left undone.
That is until now.
With the NBN, we leap those two hurdles in one jump.
Telecommunications in this country will finally be fully contested and competitive and high-speed broadband will reach every home and business.
Few investments will be more important to Australia's success in the Asian century than these investments.
Here, among this group, I'm preaching to the converted.
You know the benefits of competition because that's what gave you a start back in 1992.
And you know the benefits of universal high-speed broadband because it will underpin your work for the next 20 years.
In fact, I understand that IC2 is regarded by Macquarie Telecom as a companion investment to the NBN, and our development of the NBN gave your company the confidence to build this project right here in Australia.
So it's a great investment in local skills and capacity and it's a $60 million vote of confidence in the NBN itself.
As we roll out world-class broadband to homes and businesses around our nation, the world-class services that will be hosted in centres like this will become available to all Australians. 
As a government, we believe high-speed broadband is too important to be confined to the lucky few who the market has chosen to serve. 
I know that Macquarie Telecom shares this vision. 
IC2 is the kind of place where our digital future is being created.
So much of that future is about the exchange of ideas and the exchange of data. 
From confidential credit card numbers to top-secret communications, we need to be able to move that information around.
Just as the NBN provides the solution to moving this data around, Macquarie Telecom and its peers play a key role in answering the related questions about where to store it.
Data security is of course fundamental to the trust that people, corporations and governments place in the Internet.
So this IC2 facility is a place of security and is a place of trust.
Here your customers, including the highest levels of the Australian Government, will expect our information to be stored safely.
And I'm told that Macquarie Telecom's facilities have the highest level of accreditation for information security in Australia.
I'm also delighted by the work you've done to make this building sustainable, making use of waste heat to provide cooling which reduces the demand on energy-hungry air conditioners. 
And this is an Australian facility on Australian soil, providing an additional level of security for your customers.
The Government will have more to say on this in the coming months as we consider broader cloud computing policies. 
Here today on this day of celebration, I think we should see the potential of what is being achieved here.
It really is leading the way to the future of a high-skill, high-tech, high-wage economy that can win in the Asian century.
If there was ever a time in our history to invest in innovation, this is it.
If there was ever a time in our history to invest in smart technology, this is it.
If there was ever a time in our history to invest in schools and training, then this is most certainly it.
And now is the time to invest in a National Broadband Network, which is exactly what we are doing. 
I know we can be, with these kinds of policies, the nation that gets it right. Let's be that nation.
Just like we did in those historic reforms that gave rise to Macquarie Telecom two decades ago.
I proudly declare the IC2 facility officially open, with high hopes for the contribution it will make to our nation's prosperity and success in the future. 
Thank you very much.


New York City, USA
I am honoured to announce Australia's founding membership of the Equal Futures Partnership.
I am delighted to do so in the company of Secretary Clinton.
Hillary  -  you have done so much to inspire women and girls all around the world.
We stand taller  -  and walk freer  -  because of your work and your example.
Two years ago President Obama committed the United States to new steps to break down economic and political barriers which separate women and girls from their full human potential.
And he called on the nations of the world to join this effort.
From that commitment, the Equal Futures Partnership was born.
As Australia's first female Prime Minister, I am delighted to commit my nation to three domestic initiatives under the Equal Futures Partnership.
First, we're working to strengthen the pipeline of female talent in traditionally male-dominated industries.
It's great to have women Secretaries of State and Prime Ministers. But let's have more women engineers and truck drivers as well.
Second, we're committed to achieving a minimum of forty per cent of women on Australian Government boards by 2015  -  up from 35 per cent today.
Our progress so far is commendable.  But near enough is not good enough.
We're also creating a National Centre of Excellence to Reduce Violence Against Women.
The Centre will lead a national research agenda to support policies and programs to reduce violence against women.
No woman should live with violence or the fear of violence.
It is always and utterly unacceptable.
And I'm proud to say that Australia recently announced our A$320 million commitment to gender equality in our region: Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development.
In Australia, in the Pacific, in every corner of the world  -  all women are created equal.
This is the moral heart of our Partnership: 
Women and girls must have futures equal to those of their brothers and fathers.
That is what our work must achieve.


New York City, USA
Your two societies, rich with history, perform a vital contemporary role.
One way I describe today's environment for decision-makers is this: almost every hand on the lens is tightening the focus.
Flattening our perspective, simplifying our picture  -  and missing complexity.
Yours is one of the few that is working to wind the other way  -  encouraging us back towards deep focus.
When half the world is looking through the camera lens of a mobile phone, you're seeing it like Orson Welles.
Dedicated to seeing the complexities  -  to seeing the world through the long view, in perspective, in depth.
So that's the kind of discussion I'm looking forward to joining in today.
Now, if there were a simple story of my country's economy today  -  it would be strength.
For those of you who are not familiar with Australia's position, let me describe our economy to you through the facts.
Private investment huge  -  record highs, up $983 billion since late 2007, equivalent to two thirds of our annual GDP.
Public debt small  -  peaking around a tenth of the level across major advanced economies.
Growth totalling eleven per cent over the past five years.
Unemployment at five point one per cent today.
Job creation strong  -  around 800 000 jobs in the past five years  -  in an economy with over eleven million workers.
Inflation under control  - at thirteen year lows.
And the bottom line, remarkable: the Australian economy has grown every year for the past twenty-one in a row.
Australians have lived through a generation of growth.
Some observers boil that all down this way:
A simple phenomenon, a mining boom  -  with a simple explanation, Chinese demand for commodities  -  and entailing a simple risk, slowing Chinese growth and lower commodity prices.
But a story that simple is rarely accurate. And if you only guard against simple risks, you won't be ready for the most challenging threats.
So let me add some depth and perspective today.
First, Australia's economy today is less reliant on our natural resources and our mining boom than you might believe.
Mining employs two per cent of Australians.
In the next four years, we expect three times as many new jobs to be created in health care, social assistance, education and training as will be created in mining.
That doesn't include Australia's professional, scientific and technical services  -  where employment is also forecast to grow faster than in the mines.
Our third biggest export is education  -  mostly tertiary education.
Nearly eighty per cent of Australia's gross value added is in services.
Our finance industry alone generates a greater share of our value-add than mining.
Domestic consumption accounts for over 55 per cent of our GDP.
Of course Australia gains greatly from our rich natural resources and the industries which develop them.
But resources is part of the whole.
With the scale of our resource industries within Australia's economy better understood, consider this next.
Australia's mining boom has long to run.
The key is to understand that Australia is experiencing a series of booms: first in prices, then for investment, then for production.
Our own economic planning took into account that the price peak would be reached in 2011.
Now, the scale of this peak has to be understood.
This year for iron ore, contract prices will come out around US$126 a tonne  -  and next year they're forecast by Australia's Bureau of Resource and Energy Economics to moderate to an average around US$101 a tonne.
Ten years ago we got around US$20 per tonne.
This year contract prices for high-quality hard coking coal will come out around US$211 a tonne  -  and the Bureau forecasts they will fall next year to $US183. 
Ten years ago we got US$50 per tonne.
These are pretty representative examples of the decline in commodity prices  -  in turn, pretty good examples of where the wide view gives you a very different impression from the close-up.
Clearly, we'd prefer prices to stay higher for longer.
And the easing in prices squeezes profits, meaning slower revenue growth for Government and hard decisions on the expenditure side.
But equally clearly, if you'd offered us today's prices ten years ago, we'd have grabbed them with both hands.
And if you offered any country Australia's fiscal position, they'd grab it with both hands too.
The larger point though is this: the peak of the price boom comes as an unprecedented investment boom is now underway.
The sources of those investments are themselves diverse.
We're not leveraged against any one national economy  -  indeed the United States was the biggest source of investment in Australian resources in the past five years.
And this investment is creating jobs and wealth now and building the capacity for the production boom which will follow. 
So the Australian economy is more than just mining.
The mining boom is more than just a price boom.
And the long term health of our resource industries and our economy as a whole is less exposed to a slowdown in Chinese demand for coal and iron ore than you might think.
Consider our plans for the future exploitation of our gas reserves.
Seventy per cent of our liquefied natural gas exports go to Japan  -  and changing patterns of energy demand in developed Asian economies are creating new market opportunities.
Take the Ichthys liquefied natural gas project in northern Australia which starts operation in 2016.
A Japanese-French joint venture between INPEX and Total, this is the biggest single investment by a Japanese company outside Japan.
This single project will boost Australian export income by $72 billion over its life. 
And the entire first fifteen years' production of LNG from the project is already priced and sold: mostly to Taiwanese and Japanese buyers.
Or the Santos Gladstone LNG project: another joint venture, this time involving French and Malaysian investors.
A pioneering project which will convert coal seam natural gas into liquefied natural gas for global export, this project alone will supply 11 per cent of Korea's domestic gas needs and 9 per cent of Malaysia's gas consumption.
These are only two examples of the projects which are securing the future of Australian mining and extraction.
Gas is a key example of the strength and diversity of the Australian resource industry.
Our gas exports should more than double as a share of our energy exports over the next two decades  -  they're now forecast to reach more than a quarter of Australia's net energy trade by the mid-2030s.
Now, Australia is an open trading economy, operating in a demanding world economic environment.
We must use the opportunity of today's strength to invest in the drivers of future prosperity.  We know this.
And in saying all this, the point I'm making is not to replace one simple story  -  fragile prosperity based on a boom and at short-term risk from slowing Chinese growth  -  with a different simple story  -  good times that will last forever with no risks at all.
What I want is to replace a simple story with a more serious and detailed account of what's going on in Australia.
With that said I also want to press on to a more serious and detailed account of what's going on around Australia  -  in Asia.
The best advice I can give anyone thinking about Asia is this:
Never mistake the waves for the tides.
Of course the waves, the short term changes, matter.
Knowing whether China is growing at eight, or seven and half, or seven per cent, understanding the different elements of that growth, and how that growth is now sustained, is far from trivial.
I'm not here as an economic forecaster  -  what I'd say about the debate about the likely outcome in China is principally this.
Even if growth were slower  -  even at six per cent  -  that is very substantial and continuing economic expansion.
The very fact that six per cent growth is the bad scenario  -  the so-called hard landing  -  is itself an illustration of a considerable degree of continuing strength.
Indeed with China forty per cent larger than it was five years ago, six per cent growth today is a bigger contribution to global GDP than eight per cent growth would have been in 2008. 
In any case, while it's rightly a matter of hot debate, the centre of my thinking is not on China's waves.
I'm more focused on reading the tides.
I am struck that many of the familiar illustrations of Asian growth also illustrate how much growth and change lies ahead.
We've all heard many times that the majority of Chinese people now live in cities  -  but the really startling fact is that this means almost half of all Chinese today don't live in a city.
Perhaps another 250 million Chinese will move to the cities in the next twenty years.
We're talking about a century of change, not a business cycle.
I know that many draw a simple inference from change in Asia:
China is rising as a near-term competitor in our product markets and we have to work harder to compete.
That simple inference is half-right, at best  -  and for a decision-maker, half-right might as well be wrong.
So let me add some depth and perspective to the picture of regional change.
First, it's not just China  -  it's Asia.
Our century will be defined by the rise of many countries and many cultures, not just one.
By Indonesia, a diverse society, a vast Islamic population, a democratic state, a nation of two hundred and forty millions.
By India, a vast democracy, a historic civilisation, home to more English speakers than the United States.
By the rise of social democracies and liberal markets in a region of change stretching not just from Suez to Singapore but north to Samarkand and east to Seattle.
It's not just new competition  -  it's new consumers.
We must understand what a middle-class century in Asia means  -  because it is a key point for advanced, service-based economies like ours.
What do we do best?  We make and sell goods and services to middle-class consumers and we invent new ones. 
What is happening in Asia this century? 
The creation of a middle-class which grows by more than a hundred million every year.
Not just new consumers  -  it's consumers who want to buy new things.
Once you've built cities, they fill with city-dwellers.
So once you've sold them concrete and steel, iron and gas they buy wine and movies and music, retirement financial products and bespoke tourism experiences and food which is the product of clean and sustainable agriculture.
There are a thousand examples  -  but one conclusion.
In the century ahead, it's precisely economies like ours  -  advanced, knowledge-oriented, service-rich economies  -  which are best placed to prosper.
But only if we keep lifting productivity  -  if we keep driving innovation, keep generating new ideas.
Australia's economy is a highly productive one today.
We rank above South Korea, Japan, Canada and the UK for labour productivity  -  indeed Australia is one of the top 12 international performers for labour productivity levels.
And in the year to June 2012, our labour productivity grew at two and a half times the average for the last decade.
So for us, lifting future productivity even further demands a really sophisticated agenda  -  from innovation to infrastructure, tax reform and regulatory reform.
Above all, we must stay in front in the education race.
Now education's centrality to economic development is far from new.
America's GI Bill is known the world over: Auden's veterans encamped upon the campus plain became the world's biggest middle-class in the 1950s and 1960s.
And education has already been central to the extraordinary rise and growth of Asian economies  -  Japan, South Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong: now China and India.
There's a reason nineteen universities in Asian nations are now ranked in the top 100 universities worldwide.
There's a reason that the symbol of Hiroshima University is the phoenix, that its motto can be translated as: try new things, do new things.
These nations know that a complicated world demands a quality education.
We know it too.  Education is more important to nations like Australia and the United States than ever before.
First, because the achievement of Asian nations in education sets us a standard we must meet at home.
That is why I have set a new goal for 2025  -  to return Australia to the top five in school educational attainment in the world.
Australia's universities are already highly ranked on the world stage.
According to the latest Shanghai Jiao Tong University Ranking of World Universities, one in eight Australian universities is in the top 100 in the world.
And we have sent ambitious goals for skill formation and university attainment.
By 2015, 90 per cent of young Australians aged 20 to 24 will have attained a year 12 or an entry-level qualification at certificate II or above.
By 2025, 40 per cent of all 25 to 34-year-olds will hold a qualification at bachelor level or above, up from 35 per cent in 2011.
Second, to prosper in Asia, we'll need to know Asia.
We'll need Asia-literate policies and Asia-capable people.
And those demands are ever growing.
Last year, I commissioned what in the Australian system is known as a White Paper  -  on Australia in the Asian Century.
This will be a national blueprint for a time of national change  -  designed to set ambitious national goals for lifting the Asia capabilities of the Australian Government and people.
And third, to prosper in this new Asia, we'll need to stay smart and innovative, productive and capable. 
Australia must be a country that makes and sells ideas.
Because the big unanswered question facing countries like ours isn't the growth rate of China's economy later next year.
It is what the basket of consumer goods and services will be for middle class Asian consumers later this century.
Can we conceive of the new products and services which fill that basket  -  will we make and sell those things  -  and keep our economies strong?
In turn, the most challenging risk to Australia  -  and to countries like Australia  -  isn't China growing more slowly than we predict in 2013.
Just as the real task of national preparedness isn't fiddling with the dials of the macro economy this quarter to take care of the third quarter next year.
The most challenging risk is if we can't make and sell the things that Chinese and Indian and Indonesian and Thai consumers are buying in 2033.
And the real task of national preparedness is this.
Building the skills and the knowledge of our people  -  accumulating and deploying the human capital  -  lifting productivity, generating innovation, making ideas.
So  -  that's the picture I see from Australia. 
The Australian economy is a coat of many colours: the miners' fluorescent yellow shines brightly as a part of the whole.
This century will see the rise of a region which spreads thousands of miles west and south beyond China, in which economic changes create new markets not just new competitors.
And education is more important than ever before, because Asia's people are learning, because our people must know Asia, because it is education which best equips our economies for the change all this creates.
Societies and economies like yours and mine have some superficial differences  -  but the things we share run very deep.
We're democratic and corruption-resistant.  We're already urbanised and internationalised.  We're already market-oriented. 
Growth for us requires enormous sophistication.  Many one-off historic step-shifts lie behind us.  We've picked the low-hanging fruit, we need to be smart to find our future.
And if I can leave you with one illustration that best demonstrates how decision-makers are thinking about this:
When the formal meetings at the G20 or APEC are over, the officials may still be talking about the macro-economy, investment, finance and trade the leaders are talking to each other about our people, about improving and expanding universities, skills and schools.
I've spoken today about a century of change in Asia and what it means: it's no accident that the conversation happens here in the American north-east, here in New York.
The fact that this truly global forum for free thought and speech is hosted in a truly global city in the United States is no accident or coincidence. 
Rather, it is a tribute to the history and values of this city, this nation, a tribute to your remarkable people  -  and to the history and values we share.
We are two free peoples of the New World, two young nations born of the Age of Reason, two friends and allies still in a century of change.
You are generous and far-sighted hosts and I look forward to our conversation.


New York City, USA
Mr President, congratulations on your election.
You now preside over a forum for every voice  -  an Assembly of all people and nations  -  for no country or bloc to dominate solely or lead as one alone  -  where small and medium sized countries are truly heard. 
Australia welcomes your election warmly.
The story of the United Nations is a truly global story encompassing all the people of the world  -  a story of the progress of small and medium-sized countries, not just great powers.
It's a story of reconstruction after world war and resettlement of massing millions.
A story of navigating the winds of change, the end of colonialism, bringing self-determination to the world's great majority, the billions of the global south.
A story of harnessing new sources of wealth and new resources through a revolution of rising expectations and during decades of dictatorship, famine and war.
A story of bringing justice to the perpetrators of the worst international crimes  -  and preventing the worst of human atrocities.
Now, extending freedom and harnessing new markets, lifting billions more out of poverty and oppression.
This has been the work of the United Nations for seven decades.
This year we assemble, in the knowledge born of these years: neither expecting perfection nor accepting the status quo  -  understanding that there is much we can do together that we could never do alone.
The UN articulates humanity's highest ideals; but more, the UN makes practical progress towards realising those ideals in the world.
There is no better example of this than the Millennium Development Goals.
Specific, measurable targets of the highest human importance  -  goals now familiar to us all.
Twelve years on from 2000, three years out from 2015, the progress we have made must be just as familiar.
The global economy has grown  -  hundreds of millions of people have lifted themselves up.
And that first, fundamental Goal  -  to halve the proportion of the world's population living in extreme poverty  -  is now achieved.
One billion human lives transformed.
A decade ago 100 million children did not get to go to school.
This number has been reduced by fully one third.
33 million human futures entirely remade.
But we must all acknowledge that there are vital areas where the international community is failing to achieve change.
This is why I accepted the Secretary-General's invitation to co-chair the Millennium Development Goal Advocacy Group alongside Rwanda: to advocate for practical progress in the coming three years.
Where the world has fallen short of ambitious goals, our response must be action, not disillusion.
This is what Australia will do. We will act.
We will help improve education.
Australia's development spending on education has doubled in the past five years  -  we will be among the world's largest education donors by 2015.
I am especially pleased to join as an education champion in support of theSecretary-General's Education First initiative to mobilise global support to help achieve education for all children by 2015.
I am honoured to lend it Australia's support.
We will help increase gender equality.
I was proud to announce at the Pacific Islands Forum last month that Australia will work alongside our partners in the Pacific on an unprecedented gender initiative:
Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development.
Australia will provide $320 million over 10 years: to support women's political participation, to expand women's leadership, to spread economic and social opportunities in the Pacific.
This is a principle underpinning every Australian aid intervention and initiative: empowering women and girls.
We will help fight drug resistant malaria.
The Secretary-General has made malaria one of his key priorities for his second term. It is a priority we share.
Since 2000, the world has cut the number of deaths from malaria by 26 per cent.
Without these advances, 330 000 more people would have died of malaria last year  -  the great majority in Africa.
But malaria itself is fighting back  -  now, drug resistance in malaria must be overcome.
Later this year, Australia will hold Malaria 2012, bringing together political leaders, civil society and the private sector to accelerate efforts to control and eliminate malaria and combat growing drug resistance.
While we are working hard to realize the MDGs in the next three years, Australia is looking further ahead.
2015 is a goal but it is not a destination  -  rather it must be a new point of departure for much new work.
Australia pledges to contribute to the important work of the High Level Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
Australia brings considerable national experience in working with conflict-affected states and least developed countries  -  especially in our own region.
And we will seek to apply what we have learned in our work since 2000 to the world's plans for beyond 2015.
First, that peace is an essential foundation to development  -  and building peace is vital to the progress of societies recovering from conflict.
Peacekeepers today must be peacebuilders  -  not just stopping conflict but enabling development.
Second, that there can be no poverty alleviation without the creation of wealth and jobs.
Growth alone is never sufficient  -  but to achieve development in the interests of all people we must create jobs and wealth.
Third, thatwe cannot make poverty history until we also consign to history the argument that environmental protection and human development are conflicting global goals.
Climate change threatens the secure food supply which guarantees development  -  new clean sources of energy deliver a new source of economic growth.
Australia is one of the world's most successful multicultural and multi-faith nations.
The Australian experience proves a deeply important fact.
There is nothing natural or inevitable about violent conflict over religious belief.
We must reaffirm this again today.
Denigration of religious beliefs is never acceptable.
Australia seeks to be an example of freedom for all faiths  - and we support this in the wider world.
However, our tolerance must never extend to tolerating religious hatred and incitement to violence.
Whether these lead to attacks against members of religious minorities or diplomats, attacks against houses of worship or diplomatic missions the perpetrators of all such violence must be brought to justice and all such incitement must be condemned.
Mr President, Australia condemns violence and we work for peace. We proudly take our full part in the work of the United Nations for peace and security.
We stringently observe Security Council resolutions aimed at curtailing weapons proliferation activities like those of North Korea.
We take the leading role in the UN-mandated mission in Timor-Leste.
We lead the regional assistance mission to Solomon Islands which operates with the UN's endorsement.
And we have been the largest non-NATO contributor to the UN-mandated International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
Australia will bring this record of service to the international community to our service on the UN Security Council should we have the privilege to be elected by the UN membership in October.
There and beyond, our work and the work of every nation for peace must continue.
As we meet, the Syrian Government is turning the instruments of state power against the very people who state power ought to protect.
Employing heavy weapons and ground-attack aircraft against civilians ... engaging in systematic human rights abuses.
Syria's neighbours  -  in particular Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon and Iraq  -  are burdened by growing numbers of refugees and are delivering vital help to desperate people.
The UN has done important work already.
Australia is playing our part to help through our humanitarian aid.
We must do everything we can to end the suffering of the Syrian people.
And to rebuild Syrian society, those who are committing crimes against humanity must be held accountable.
The international community must unite behind Lakhdar Brahimi, the Joint Special Representative for Syria.
We urge the members of the Security Council to do so and to act decisively.
The international community must also unite in guarding against proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
It is now six years since the Security Council first expressed concern about Iran's nuclear program.
Iran still refuses to take the urgent steps necessary to build confidence that its nuclear program is exclusively peaceful.
In contravention of successive IAEA and UN Security Council resolutions, Iran moves closer to having the capacity to produce weapons-grade material.
So we stand with the world, united in sending a strong signal  -  through Security Council sanctions  -  that Iran must change its behaviour now.
A nuclear armed Iran would be a major threat to regional and global security: especially given the shocking and aggressive statements about Israel by Iran's leadership.
There remains the opportunity for diplomacy, backed up by robust sanctions, to persuade Iran to change its course.
Iran must take this opportunity for change and the nations of this Assembly must press Iran to do so.
There must also be change in the Middle East process for peace.
Australia shares the frustration of the parties at the current impasse.
We understand the strong desire of the Palestinian people for national self-determination.
Australia is resolutely committed to the establishment of a Palestinian state which is both independent and viable.
This is why we provide significant support to the foundations of a future Palestinian state and build its infrastructure and economy  -  more than $300m in aid from 2011 to 2016.
We commend the genuine progress President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad have made in building the institutions and infrastructure for statehood.
And no one can doubt Australia's close and continuing friendship with Israel.
Our support for the right of Israel and its people to exist in security and peace is an historic commitment in Australian policy and it will endure.
We urge a return to direct negotiations  -  the only durable basis for achieving a two-state solution.
The present impasse must be overcome.
Both sides need to make compromises  -  and avoid provocations.
It will take sacrifice on both sides to settle complex and difficult issues such as settlements, borders, security and Jerusalem.
The Israeli and Palestinian people deserve no less.
Australia's ideals in the world are those of the UN  -  and Australians know the practical value of the UN's work.
This is why Australia seeks to serve  -  in all the work of the UN  -  and on the Security Council.
We are a strong democracy, welcoming all the people, languages and religions of the world. 
We are a country of the Asia-Pacific, a neighbour to developing countries, with a perspective of both the North and South.
We are a state with a decades-long tradition of capable and committed work in the United Nations.
We contributed to the first UN peacekeeping force in 1947  -  and we lead contemporary peace building in our own region.
We support the development of new norms to enable the UN and its member states to act to prevent atrocities and to make the perpetrators of the worst crimes accountable for them.
We act as a first responder to humanitarian need  -  as a donor who stays the course  -  as a partner in rebuilding after conflict.
Mr President, Australia embraces the high ideals of the United Nations and takes a practical approach to achieving change.
The work of the United Nations is an historic task in which Australia wholeheartedly joins.


New York City, USA
It's a great honour to be champion of Secretary-General Ban's Education First Initiative.
This is a very significant tribute to Australia's work to improve education in developing countries through our aid program.
There's a reason universal education is second only to ending hunger in the Millennium Development Goals.
In my discussions with the Secretary-General, I've told him that for my country, improving education is a great national priority  -  one we want to share with our neighbours and partners in the world.
And for me personally, education is the great passion that brought me into public life, and I want to share the story with you today.
Recently my beloved father passed away.
He was a bright boy who grew up in a family of seven in a Welsh coalmining village.
His family knew great hardship and even though my father won a scholarship, he had to go to work at 14 to help put bread on the table.
He died at 83 but his lifelong dream of a higher education was never fulfilled.
My sense of injustice has never dimmed, and I am deeply saddened that John Gillard's story is a story lived out in homes and villages all across the world today  -  especially in the global south.
Bright kids who don't have a chance parents who send their children off to work knowing it's not the best thing for the future.
As members of the international community, we can help end that.
Education is vital to prosperity for nations and to opportunity for individuals it is the ultimate means of a civilised life for every person.
I am delighted to join my fellow Education Champions who are determined to put education first.


New York City, USA
It's a great honour to take part in this panel discussion on the New Deal.
I'm reminded that in 2012, we mark 80 years since Franklin Roosevelt proclaimed the original New Deal:
That remarkable extension of hope to a people afflicted by the misery of unemployment, poverty and homelessness.
High ideals entrusted to practical and achievable measures.
Hope that could, in FDR's words, only be delivered with "statesmanship and vision".
That could just as well serve as description of the New Deal initiative.
It is a timely and ambitious agenda, and the g7+ members should be proud of the progress achieved to date  -  and determined to do more.
Australia was proud to be a founding member of the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and Statebuilding which led to the New Deal.
It is sobering to think that there are more than 1.5 billion people living in fragile and conflict-affected countries  -  more than one in five of all the world's people.
And that, on present trends, it is likely that not a single g7+ country will achieve even one Millennium Development Goal by 2015.
Nothing could better illustrate the vital relationship between ending conflict and achieving development.
People living in conflict-affected and fragile countries are twice as likely to be undernourished.
Their children are three times more likely to not attend school.
Unemployment is too high, economic opportunities too few and tragically, life expectancy too short.
These stark realities compel us to do more to build peace, to strengthen state institutions, to engage civil society and local communities and support country-led transitions out of fragility, to manage our aid better.
The New Deal Initiative offers real promise to achieve that  -  in turn, offering real promise to accelerate progress toward the MDGs in fragile and conflict-affected states.
As co-chair of the Secretary-General's MDG Advocacy Group, I have made a personal pledge to advocate for development in conflict-affected and fragile states.
Building the resilience of fragile states also remains a key focus for Australia's aid program
In 2012-13 more than 55 per cent of our bilateral and regional aid  -  almost $1.8 billion  -  will go to fragile or conflict-affected states.
Seven of the top ten recipients of Australian aid are fragile or conflict-affected countries.
We are proud to be the lead donor supporting the New Deal pilot in Timor-Leste  -  through a new partnership arrangement with the Timorese government.
By the end of this year, we will have provided access to safe water for an additional 90,000 people as well as access to basic sanitation for 35,000 rural people.
Together we are working towards the goal of rehabilitating all rural roads by 2015, creating some 52,000 jobs by 2016 and bringing opportunities to the rural poor.
By 2015 we aim to be providing quality basic education to 93 per cent of children aged between six and fourteen  -  and to reduce the drop-out rate to just five per cent.
Building on our work in Timor-Leste, we are moving to align our work in other fragile states with the New Deal.
In Afghanistan, for example, we recognise the importance of Afghan Government leadership and capacity. As proof of this, we now deliver 50 per cent of our assistance through Afghan Government systems.
These are not only good examples of Australia's commitment to the collective enterprise of building peace and fostering development.
They illustrate that the goals and ambitions of the New Deal are achievable.
Together we can deliver change. Our commitment to the New Deal must not waver. The world's poorest and most vulnerable need us now.


New York City, USA
The Sahel region is rich in ancient cultures and history.
But the convergence of complex political and security issues with a devastating humanitarian crisis presents serious challenges.
The human cost to the people of the region is very real.
And the international community should also be gravely concerned about the risk of northern Mali becoming a safe haven for extremists and a focal point for transnational crime.
These challenges demand the care and concern of the entire international community.
So I thank Secretary-General Ban for bringing us together to discuss them and commend the UN's work towards an Integrated Strategy' to guide our development of a comprehensive response.
The Sahel is rightly at the front of our minds today.
More than 18 million people are at risk of food insecurity.
An area of northern Mali the size of France is currently without government.
I'm deeply disturbed by the destruction of UNESCO World Heritage-listed sites in Timbuktu  -  and I am appalled by reports of public stonings and amputations.
Peace and stability must be restored to Mali.
The international community must reject the claims of sovereignty in northern Mali and pursue regionally-led mediation to resolve the crisis.
Australia applauds the efforts of the ECOWAS to engage the parties in dialogue.
Australia welcomes the appointment of the National Unity Government, but recognises that there is a long way to go.
And we encourage the transitional government in Mali, ECOWAS, Mali's neighbours, the African Union and the UN Security Council to continue working together to develop strategies to restore stability and territorial integrity.
Restoring effective, representative government in Bamako is the necessary first-step in restoring peace and stability in Mali.
Together with these efforts to restore peace and stability in Mali, the international community must move quickly to address the humanitarian crisis in the Sahel.
Australia is playing a significant role.
In 2012 we have contributed AUD 30 million to deliver urgently needed food and medical relief, as well as training to local medical staff.
We will provide a further AUD 14 million in urgent humanitarian assistance including AUD 7 million through the World Food Program and AUD 7 million through the Red Cross and UN Refugee Agency.
But as always, humanitarian aid can only be a temporary measure.
So Australia is working with partner Governments in the Sahel to build long-term food security and resilience.
This includes a program in which Australian scientists work side-by-side with scientists from the West and Central African Council for Agricultural Research and Development to boost agricultural productivity in the Sahel.
Long-term security in the Sahel will be closely tied to economic development.
The international community must help to improve the economic prospects of the people of the Sahel.
This will reduce the appeal of extremism and provide a means for individuals to earn livelihoods and respect.
Australia's Mining for Development' initiative and program of scholarships for Africa  -  over 1 000 in 2012  -  are designed to provide such opportunities and promote economic self-reliance.
Australia commends the governments of the Sahel region for their efforts to address the humanitarian crisis.
As friends and partners, we stand ready to support regionally-led solutions.
There is much to do  -  our partners in the Sahel region can be confident Australia will do its part.


Sydney
I think it's very appropriate that we've gathered here at a university, the places where so much of our destiny in the 21st century will be written, as much as the mines and gas fields to our north.
Just last week, a major breakthrough in quantum computing that will open up whole new opportunities in areas like drug manufacturing and materials design was announced in the journal Nature.
That breakthrough wasn't made at MIT or Stanford, but right here at UNSW.
So I'm very proud to be here today, and I thank the Vice-Chancellor, Professor Fred Hilmer, for his generous hospitality.
It is also, I think, quite symbolic that we've gathered in this beautiful building - the Scientia Building  -  the Latin world for 'knowledge' because that is why we are here today.
The commodity most precious in the 21st century, more valuable even than iron ore, is knowledge.
The way we create and share knowledge will be a key determinant of our success in the Asian Century.
It seemed not so long ago that thinkers like Barry Jones were counselling us to be ready for the digital future.
That future is here.
It is well and truly here.
In a range of visible and invisible ways, it's already integrated into all of our lives, and into our nation's economy.
Economic activity directly related to the internet contributed $50 billion to the Australian economy in 2010, but the indirect effects are just as important.
These effects aren't captured in GDP figures but they're worth an extra $80 billion a year.
Like the social connections the Internet age can bring to those confined at home through disability or illness. 
The benefit to a working parent of ordering groceries online and having them delivered to your door.
Or pregnant women wearing foetal monitors that can be monitored remotely by midwives to alert them to any problems.
It's certainly made my life easier.
For a century, each Prime Minister used to lug his Cabinet papers home in a bulky folder that would have felled a forest worth of paper over a year. I slip an iPad into my brief case.
I'm sure that everyone in the room could tell a story about how digital technology has changed things for them.
We've seen some extraordinary gains made so far.
Last year, there were 11.6 million internet subscribers in Australia, an 11 per cent gain on the previous year.
But there isn't an industry that won't benefit from finding more effective use of digital infrastructure.
A recent report by Deloitte Access Economics found that one-third of our economy will be significantly affected by digital-driven change in the next three years.
It would be a change on the scale of the tariff cuts of the 1980s, with the biggest impact to be felt in the retail, finance and media sectors.
So we have to be ready to take advantage of these opportunities, and that's why I've called this Forum today.
Nothing is more important to the success of Australia's digital economy than building the NBN.
Not only building it  -  but doing it right, upfront.
The NBN is what the economists call a public good'.
One of those projects like the Transcontinental Railway, the Sydney Harbour Bridge and the Snowy Scheme that creates a wealth of indirect benefits beyond those that can be calculated on a spreadsheet.
Business recognises it.
In fact the Chairman of Google, Eric Schmidt, has said of the NBN, "The decision to have universal fibre access is one of the most important decisions the Australian government has made... investing in the national broadband infrastructure at this level is probably the highest leverage investment that the country can make because it touches so many aspects of the society."
I'm pleased that we have Google represented by Nick Leeder here today. 
The NBN will help Australians to exploit the digital economy by boosting productivity and creating new opportunities.
First to productivity  -  or working smarter.
We all know that the application of new technologies and digital innovations can improve the quality of our products, and reduce the cost of producing them.
Every nation ahead of Australia in the Global Competitiveness Index has the universal access to broadband that the NBN is going to provide.
Through better exploitation of the digital economy we can increase the output of both our capital and our labour, and make Australia more competitive.
The productivity improvements that the NBN will provide are absolutely essential for Australia, as they are for every developed nation.
Because if we can't compete on quantity with developing nations that can provide ten times the number of workers for the same price, we will compete on quality.
With quality skills, and quality infrastructure, we'll be better able to take advantage of the opportunities that come our way.
And there will be opportunities, some predictable, others not so much.
As the digital economy continues to alleviate the tyranny of distance, barriers to overseas markets will fall for Australian producers of goods and services.
As economies in our region develop further, demand for Australian goods and services high up the value-add chain will increase, particularly as internet penetration increases.
As well as opening up new markets to existing industries, further exploitation of the digital economy will create entirely new industries that none of us have imagined yet.
I'm not exactly sure what all the benefits of fully utilising the digital economy will look like.
No one is  -  and that's the point.
You just have to be ready, with the skills and infrastructure in place to create and capture change.
What I do know is that the digital economy will bring money, jobs and sustained prosperity to Australia.
The direct contribution of the internet to GDP is expected to grow from $50 to $70 billion by 2016 alone.
But we have to work closely together to get the benefit.
If we don't collaborate to get to the front of the digital pack, we'll see our competitiveness decline, jobs move elsewhere, and our overall prosperity reduced.
The National Digital Economy Strategy that the Government released last year outlined eight goals to reach by 2020.
The goals we've outlined aren't things that can be achieved just by new spending or the enactment of new legislation.
They require an economy-wide effort.
Government will provide enabling infrastructure, and seek to give Australians the education and skills they need to work in innovative Australian firms.
We want to equip Australians in their work to produce the new ideas, new products and new ways of working.
So today I'm looking forward to sharing ideas about how we can ensure that Australia remains at the cutting edge of the global digital economy.
About how business and government can work together on these important challenges.
In particular, how we can work together to improve digital literacy and ICT skills in Australia.
We'd also like to hear from you about what barriers you might be experiencing in exploiting the digital economy.
But today is not just a discussion between government and business. 
Today is also an opportunity for participants in the forum to share their experience, for business to learn from business.
I encourage you all to listen closely and gain from one another's experience.
Today is not just a one-off discussion either.
It is my hope that we will take the significant ideas tabled here today, refine them further, and that we continue to consult together on them.
In helping to start that conversation today, I urge you to share your views frankly and freely. 
And after we leave here room today, I urge you all to carry on that conversation with your stakeholders and with the Government.
By doing so, you contribute to the future of our digital economy and help make Australia a winner in the Asian Century.  
Thank you.


Sydney
Thank you very much. Can I thank everybody for coming along today and for participating in this discussion. I think it's been a truly fascinating one and we have had people following the discussion online and participating in the Twitter conversation.
When we were trying to work out who to get together it's always a difficult judgement call, and we did cast fairly widely from people who have been involved in their own small business start-ups  -  and thank you very much to them for coming along  -  through to some of the giants in the world of the digital economy. 
We wanted people coming at this from a variety of perspectives, and I think the power of that combination has been on display today. So thank you very much to everyone for coming along and being involved in it.
In terms of take-out messages, I think Andrew earlier on talked about this as Australia's time; this is our time. But we don't have an endless opportunity to exploit the benefits that we have as a nation and to set up for what the future is going to bring. So there's a real sense of urgency that we've got to be working together now to seize the maximum opportunities that we can for the future.
I was taken by Ian's words about if we are to get those opportunities together, we need to bring together the dreamers, the doers and the dollars. I think that's a good set of words about how we can maximise the potential of this age.
And I was taken too by Phil's words about the enabling power of the National Broadband Network  -  not a word wasted  -  that opposition to the NBN is stupid and we need to get this technology  -  ubiquitous broadband  -  out there, because of how it will change our economy, how it will change service delivery and how it will change productivity.
It's fallen to me to try and come up with the difficult task of synthesising the discussion and perhaps pointing a few directions forward. 
What I'm going to do is point four directions forward, but then I'm going to take away the rest of what we've talked about today and we will keep in contact with people in various ways.
It seems to me two things we should do in the very short term. 
There is clearly a short term issue about the skills pipeline into ICT. It's been raised around the room, it's not something that we can let drift, because when people point to enrolment patterns now in our universities there is a real reason to be concerned, that in the relatively short term we will not have available to us the skills sets we need, the software engineers for example. 
So I will ask Chris Evans who isn't with us today, who is the Minister for Skills and Tertiary Education, to meet with a breakout number from this group to really bare down on that question in the relatively short term. 
So I think that that's something we can and we should do.
Two, I've been taken by the conversation about telework, about the changing nature of workplaces, about what that can do for workplace productivity, workplace participation, for the options and choices that working people want. For the shape of our cities and our nation, where people can live, and still do the work that they want to do. 
We do actually have a goal for the Australian Government about having at least 12 per cent of employees teleworking at least one day a week by 2020. We've already set that goal, and we do have this focus coming up with a week that will showcase what can be achieved by telework.
But I was also taken by the discussion that we, as a substantial employer, have got an obligation to model behaviours. And so what would I suggest too, is that in the relatively short term we get a breakout number from this group to meet with the secretaries of our departments, so across the public service  -  and with the Public Service Commissioner  -  to talk about Australian Government leadership in this area and what we can model as a major employer. 
Thirdly, we've all been talking about the cloud. 
For one of the less technically savvy people in the room I'm conscious that in ordinary parlance, clouds are not a good thing. Storm clouds gathering on the horizon, a cloudy day is not as good as a sunny day. So there would be a lot of people who are probably thinking I'm not taken by this dialogue about a cloud. I'm not sure about what cloud computing is, what it does and why it's supposed to be a good thing, and how it could possibly fit with my world and what I do and my work. 
A lot of the contributions really have been about the power of cloud computing. But also the need to spread understanding about what this mean, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises. 
So I will ask Minister Conroy to bring people together in a discussion about that. I think it needs to be a genuine government-industry partnership, and for us to embark on a cloud computing strategy so that we can capture in terms that are going to make sense to people, what is very powerful about this and do it in a synthesised way. So if Minister Conroy could do that I'd be very grateful.
Fourth, we have been in the process of putting together a Cyber White Paper. This really goes to something Suzanne brought to the table. We've been in the process of putting together a Cyber White Paper. White Papers are of course powerful cross-government strategic documents that then drive government actions and policies for a long period of time to come.
One of the White Papers that will shortly be delivered is the White Paper about our changing opportunities in this Asian Century of growth. 
But having listened to the discussion today I think we should broaden what we have been conceptualising as the Cyber White Paper, which would get people thinking about the security space, which of course is important. But I think we should be broadening that out so it is more a digital White Paper and helps us capture some of the more profound and longer term issues that have been brought to the table.
There was the discussion about skills and ecosystems and how we leverage all of this to sustain the development of the digital economy and the transformation of our economy generally. The sort of skill settings that requires, the innovation settings that that requires. 
I think we should try and bring that to the table for a broadened look through this White Paper and we'd not only take what's happened in the conversation here today into that process, but we'd be calling on individuals around the room to be making some direct contributions to that process too. 
So they are the four action items I'd like to outline now. I think that there is more that we can do and Minister Conroy, Minister Shorten and I will take the discussion from this table and have a think about what else. 
But it really has been a very, very energising conversation and I do want to thank you for that. And we've got a lot of work to do together in the future, so we will certainly be staying in touch.
So we will release you now to do whatever you normally do on a late Friday afternoon, early Friday evening. If a glass of good Australian wine is involved, that would seem to me a fairly appropriate outcome for this time of the week. 
Thank you very much for all of your efforts during the course of the day. Thank you.


Sydney
It's a great honour to celebrate the 50th Joint Business Committee meeting and deliver the Australia-Japan Foundation Annual Address.
Tonight I see so many friends.
I see members of the Australia-Japan Foundation Board who give such rich expression to the spirit of cooperation that has been forged between our two countries.
I see members of the Australia-Japan and Japan-Australia Business Cooperation Committees proudly celebrating half a century of success.
You've come so far since those early days when you flew over the Pilbara and saw such potential in the landscape and in each other.
I pay tribute to the eminent former Chairs of the JABCC - Hugh Morgan and Takashi Imai, who honour us with their presence tonight.
I see Ambassador Bruce Miller, a great servant of Australian diplomacy and his counterpart Ambassador Sato, whose outstanding work in this country is soon to end.
We are not just fulfilling a courtesy of protocol in bidding Your Excellency goodbye.
It is truly sad to see you go and leave so many friends behind.  
There will always be a place of welcome for you in this open and generous land.
I see Mr Akio Mimura, one of Asia's most far-sighted business leaders, who has been honoured by an award in the Order of Australia.
Fittingly, this award has been made at the highest rank - Companion - because your contribution has been of the highest rank.
I'm also very proud to acknowledge Sir Rod Eddington who this week joins Mimura-san in receiving honorary doctorates from the Australian National University.
I can't think of a better way to mark this 50th anniversary than to celebrate those who have helped bring our relationship so far.
And in particular to recognise those truly pioneering senior business figures in Japan and Australia who, barely a decade after the end of the Pacific war, had the imagination to see what the economic relationship could become and the determination to realise that vision.
We can't gather tonight without remembering last year's terrible earthquake and tsunami and the difficulties many in Japan still endure.
Australians watched with horror as these events unfolded and we responded with our hearts, just as Japan did after our fires and floods.
My visit to the town of Minami Sanriku was one of the most moving experiences I've had as Prime Minister. 
I will never forget the scenes of destruction I witnessed there, but nor will I forget the resilience shown by the survivors and their families as they set about rebuilding their lives. 
I was deeply touched that the presence of a foreign leader could bring that small measure of comfort which comes from knowing you are not alone.
In turn, we are honoured tonight to have in our presence Mayor Sato from Minami Sanriku and Council President Sato from Iitatemura, another community Australia has been active in helping.
You represent the spirit of the survivors and their determination to ensure the earthquake and tsunami can never defeat their courage.
Natural disasters are a time of testing when the quality of people and relationships is revealed.
In this time of tragedy, we saw the endurance and strength of the Japanese people.
Just as in our response to tragedy, we saw the character of the bonds between our two countries.
Those bonds are warm and they are strong, so we gather here tonight to celebrate a relationship that is deeply valued and not ever taken for granted.
Our partnership has endured through changes of governments, economic cycles, circumstances and events.
It is an adaptable and enduring friendship, forged from the unlikely inheritance of a sorrowful past.
In the 1950s, Australians found the capacity to extend understanding.
At the same time, Japan has become a model liberal democracy, embracing human rights and the rules of the international community.
In this new Japan, Australians saw the emergence of values we had long prized.
So we forged a genuine friendship that has enriched the prosperity of our people, the strength of our economies and the security of our countries.
A friendship that provides a template for how countries with different histories and cultures can find agreement in unexpected ways.
This is not an instrumental or transactional relationship.
It is a sophisticated relationship based on rich personal connections built on the foundations of the trading relationship which the Business Cooperation Committees helped lay down, but now encompassing education, culture, science, sport and beyond.
And, of course, it is a strategic partnership built around common objectives and a shared view of the world and our region.
Our celebration of past achievements only has meaning if we draw inspiration from them to address the challenges of today and tomorrow.
So tonight we look to the future.
For us in this region, that future can be characterised as the 'Asian Century'.
In the next 30 years, one in two human beings born on this planet will be born in Asia.
And the Asian urban population will increase by over a billion.
Every year, the Asian middle-class will grow by 100 million.
That means opportunity for Australia and Japan, and change too.
It means looking at what more we can do together, even in such a long-standing and valued friendship.
The first thing we can do is get the Free Trade Agreement done.
Yes we've achieved a remarkable degree of economic complementarity over six decades.
At the end of 2011, the total stock of Japanese investment in Australia was over $123 billion and the pipeline remains strong. 
For example, Japan's INPEX has committed nearly $22 billion to the Ichthys LNG Project in the Northern Territory, whose construction I launched in May this year.
And In June, Mitsubishi Corporation bought a 24 per cent stake in milk processor Tasmanian Dairy Products.
Our trade with Japan continues to grow rapidly, more than doubling from $24 billion in 2001 to $52 billion last year. 
Australia supplies the lion's share of the resources that have made Japan an industrial powerhouse, including 60 per cent of its iron ore and coal, and now an ever-growing proportion of its LNG.
We have developed a reputation in Japan as a reliable supplier of safe, high quality food.
If you eat a Macdonald's hamburger in Japan, it's almost certain to contain Aussie beef.
If you eat Japan's famous Sanuki Udon noodles, chances are they are made from custom-grown Australian wheat.
If you drink a Japanese beer, it's probably made with Australian barley.
And these things are only possible because over the years, Australian and Japanese companies have built close ties founded on trust and reliability.
Japan is a critically important economic partner for Australia and will remain so in the future.
But in a dynamic and changing region, it's time to take the next step.
It's time to seal the deal on a Free Trade Agreement.
Free and open trade is the cornerstone of Australia's prosperity.
Opening markets and curbing protectionism increases prosperity and creates jobs all round.
Australia is working with regional partners to develop a high quality regional free trade agreement that advances the APEC vision for an economically integrated Asia-Pacific.
At the same time, we maintain a realistic focus on what can be achieved through bilateral free trade agreements.
No FTA should be more natural or logical than with Japan.
I recently spoke with my colleague, Prime Minister Noda, about this and I was encouraged by his response.
I am only too deeply aware that for 2011 Japan's focus was overwhelmingly on disaster recovery.
But in 2012 we have seen momentum gathering again in our FTA negotiations.
Perhaps now, as this special anniversary year enters its final months, we can find an opportune moment to finalise the FTA.
Such an agreement would be a fitting culmination of all our great work over the past fifty years. It would ensure Japan does not fall behind our other FTA partners.
An FTA would reduce the costs of inputs, encouraging previously protected Japanese industries to innovate and expand.
It would contribute to Japanese food security by making Japan an even more affordable export destination for Australian farmers.
It would help our bilateral trade reach its full potential in services.
And it would provide an achievable staging point on the way to Japan joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement if they so wish. 
Our FTA negotiations have come a long way in five years; only a few hurdles remain. 
They are important hurdles, but they can be overcome with a concerted political will on both sides.
Together, we can get the job done.
At the same time, we need to keep our people-to-people links strong.
There are, for example, 47 Japan-Australia societies in Japan and 16 Australia-Japan societies in Australia.
We have 100 sister-city relationships and six sister-state relationships.
On my visit to Japan last year, I was honoured to be able to make a small contribution by supporting a two-way exchange for students and academics from prefectures hardest-hit by the earthquake and tsunami. 
Nearly 60,000 young Japanese travel to Australia each year, to study, undertake school exchanges and learn English.
But only one-tenth of that number  -  about 6000 Australian students  -  go to Japan each year as part of their school or university studies, so I'd like to see us do better.
I also want to see Japanese language teaching in Australian schools and universities stay strong.
Japanese language remains the most studied foreign language in Australian schools and its teaching will be strengthened by the development of a new Japanese curriculum as part of our wider educational reforms.
In the Asian Century, Australians will need to be much more Asia-literate and Asia-capable than we ever have been before.
Indeed, this is one of the key themes I have asked the Asian Century White Paper team to examine.
Let us remember that all these things - trade and investment, student exchanges, tourism - are the works of peace.
All our achievements over the past 50 years have only been possible because of the long-term strategic stability in Asia.
Only if we maintain and enhance that framework of stability can the children of today grow up in a peaceful world like their parents have.
In this context, diplomatic and security cooperation between Australia and Japan has never been so important.
Australia and Japan must continue, and where possible strengthen, our cooperation in the G20, APEC, East Asia Summit and our other global and regional forums.
Australia is acutely aware of the important contribution that Japan makes to key decision-making bodies and global governance  -  to the rules-based international order that we both seek to promote.
So much so that Australia has long held the view that Japan ought to occupy a permanent seat on the UN Security Council.
Together we played a key role in the founding of APEC, and we have helped to expand and consolidate the role of the East Asia Summit and the G20.
Our partnership in the World Trade Organisation has served our shared interests in a global rules-based multilateral trading system.
Above all, we must work together on regional security.
As China and India and other large nations of Asia rise, our strategic landscape is becoming more crowded and complex.
Rising national wealth is allowing states to modernise their defence forces.
At the same time, economic growth is putting pressure on strategic resources, like energy, water and food.
And existing regional tensions remain, such as North Korea's nuclear ambitions and unresolved territorial disputes.
We need not be pessimistic about the future for our region but nor should we be complacent. 
New mindsets and creative approaches will be needed as we seek to build mutual trust and confidence between the countries of our region.
Australia and Japan must work together to this end, bilaterally and with all the countries of the region.  
Our Alliance relationships with the United States contribute to stability in the region.
We are working to strengthen the East Asia Summit, a forum now with the right membership and mandate to cover political, security and economic issues in our region.  
Our cooperation encompasses non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament as well as emerging issues such as space and cyber security.
Bilaterally, building on the 2007Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation, we now conduct annual high-end military exercises, have negotiated an Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement and an Information Security Agreement.
One of the key outcomes of the 2+2 Foreign and Defence Ministers meeting in Sydney last month was a joint Vision Statement, which will guide our deepening defence and security cooperation in the years ahead.
We will play our part in keeping Asia stable, peaceful and cooperative.
These are years of destiny for our region.
If we get this right  -  as I believe we will  -  this will be looked upon as one of the most extraordinary periods in human history.
It will be seen as the period when we were able to bring billions out of poverty.
To recast our global and regional links through freer trade and stronger regional architecture.
To manage the challenge of food security and environmental sustainability in a growing world population facing the very real threat of climate change.
And to maintain the stability needed for economic growth as the strategic order changes in our region.
I believe all this can be accomplished in our time.
Indeed, it must be because the alternative cannot be contemplated.
The partnership between Australia and Japan shows it can be done.
Two countries that put old enmities aside and embraced a common purpose.
It has taken judgment and committed diplomacy.
It has taken wisdom and patience through the occasional low points.
And, perhaps most importantly, it has taken a strong human dimension  -  beginning with that early friendship between Prime Minister Kishi and Trade Minister John McEwen, and continuing to the warmth and generosity that exists in this room tonight.
The governments of both our countries have high hopes and great ambitions for the next 50 years, and so we should.
This is a time of opportunity for us both.
We rightly call it the Asian Century', and in creating that century, Japan led the way.
Japan was the first Asian country to modernise, providing an example and an inspiration to the other nations of the region.
The next 50 years will be harder.
The competition is steeper, and the low-hanging fruit has been long picked.
But if the energy and commitment shown by the organisations in this room over the past 50 years are anything to go by, we can have every confidence in the next 50 years.
Much will change in those decades.
But the friendship between Australia and Japan  -  warm, respectful and dependable  -  will endure.


Canberra
Can I thank Katy for her leadership of the ACT. As a part time resident in Canberra I am acutely aware that often we give your beautiful place a bit of a bad name.
When it runs around the country on the TV news as Canberra today has done this or that, what they're really talking about is what happens in federal parliament.
On a morning like this the attractions of Canberra and the ACT are clear. And Katy and her team  -  women and men  -  have provided fantastic leadership of the ACT during a time of change, and I'm looking forward to seeing that leadership continue after the election, shortly upon us, in 11 days' time. But no one's counting.
I've been asked today to speak about the role of powerful women and what that means for politics and for the life of our nation.
In truth I don't wander around thinking about myself as a powerful woman. I think about myself as a Prime Minister who's got a job to do, who is fantastically supported by a great team.
But when I do stop and reflect about women's roles in politics I don't think of us  -  this generation  -  as the trail blazers. The trail has already been blazed by the women who have gone before.
The women who went before in times when women in politics were so much more unusual than they are today.
I think of people like Joan Child becoming the first female Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Joan Kirner and Carmen Lawrence blazing a trail when it was truly tough.
Susan Ryan, of quitting her job as a minister when she truly alone, out trying to take that executive responsibility.
These are the women who have blazed the trail for us and we should be so thankful that they have done it.
The women of today's generation, including me and the women in my team, I believe are in the mid phase of change. Women aren't unusual in politics any longer, but we're not half-half either. And we are still blazing some of those first trails, including being the first female Prime Minister.
But life for us is different from those early women, and we are a generation that is shaping more change. And I believe the ultimate end point to this generation of change  -  and I absolutely believe I'll live to see it  -  is an Australia in which we don't bother to reflect on how many men and how many women are in politics any longer because it is so routine for it to be half-half.
That we don't bother to collect the statistics any longer about who is the first female Minister for Defence or any of those jobs because it is so routine for women to do them as well as men.
That we don't bother any longer to collect the statistics on how many women prime ministers there have been or women premiers or chief ministers, because it is so routine for those jobs to be held by women.
I genuinely believe that we will get to that place; we'll do it in my lifetime. But in order to do it we need to see further change.
One of the great delights of doing this job as Prime Minister is, I do believe, that around the country it's made women and men stop and perhaps have a conversation with their daughters about their lifetime aspirations. And reinforcing to their daughters that there are no closed doors for them any longer. It's a great delight.
Indeed a friend of mine who has a very young son told me about a conversation she had with her son where she said to him  -  talking about what you might want to do when he was a much bigger person, he was only four or five when this conversation happened  -  you could be Prime Minister. To which he said, No I couldn't mummy because you've got to be a girl to do that job.
That's not exactly the impression we're seeking to leave but the impression we do want to leave for the girls and the boys of Australia is that there are no closed doors. That this occupation, all occupations are open to women and to men.
And yes, being the first female Prime Minister also attracts some commentary of the negative kind, and you know what I'm talking about when I refer to that. But that is I think a by-product of this generation of change.
And for me, that negative commentary has never detracted from the real delight of having the opportunity  -  not only to change perceptions  -  but to change the nation.
Because ultimately our mission isn't about changing politics, it's about changing the country we live in and ensuring that the country we live in offers the best of opportunity to women, to men, to girls, to boys, to people from all backgrounds and all walks of life.
Which is why we're on a mission to do things like make sure that every child in every school gets a great education. To turn on its head the saying that demography is destiny. To ensure that poor kids get the same chance as children from better-off backgrounds.
I'm really proud of what we have achieved as a Government for women. It's not only changing politics, it's changing lives for Australian women.
Whether it's the introduction of paid parental leave, the changes we've made to make child care more affordable and higher quality. Whether it's the changes we've brought to the tax system so hundreds of thousands of women who work part time, often in low income jobs, don't pay a cent of tax until they've earned over $18,200.
These are big achievements for women.
I'm also particularly proud of our workplace relations legislation, bringing as it did for the first time in this country a principle that would enable women to truly achieve equal pay.
And I'm proud that under that principle we are seeing change for women who do some of the hardest work in our society  -  people who work in the social and community services sector  -  in the women's refuges, in the domestic violence counselling services, in the homelessness shelters.
Those workers, predominately women, are going to see their work revalued because of what we achieve through those laws, what we achieve working with the trade union involved, the Australian Services Union, and what we achieve through agreeing with them that this work shouldn't be undervalued because it's traditionally been viewed as women's work.
And I am delighted today to announce at the start of a sitting week, that is this sitting week that will see us introduce legislation to put in a special account $2.8 billion which is the Commonwealth's share of making sure that these workers, predominately women, are properly paid and properly valued in the life of our nation.
If you're trying to bring change of this dimension you can't do it alone and I do want to acknowledge today that Katy was amongst the first of the leaders of states and territories to say that she too wanted to see equal pay for these workers.
And one of the first to announce that rather than just good words, real money would be put on the table to make a difference for these working women.
I want to acknowledge the really genuine partnership I've had with Katy during the time I've been Prime Minister. Those exchanges around the COAG table aren't always easy ones; sometimes robust' is a word that covers many sins. Sometimes they are very robust exchanges.
And whilst Katy's always been a very strong advocate of her place, of the ACT, she's been a progressive voice around that table for change.
Whether it be in health or education, whether it be justice for women workers; a progressive voice, a progressive advocate for change.
The women who will have power in this place in 11 days' time are the women who take themselves to the polling places to go and record their vote: 125,000 of them.
In the ACT you get a very special power when you go and vote. You get to vote for the political party of your choice, but you actually  -  because of the magic of your very unusual voting system  -  get to select the candidates that you want to select.
And my message to people who go to those polling places  -  to women and men  -  would be, to vote for candidates that embody the values and power of this place, the ACT.
Vote for candidates with the values that you agree with and the track record of getting it done. And if you do that, I know that Katy, the women in her team, and the men who work alongside them will be returned in that election.
It's great to be with you this morning and I'm looking forward to the conversation to come. I think we should all be a little bit scared of Jane though as she moderates it.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
I am delighted to launch the International Day of the Girl Child in Australia.
I'm especially delighted to do so as this country's first female Prime Minister.
But also as the Adelaide girl who grew up safe, valued and loved, and received that standard of education I want to see for every child.
For most young girls, growing up in a country like Australia is a time of remarkable opportunity.
To be encouraged to think for ourselves.
To have choices and the freedom to exercise them.
To manage our careers, our relationships and our health as we see fit.
But for many girls and young women  -  here at home and especially in the developing world  -  the experience is very different.
Like the girl forced to work at home and watch her brother go off to school.
The girl forcibly married to someone she doesn't know before she has even come of age.
Or the young woman who dwells in daily fear of violence from those closest to her.
In many cases, they live lives unchanged from the days of their grandmothers and great-grandmothers.
Their shoulders weighed down by authority and unthinking tradition.
Arduous, limited, even dangerous lives.
Robbing them of a future.
And robbing us of their potential.
Many of us heard overnight of the shocking news that Malala Yousafzai, a teenage schoolgirl and renowned children's rights advocate in Pakistan, has been shot by the Taliban.
Malala was on a bus home from school when a man who asked for her by name shot her, seriously wounding her and her classmates in the attack.  Today she is in intensive care with bullet wounds to the head and chest.
This attack was no accident.  Malala was targeted because she is a campaigner for girls' right to education. 
The Pakistani Taliban have claimed responsibility, describing her as a Western-minded girl, known for speaking out against the insurgents, who had harmed their cause.
Malala's inspiring words have been widely reported and repeated today:
I will serve my people, I will speak up for my right of education and I speak for the girls.  If I lost my life in speaking up for the rights of girls, it is not a big deal for me.
Today we think of her and her family  -  we desperately hope she does not have to pay that price.
And we resolve to join in her work.
As Malala's life shows, widening the horizons of women and girls is a job for the whole world.
If girls live lesser lives anywhere, we are diminished everywhere.
When this country helped found the United Nations, we made a commitment to be good global citizens and to be a friend of humanity at all times and in all places.
Australia is a nation that keeps its commitments.
So we must all we can to alleviate the suffering of women and increase their rights and opportunities globally, especially here in our region.
Nothing is more important than education.
I don't want to see young girls working in sweatshops.
I want to see them in the classroom - well fed and clothed, immunised, safe from harm and free to learn.
Education is the key.
Education is aid that works.
Teaching girls and women is one of the most important investments in the development of a nation.
Education makes an enormous difference to the health of women and their children, to their job opportunities, their wage levels.
Educated girls tend to marry later, which increases their employment prospects.
Education plays an important role in giving women more control over how many children they have.
An extra year of secondary schooling can boost a girl's future wages by 10 to 20 per cent.
And because women typically reinvest 90 per cent of their income in their family, compared with 30 or 40 per cent of men's income, their children can lead better lives as well.
Friends, In my role as co-chair of the Millennium Development Goal Advocacy Group, I recently announced that promoting access to quality education and achieving gender equality were my personal priorities.
That's why in recent years, we've put our foot on the accelerator.
Yes, $320 million is the sum for our Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development initiative, and there's more for countries beyond the Pacific.
Australian aid means half a million children receiving support to go to school in Papua New Guinea.
It means 165,000 school places for girls in Indonesia.
It means 140,000 girls being able to attend middle and secondary school in Pakistan.
And in Afghanistan, we have made a significant contribution to an international effort which has increased school enrolments from one million in 2001 to more than seven million today  -  including more than 2.7 million girls.
But for all the opportunities being opened up, there are plenty of girls being left behind  -  abroad and here at home.
That's why the United Nations has created this day of observance - the International Day of the Girl Child.
This is the first, and it's been a long time coming.
It's day for symbolism - and symbols are important because where our heart and ideals go, our actions will follow.
Friends, Gender equality is one of the great goals of our time.
The first-wave feminists started the last century with such high hopes yet we reached the year 2000 with those goals not completely met.
Let this century be different and let us be the ones who make it different.
May this be the century when every girl is born wanted.
Where she grows up free from want and fear.
And lives out her years nurtured in dignity and abounding in opportunity.
That is our commitment to the women and girls of today and those of future generations.
That is the hope in which I declare the first international Day of the Girl Child officially launched.


Bali, Indonesia
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Today, we gather to commemorate the worst terrorist attack our nation has ever known.
88 Australians died here. And they did not die alone.
38 Indonesians died with them.
In all, 202 lives were lost and more than 200 were injured.
The bodies of the dead and the living bore wounds more often seen in wartime.
But these were not soldiers.
Our fellow Australians  -  those lost, those hurt  -  were doing nothing more than seeking a few carefree days amid full and busy lives.
They had come to a place loved for its sunshine and uncomplicated joy.
A place, like London and Gallipoli, where something of the Australian spirit dwells upon another shore.
This is what the Bali bombers struck at here.
On September 11, terrorists attacked the great symbols of American prestige.
Here in Bali, they attacked our people and through them, sought to overwhelm our values.
Here on these bustling streets, they inflicted searing pain and grief that will never end.
But even as the debris fell, it was obvious the attack on our sense of ourselves  -  as Australians, as human beings - had failed.
Rescuers ran towards the terror.
Volunteers extended their hands by the hundred, Indonesians and Australian alike.
A remarkable medical rescue effort swung into place.
A thorough policing effort methodically dismantled the terrorist network responsible.
And our two countries drew closer than we ever had before.
Amid the horror, it was a time for heroes. Like Peter Hughes and Jason McCartney, victims who became rescuers.
Like the Sanglah Hospital staff who provided frontline care in those first critical hours.
Or Len Notaras, Fiona Wood and their colleagues who were angels of healing back at home.
It was a time for leaders too.
President Megawati and then Minister Yudhoyono were quick to embrace international cooperation and a decisive security response.
Prime Minister Howard was a steadfast, reassuring voice for Australians in those dramatic days, and it is very fitting that he is here today.
Police Inspector General Pastika and Commissioner Keelty gave us confidence that justice would be done.
Ten years later and we witness today another sort of courage: the courage it has taken for the survivors and families to make this pilgrimage.
The physical journey by plane has been easy but the inner journey is wrenchingly hard.
This is a day of contesting emotions, from anger and unamended loss to forgiveness and reconciliation with a bitter past.
Wounds and scars abound, healed and unhealed.
But nothing can replace the empty seat at your family table.
The graduations and christenings you will never know.
And the fault line that will always divide your lives into two halves: before and after Bali.
There are, at least, some fragments of comfort on this day of recollection and return.
There is peace in this island, and the knowledge that millions still come here for the same reasons you and your loved ones did.
And perhaps there is a grim reassurance in knowing that the terrorists did not achieve what they set out to do.
They did not undermine Indonesian democracy, which has only grown stronger across the passage of a decade.
And though our vigilance is greater, we have not surrendered the freedoms that brought us here in the first place.
We were hurt and so were our friends, but we did not falter.
Instead, we endured and found strength in each other.
With that strength, we embrace those who suffered in Bali and lost so much.
With that strength, we affirm the endurance of our ideals.
Because in the end, terror is not beaten by policing or force of arms alone.
We prevail because we have a better way.
We prevail because our beliefs endure.
Terrorists have killed and maimed thousands around the world.
But they will never sunder or displace a single ideal.
So today we return here in remembrance, but we also gather in quiet defiance.
We will never forget all that we lost.
We will hold fast to that which remains:
To our determination as a free people to explore the world unbowed by fear; to our resolve to defeat terrorism; and to our duty to care for each other. 


Tarin Kot, Afghanistan
Thank you very much and thank you for gathering like this.
I've actually come here from being in Bali for the ten year commemoration of the bombing on 12 October. And I just wanted to talk to you about that because I think it's so meaningful to what's happening here in Afghanistan today.
We got families, survivors together to go to Bali for the ten years. And I had the opportunity to meet with people who could tell me a story about how they were dancing at the Sari nightclub, didn't like the song that came on, left the dance floor, and if they had made a difference decision, if they had kept dancing, then they would be dead today because the people they were dancing with died.
I met people who can show you the scars of the burns that are on their arms and talk about how long they were in the pressure suit to get over it.
I talked to a girl who is 22 years old now. She was 12 in Bali, her sister died and she got separated from her father and was there just rattling around at the hotel they were staying at trying to find someone and trying to work out what was going on.
And when you think about those stories then they really add up to something very powerful about what terrorism is. About how it hits people, people who are just doing everyday things. Hundreds of thousands of people go to Bali each year, I think around 900,000 Australians will go there this year.
And they go, and they go to the beach and they shop and they go the nightclubs and they go to the restaurants, just such an ordinary thing to do. And that in one flash, one second, everything ordinary can be destroyed and people for the rest of their lives are either grieving for someone they've lost, or they are recovering from the injuries either physical or psychological, or both.
We know that for the Bali bombing and for the more than 100 Australians who have lost their lives in terrorist attacks since 9/11, that each of those attacks had a link to Afghanistan.
Each of those attacks involved someone who had been trained here; trained in bomb making, trained in the ways of terrorism.
And so it was fighting global terror that brought us here and that global terror had taken Australian lives. And we came here to make sure that never again would we see terrorists trained who came and took Australian lives.
Now it's one thing to define a mission, it's another thing to come and do it. And you are the people who come and do it, and it's really hard to do; really hard to do in every way.
The amount of time you are separated from family, the living conditions, the absence of hot showers, I've been briefed on that  -  I did say I thought that's a bit harsh, but you know, the Commander is the Commander  -  the absence of hot showers.
But then the really big things that you confront including the loss of some of your mates, and you've had to confront that over the recent period, including losses that have involved insider attacks so difficult emotionally and in every way.
It's one thing to understand that we need the mission, it's another thing to be the people who come and do it.
And so one reason I'm here today is just to say a big thank you to you on behalf of the Australian nation for everything that you do.
We understand how hard it is. You understand that better than we do, but I think the Australian nation has an insight into your lives here and has an insight into how tough it is, and they are full of admiration for the way that you've kept going even when it's been really, really tough.
The other reason I've come here today, to Afghanistan, both here and to briefings in Kabul, is to make sure that at my level, at the Government level, we are across everything that is happening with the transition and we are thinking about the days beyond.
We are doing the planning now, not only for how transition will roll out, but how our engagement will be here in the days that lie beyond 2014. So I wanted to be in country to do some of that work and that's very important to our future planning.
You know that the mission is in days of change, that we are moving through the transition process, and that is bringing change. It's bringing change as we move to a training, advise and assist mission. It will bring more change as we go through 2013 and into 2014.
And we will be thinking and developing those plans for change alongside of course the senior leadership of the ADF. But we also want to be here so we can listen to you about how you think things are going and what insights you've got as we go about that planning.


New Delhi, India
Tonight, I have the pleasure to open Oz Fest  -  my country's biggest ever cultural festival in your country.
Oz Fest will bring a touch of Australia to India's shores.
Running from the middle of October through to early February next year, Oz Fest will reach out to audiences in 18 locations across India, in the north, the south, the west and the east.
Australia is known for the most part around the world, including in India, for its sporting prowess, its beautiful scenery and its relaxed lifestyle.
But we are also a nation that values our world class artists, who play a critical role in society - exploring, challenging, inventing and communicating.
Within and beyond our nation's shores, our artists interpret cultural differences and bring us together.
So Oz Fest is about bringing Australia's contemporary character to India in new and fresh ways.
We want to surprise and excite you. 
Amuse you and cause you to reflect.
And to show you the versatility and depth of contemporary Australian culture.
To give you just a few examples, for young audiences we feature the Melbourne International Comedy Festival and up-and-coming bands such as Sheppard, the Aston Shuffle and Big Scary.
The cinema culture of today will be featured through Save Your Legs!, a fabulous Australia movie about cricket and life, starring Pallavi Sharda, an Australian of Indian descent who is carving out a career in Bollywood.
The Bookwallah will take six writers, three Australia and three Indian, on a 2000 kilometre train ride across India, seeking out stories, conversations, and connections.
We will also feature great works of collaboration between our two peoples.
For admirers of physical beauty, The Pilbara Project will display photographs of Australia's rugged, starkly beautiful north-west region by Australian and Indian photographers.
And for theatre bugs there is The Lady of the Sea, a major collaborative work between the Brisbane Powerhouse and the Abinaya Research Centre.
Two Oceans will continue a long-term collaboration between the Australian Art Orchestra and some of the greatest exponents of India's Carnatic classical music to create a new musical language.
Through OzFest, we also want to build a bridge to our shared past.
For example, few people probably know that one of the great characters of Indian cinema in the 1930s and 1940s, Fearless Nadia, was played by an Australian, Mary Ann Evans.
Born in Western Australia, she came to India as a child, forged a very unexpected cinematic career here and married into the Wadia family.
India became Mary's home.
Oz Fest will present some of Fearless Nadia's classic scenes to a new musical score played by an orchestra of Australian and Indian musicians.
This production premiered to strong reviews at the OzAsia festival in Adelaide several weeks ago.
And friends, there will be more.
But tonight, to launch this festival, we begin with a musical interplay of the cultures of our two countries.
Shortly Mark Atkins, Gurrumul Yunupingu, and Anoushka Shankar, some of the most gifted musicians from our two countries, will be taking us on an equally magical musical journey  -  a journey celebrating the meeting of Australian and Indian contemporary culture and their grounding in ancient tradition.
On that score, I am delighted to announce the Ravi Shankar World Music Scholarship.
The scholarship honours the exceptional life and work of Pandit Ravi Shankar, who has done so much to bring Indian culture to the world and to fuse the old with the new.
The award will offer a Masters degree scholarship to study at the Victorian College of the Arts at the University of Melbourne in 2013.
It has the Shankar family's blessing, and support from the Australia India Institute.
Like OzFest itself, this scholarship symbolises everything we have to share and everything we have to learn from each other.
In that spirit, it gives me great pleasure to formally declare Oz Fest open in the hope it will bring joy to many and strengthen the bonds of affection and respect that exist between our two nations.
So let the music begin and let's build for the future together.


New Delhi, India
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you for your welcome.  I am delighted to be here with you in Delhi today.
The people of Australia and India have long been friends.
My great predecessor, Prime Minister Ben Chifley, Australia's Prime Minister at the end of and following the Second World War, was someone who was driven to work for the betterment of all people, not only in Australia but anywhere we may give a helping hand.
He led an Australian people who were friends to the newly free world  -  friends to the new nations of the global south.
So, naturally, he formed a working friendship with Prime Minister Singh's great predecessor  -  Nehru.
They met more than once, Chifley cited Nehru in his speeches, and in correspondence with Chifley's biographer Nehru wrote of his deep distress at Chifley's untimely death in 1951. 
Chifley's admiration for Nehru was expressed in an interview for the Indian media which he gave only hours before his death. 
Chifley said:
Tell Nehru not to lose heart, but to carry on. 
India will still show the way to peace.
In him not only you but the world has a great man.
Friends, as you were then, you remain today: a sign of hope to the world.
Not least in the global importance of your national success as a great democracy in Asia.
And as Australians were then, so we are now: as you take your rightful place in the affairs of the globe, you do so with the affection and respect of our people, your friends.
Of course, one manifestation of this friendship is our shared love for, and friendly rivalry in, cricket: that Indian game accidentally discovered by the British as the great Indian thinker Ashis Nandy described it.
At the start of this year it was my pleasure to host the Australian and Indian cricket teams at my Sydney residence.
The summer was a celebration of the game and of the ties it has created between our peoples.
And many Australians gathered for what could be their final sight of Sachin Tendulkar in Tests.
Sachin Tendulkar is almost as widely admired in Australia as he is here in his homeland.
So, as I announced yesterday, we are delighted that he has accepted an honour from the Australian People, Member of the Order of Australia.
NEW PARTNERS
Friends, in past decades, I believe the strong friendship between our peoples has not been matched by the strength of the connection between our Governments.
Above all because while shared sentiment was often strong, shared interests were too often weak.
This has been changing for some time.
In the 1980s and 1990s both Australia and India undertook economic reforms which turned our economies outwards to the world.
While we each followed our own respective economic paths, we sought the same goal of economic growth.  Two facts tell the story of our efforts.
Twenty years on, India's share of world output has almost doubled while this year, Australia reached 21 years of uninterrupted economic growth.
And although our economies have come from very different points, in going for growth, we have grown towards each other.
Now, in a new century  -  one I describe as an Asian Century  -  the case for a stronger, broader and deeper relationship between India and Australia is compelling.
THE ASIAN CENTURY
The Asian Century is the setting for the great national opportunities and challenges each of us faces.
In this century, the tide is running to Asia.
Global economic and strategic weight is shifting eastwards towards our region, driven by the rapid modernisation of Asian nations, by economic dynamism and by population growth.
By 2025, four of the top 10 economies in the world will be in Asia.
Asia is becoming the world's largest consumer market.
For Australia, we are in the right part of the world at the right time. 
And our record of economic management reinforces this advantage.
As the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 created recession and mass unemployment in many advanced economies, Australia stood out as one of the few to maintain growth in employment and GDP. 
The Australian economy has recently been confirmed as the twelfth largest in the world, up from fifteenth.
Our comparative advantages include our natural resources, strong institutions and diverse, highly skilled workforce.
Our status as a reliable supplier of energy, minerals, services and manufactured goods to our regional partners gives us an important role in Asia's economic transformation.
India is itself a vast demonstration of the trends defining this century.
The proportion of India's population living in poverty has fallen over the last two decades from almost a half to less than a third.
New and growing cities are housing new and growing industries.
India is home to an emerging middle class that will shape social change and global markets in the decades to come.
Across the board, India doubled per person income within a decade.
To put this into perspective, it took the United Kingdom over fifty years to double per person income when it industrialised in the nineteenth century.
That same Industrial Revolution reshaped the dynamics of economic growth, as technology eclipsed population in determining the power of nations. 
Now, as Asia's rapid advances see Asian nations returning to their historic place as a share of global GDP, the strategic importance of population size has also returned.
For a nation like yours, and for your friends, this is a great and a good thing.
GOVERNMENTS BUILDING PARTNERSHIP
This is the context for the growing partnership between Australia and India.
In a century of growth and change, our interests are closer than they have ever been.
But while the convergence of our interests creates the conditions for a new partnership, leadership from Governments remains essential.
This is why it was so important that when my predecessor Prime Minister Rudd visited India in November 2009, he and Prime Minister Singh issued an historic joint statement:
Agreement to upgrade relations between our two countries to the level of a Strategic Partnership.
This is a vital symbol  -  and it is the basis of very practical work.
We issued a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation to ensure closer and more regular collaboration on security issues.
We agreed new programs for joint research and development in areas like clean energy, water efficiency and sustainable agriculture.
The annual meetings between our Foreign, Trade and Education ministers and important ministerial contact between Defence and Energy ministers are adding new vitality.
In the past year, another barrier to relations has been removed: Australia has opened the door for uranium sales to India.
We did this because, to quote Prime Minister Singh in another time and place, it is an idea whose time had come.
So I look forward to discussing the next steps for our peaceful nuclear co-operation when I meet with Prime Minister Singh today.
These discussions are much more than an opportunity for jobs and exports or even a step for energy security.
They demonstrate in the most practical way that the Strategic Partnership between India and Australia is founded on enduring shared interests.
NEW ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES
In recent years our economic relationship has grown stronger.
Two-way trade has grown at 13 per cent per annum in the past five years.
Indian investment approvals in Australia grew last year alone to over $11 billion.
This is a one hundred fold increase from ten years ago.
Last year, Australia was India's largest supplier of coal and wool.
Indians are the fastest growing group of new migrants to Australia.
And Australian universities and training providers are an invaluable source of education for Indian students, who are the second largest group of international students in our country.
But there are important gains for both our nations if we broaden these links.
The dramatic changes in Asia are creating new patterns of Indian growth.
Unlike comparable economies in the past, as India's share of output from agriculture has fallen, it is the services share, rather than the industry or manufacturing share, which has risen.
This reflects not just the development of new information and communications technologies, but the integration of these services into global value chains.
The growth of knowledge and its application have never been more important.
This century is one of opportunity for Asia's innovators  -  and that means opportunity for India and Australia.
India has a genius for opening up new markets and meeting people's needs through frugal innovation.
Take TATA's Swach a benchtop water filter.
The Swach is an innovation based on advanced knowledge, using the properties of nanoparticles of silver.
Yet it also uses rice husks, one of India's most common waste products, runs without electricity or moving parts and costs about a tenth of comparable previous products.
In a nation where two million people die every year from drinking contaminated water, this is a lifesaving device.
And in a nation which makes and sells ideas, it is one of a thousand cases where your dynamic technology and service sectors are already contributing to the global knowledge economy.
Australia's firms are globally recognised as businesses who deliver innovation with their partners.
From transport and logistics, to mining and environmental services, from medical research to food science education to financial services.
So the next stage of our partnership should focus on areas of collaboration which build on these respective strengths  -  and which encourage innovation and specialisation in our economies.
Witness the growth of knowledge partnerships between Australia and India: today 32 Australian universities take part in 380 active collaborations with 250 Indian institutions.
Ranging from academic co-operation and joint research to encouraging student and staff mobility and recognising course credits between institutions.
Indeed, it is just this work which brought me here when I last visited in India in 2009, as Australia's Deputy Prime Minister and Education Minister. 
A commitment to education, research and innovation should be at the heart of our economic and social ties  -  indeed our Australia India Strategic Research Fund is another important example of this.
We are also seeing the expansion of our partnership to other areas of growing interest.
This is why my discussions with Prime Minister Singh will cover proposals for new cooperation in areas such as water technology and energy security.
But while the work of our two Governments can develop this potential, it is businesses and people who actually realise it. 
That is why leadership and collaboration among the business communities of India and Australia is vital to our partnership.
And why we are working so hard to encourage the development of business relationships, including through investment, partnership and joint ventures.
To make the most of all this broadening of economic ties, we must truly be makers and shapers of change.
Australia has changed, in determining to export uranium to India. 
India is changing, through important economic reforms in areas like energy, aviation and retail.
Our work together on a truly liberalising Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement will change both of us.
We have already set a goal of $40 billion trade in 2015  -  in other words, our trade could double by 2015.  
Both our economies have felt the vast human benefits of change on our path to economic growth in the past two decades  -  great benefits lie ahead if we persist.
SECURITY AND STABILITY
Economic and social progress also depends on security and stability through a time of rapid and far-reaching change.
We are partners in our region.
In principle  -  as open, democratic and pluralistic societies  -  we both seek a region which is stable and rules-based, outward-looking and inclusive, where all countries work together for peace and growth.
In practice  -  we see common security interests in what is increasingly described as the Indo-Pacific region.  
We both want security of maritime routes. 
And we both seek to build habits of cooperation and trust across our region, in particular through the East Asia Summit.
Next year, when Australia takes over from India as Chair of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation, we will continue to build on the work India has done to strengthen Indian Ocean cooperation.
We are committed to our cooperation in counter terrorism.
We each remain undaunted in the face of international terrorism and determined to defeat it. 
Our defence and security interaction has been stepped up in recent years and we should look to increase them further.
In time this could include more regular and combined talks at ministerial level, and stronger co-operation between our Defence Forces, including full naval exercises.
We are regional partners  -  and we work together in the world.
So Australia argued strongly for the G20 to replace the G8 as the preeminent international economic forum.
When Australia hosts the G20 Summit in 2014, we plan to do that in close cooperation with India. 
I welcome Prime Minister Singh's leadership at the G20 in promoting human development and economic growth.
And India and Australia have pressed for reform of the IMF and World Bank so that they better represent today's world.
Even when we do not immediately see eye to eye  -  when there are tough issues on the table, as at the Doha Round and in climate change negotiations  -  we continue our quest for common ground.
NEW PARTNERS, OLD FRIENDS
In all that we do to seize the opportunities of the Asian Century, the task for our two Governments is simply this:
To build a partnership just as productive and enduring as the friendship our peoples have forged.
For Australia, our goal is for a partnership with India which reflects your standing  -  along with the US, Japan, China, Indonesia and the Republic of Korea  -  as one of the handful of countries which matter most to Australia.
Australia's future in Asia is firmly grounded in relationships of respect with Washington, Tokyo, Beijing, Jakarta, Seoul ...  and Delhi.
We know India's importance in the Asian Century.
You long ago woke to life and freedom today it is the world waking to the global role your freedom and life have made for you.
The economic transformation you have achieved is remarkable the assets you hold today are rich indeed.
A great democracy, a vibrant private sector and entrepreneurial culture, and a demographic dividend as you invest in the skills and knowledge of a creative people.
These are assets Australia and India share.
Assets well fitted to growth and prosperity in the Asian Century.
This is a moment in history for nations like ours.
A century when reformers and innovators, will flourish in Asia  -  this is a century for India and a century for Australia.
Thank you.


Canberra
Thank you very much and it's fantastic to be here with my ministerial colleague Dr Emerson on what is such a great day for our nation.
Now it's not too many venues that you speak in that you've got people on three levels, so I'm going to be looking around a bit to try and take you all in to this speech.
But you, working here, know how important this is for our nation. It's been 27 years since we served on the Security Council.
We are a nation that is a substantial contributor to the UN. And so it was more than time for us to return to the Security Council and to play a role over the next two years in shaping events that are truly important to our nation.
The Security Council is going to be at the heart of shaping what happens next in Afghanistan as we work towards the completion of the NATO-ISAF mission. It's vital the UN to what happens next in East Timor. It's vital to our efforts against poverty and peace-building around the world where we have got such a good track record and where we are continuing to make such strong contributions now.
The Security Council will be vital to what happens with the sanctions regimes against Iran, against North Korea, the fight against global terrorism, the fight against weapons and their illegal use in our world.
It will also be pivotal to what happens in Syria and the ending of the violence there. So, so much to do over the next two years, but we've only got there because of the hard work of the people gathered here and beyond.
And so my real purpose today has been to come along and to say a very big thank you to everyone who has been involved in making sure that we won this bid. It's never been easy.
There's been some casual predictions from some in the newspapers about how easy it is to get yourself on the Security Council. This group of people knows that it's really hard. And it takes a lot of work.
And so I would like to thank in order, firstly Kevin Rudd for having the foresight as Prime Minister to put our name forward and to commence the bid process, and then to pursue it so energetically as Minister for Foreign Affairs.
I'd like to thank too, Stephen Smith who in his days as Foreign Affairs Minister also was very determined to pursue the bid around the world.
I'd like to thank Dr Emerson for having played his part across all of those years as Minister for Trade, sneaking in advocacy of our Security Council bid to discussions that were supposed to be about something else entirely.
I'd like to thank Minister Bob Carr who I've spoken to over in New York. I accused him of drinking apple martinis in a bar in New York. Being Bob Carr of course he wasn't drinking apple martinis in a bar in New York. But he is tremendously excited and you all know the great efforts he's put in in this, the closing stages of the campaign, including in New York in recent days.
I spoke too to Richard Marles, who is tremendously excited and has played a major role for us in the Pacific and beyond and has been a very vigorous advocate of this bid.
I'd like to thank here, Dennis Richardson and I'd also Gillian, like to thank you for your leadership of the departmental efforts here and around the world. This has been an effort not only out of this building in Canberra, but in all of our missions and posts around the world, people have been involved in the bid and involved in the advocacy for it.
I've had personal experience of dealing with DFAT staff who around the world in those missions and posts, have been going that extra mile to make sure that our credentials for the bid are put to the forefront.
I'd like to thank the amazing Gary Quinlan who has led our bid in New York.
I'd have to say having had exposure to Gary; I really don't know how he does it. It takes tremendous energy, a lot of fortitude and Gary shown all of that. A few moments of great stress along the way, Gary's known for having the occasional stressful moment I think we'd all acknowledge that. But the fact that we have won and won in such style is a tremendous credit to him.
I'd like to thank Caroline Millar as well for her efforts. She's been there driving it hard too, and without her efforts we wouldn't have got there.
And I know all of these great representatives  -  Dennis, Gillian, Gary, Caroline  -  work with big teams and they're as good as the teams they lead. They can't be better than the teams they lead. And so that is a great tribute to all of you, to each of you.
And I think the fact that we came through is not only a tribute to Australian diplomacy, it's a tribute to Australia's reputation around the world. And that reputation is built by the activities of our diplomats.
It's also built by the work of our Australian Defence Force as we do such difficult missions overseas. It's built by the work of our aid workers as they go into some of the poorest and hardest places on earth to make a difference to people in real poverty and as they do so, to hold the reputation of Australia up high.
It's also a tribute to our federal police who deploy around the world, and who are so well received as they take those missions on around the world. And I've seen that with my own eyes too, the difference that our federal police can make in some of the hardest and most dangerous places on earth.
All of this is to be celebrated. It's to be the subject of a great deal of thanks. I'm looking forward to spending some time with you today and saying thanks to as many as I can personally.
Now I know in these days of budget restrictions that we're not at this point raising glasses of champagne.
Though I do understand there may have been the occasional person who sustained themselves late into the night by having drinks through to get them there, but I don't expect in a group this large for people to identify that they have been up all night drinking. But there were a few were they Dennis? Alright, he' got his senate estimates face on in answer to that question.
But I hope at some point you do get the opportunity to raise a glass and to savour the moment because it really is about you and your efforts.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
I want to begin by saying to the men and women of Australia's farming communities: because of your hard work and that of your forebears, Australia is an agricultural powerhouse.
Our agricultural industries export over $30 billion worth of food a year.
They provide enough food to feed our own population three times over.
And our food supply chain employs around 1.6 million Australians, or 15 per cent of the nation's workforce.
All this in a continent that poses huge challenges of climate, logistics and workforce availability.
Our success didn't happen by accident.
Australian farmers have never been better educated or better connected.
We have better science.
We have better tools and equipment.
And in the Asian Century, we have bigger markets than we've ever had before.
Australian farmers are no strangers to Asia.
Your parents and grandparents led the way in the 1950s on our breakthrough deal with Japan that paved the way into the region.
So Asia is not new  -  but the scale of this opportunity is.
The Asian middle class is around 500 million strong today but will grow to 3.2 billion within two decades.
By 2025, half of the world's economic growth will come from this region.
Growth equals demand.
Demand for minerals. Demand for manufactures. Demand for services.
And, of course, demand for food.
Agrifood demand is set to double between 2007 and 2050.
Not just in China but in India, the ASEAN region and South Asia as well.
So unlike the past two centuries when our markets were far away, this time we are in the box seat.
A farmer in the US Midwest is twice the distance from Beijing than a farmer in Kununurra.
So Australia has an Asia advantage.
By seizing that advantage, we'll see agriculture's share of the Australian economy rise through to 2025, reversing the fall we've seen in the past decade.
Of course, even if we doubled our production levels, we couldn't put food on every Asian table.
But we can target the region with clean, sustainable produce, renowned for its quality and consistency.
Australia's opportunity is to provide high quality product to a growing middle class in areas where we have experience and advantage, especially beef, wheat, dairy products, sheep meat and sugar.
But more than that.
I want us to sell our ideas and innovative capacity as well.
Australia should be a supplier of choice for agricultural solutions like technologies to increase yields, reduce water use and lessen environmental degradation; soil management systems; and improving feed sustainability for marine aquaculture.
We've got so much to offer to the region and the world.
Succeeding in the Asian Century will demand a lot of us too.
The strategies that have worked for the domestic market won't always work in Asia.
Success will require a whole-of-Australia effort, with farm businesses, communities and governments being partners in a profound transformation of how we think and operate.
It will mean becoming more Asia-capable, like having more business people on company boards with direct expertise in the region.
Businesses must continue to increase adaptability and resilience to changes in the environment and economy, including drought and climate change.
They must become fully part of the region, adjusting their strategies, linking with regional value chains and developing long-term relationships.
And some businesses will need to look at their size and structure, finding new ways to grow and scale-up.
Finally, engaging with our north will demand new and deeper Asia-relevant job capabilities include adaptability, flexibility, resilience, creative thinking, and the confidence and readiness to operate in Asia.
We also face significant agricultural skill shortages spanning the entire value chain, especially in agribusiness and agricultural science.
Addressing these factors will require sustained effort.
We cannot build stronger relationships or learn new skills overnight, or even over five years, especially given the diversity of the countries in our region.
But we can begin now.
At the heart of Asia-readiness is productivity.
So since 2007, we've been focused on building the long-term productivity and sustainability of our nation's agriculture, fishing and forestry industries.
Australia's producers know the value of investment in rural research and development.
That's why we've provided $1.1 billion to rural research and development corporationsover our five budgets so far.
Our rural R&amp;D policy included a commitment to continuing matching funding and outlined improvements that will drive productivity, investment and adoption of innovative practices.
We've also invested more than $1.6 billion in biosecurity, to minimise threats and keep Australia's primary industries strong.
Released draft legislation to replace the century-old Quarantine Act.
And announced a state-of-the-art post entry quarantine facility in Victoria.
But we don't just need to refine what we sell but how we sell it.
In an increasingly interconnected world market, a premium is being placed on joined-up supply chains and partnerships.
So stronger entrepreneurial and management skills will be necessary to be successful in an increasingly interconnected global food industry.
Investments in water and transport infrastructure help farmers better integrate into supply chains.
Governments have an important role to play in getting the settings right and enabling the sector to do what it does best.
Through APEC we are working in the region to improve cross-border supply chain performance by 10 per cent by 2015.
This includes identifying and fixing choke points that limit fast, cost-efficient movement of goods.
In the Asian Century, our production and exports will expand, but our soil and water resources remain finite.
Farmers more than anyone know how fragile our natural assets are and how preserving them must be a priority.
As Prime Minister, I recognise you as frontline caretakers of our greatest assets  -  our soils, our water, and our biodiversity. 
Soil is the very basis of our survival.
Clean air and water; food and fibre; and our unique biodiversity all rely on protecting our soil.
This valuable asset is threatened by climate change, land degradation and competing land uses.
So I seek a deeper partnership in trying to increase our soil health, our water quality, our biodiversity and vegetative cover.
Throughinnovation, researchand improving on-farm practices,we can reduce our impact and increase our output.
Late last year we established a Working Group on Water, Soil and Food in recognition that the condition of our soils must be a national priority.
Akey step in this direction is the appointment of a person with the authority and trust of the community to raise awareness of the importance of soil -  an Advocate for Soil Health.
I'm pleased to announce that this important role will be filled by an eminent Australian, the former Governor-General, Michael Jeffrey.
As Governor-General, Michael Jeffrey had a passion for regional development and the future of our rural industries, a commitment he has continued since leaving office.
This role will also involve the development of soil research priorities to complement existing efforts to develop a national soil research, development and extension strategy.
Government departments, CSIRO and our rural RDCs must continue to take an integrated approach to ensure resources are used sustainably and we target investment to the right areas.
We also need to engage better with our soil scientists to take advantage of new ideas and provide the information that farmers need to look after theirsoil.
The Government recently announced the new $700 million sustainable agriculture' stream in the next phase of the Caring for our Country program.
Helping farmers to improve the health of their soil will be a major component of this.
Healthy soil underpins biodiversity and the provision of ecosystem services.
The Government recognises the importance of biodiversity conservation, now and for future generations.
We also know that in this dry land, we know the next drought is only a matter of time.
So we're working with industry as well as State and Territory governments to reform drought management in Australia.
In these relatively good times, it's a unique opportunity to move from crisis management to preparedness.
The work is ongoing but we look forward to delivering a new and improved system to help producers deal with the impacts of climate variability.
Most important of all our land use challenges, we need to resolve the Murray Darling Basin Plan.
It's hard to believe we've gone 111 years as a Federation without such a plan.
2012 will be the year when we get the job done.
None of this will be easy.
As you all know so well, nothing in agriculture ever is.
In a way, growing and selling goods to Asia is the simpler part.
Putting in place the policy and regulatory settings here at home is where we need to dig deeper.
There's no single big bang' but rather our method is to weave together complementary strategies to ensure that all the resources of government are focused on the task.
Like removing the heavy hand of centralisation and getting our wheat marketing right.
We believe that those who own the wheat should decide how they want to sell the wheat.
Taking the politics out of foreign ownership.
Foreign investment is not a new thing.
It has helped build Australian agriculture over the last two hundred years and it is important for the future as we seek to boost food production and food security.
Foreign direct investment in agriculture, forestry and fishing accounts for just 0.1 per cent of total foreign investment.
And 89 per cent of our agricultural land is entirely Australian owned, with a further 6 per cent majority-owned by Australians, roughly similar levels to what they were 30 years ago.
But we also understand the need for more information to foster an informed public debate.
That's why I am announcing that the Government will be introducing a foreign ownership register for agricultural land.
The register will provide the community with a more comprehensive picture of the specific size and locations of foreign agricultural landholdings over and above what is currently available.
We will shortly be releasing a paper to begin discussions with stakeholders, including many people in this room, plus the States and Territories, about the design and content of the register.
We're continuing the hard grind of negotiating the Free Trade Agreements that are so vital to market access.
The Government is working overtime to support Australia's industries in getting their products to the world.
That's why I spoke with Prime Minister Noda at the United Nations last month because I want to see the Japan FTA done.
Just as I want to see the China and Korea FTAs done, and the Trans Pacific Partnership as well.
We're completing Australia's first ever National Food Plan to look at our food system from paddock to plate.
This plan will help ensure we have a sustainable, globally competitive, resilient food supply that supports access to nutritious and affordable food and that our agricultural sector makes the most of the opportunities, like the growth of Asia.
And bringing it all together, we're very close now to delivering the Asian Century White Paper.
Charting our path as an export-driven economy with a smart, innovative, Asia-literate population.
We can't accomplish this work without the advice and input of the NFF and its fellow peak bodies.
The NFF's contribution to the Asian Century White Paper has been thoughtful and substantive.
I'm also proud of our work on the Coal Seam Gas National Partnership, which went from an idea Jock and Matt presented in my office to a signed-off COAG policy in record time.
But for every success and occasional controversy that gets a front page in the papers, a lot goes unsung as well.
Like the North Queensland irrigated agriculture strategy, where we're working with the State government, industry and CSIRO.
Or the Northern Australian Beef logistics initiative, again working with industry, State and Territory governments and other stakeholders to get a good result.
This policy work won't always win headlines.
But the farmers and communities involved know its value.
Work that will be earning export dollars for Australia long after we have all left the stage.
That's really what this work is all about  -  the future.
Like when Trade Minister John McEwen renewed our relationship with Japan 60 years ago.
He didn't know precisely what the opportunities would be.
He couldn't guess that within a few years we'd be extracting iron ore from the Pilbara, or farming fish in Tasmania.
But he helped ensure we'd be ready for whatever chances presented themselves along the way.
We don't quite know what Australia will be like in 2050.
But we do know we'll have to be living within the natural limits of our soil and water resources.
Drawing our energy from sustainable supplies.
Linking ourselves to high-speed broadband.
Better understanding Asian cultures and manners.
And putting ourselves back in the top five countries educationally.
All of these things are within our grasp right now.
Yes they are complex in execution, but they are not hard to understand in principle or design.
Most importantly, let's remember this:
Australia is up for the challenge of the Asian Century.
We are no longer the small, isolated nation of our grandparents' fears and imaginings.
We are the world's 12th biggest economy on the doorstep of a historic economic transformation.
But for all of the opportunities, the journey doesn't get any easier from here.
The low hanging fruit has been picked, so we have to reach higher up the tree.
We have to be smarter and stay smarter to not only hold our own in the international market place but grow our share of the opportunities.
That's why it's time to get the right settings in place now.
We can't afford to be arguing about stuff like the Murray-Darling in ten years' time.
The Asian Century, like the Industrial Revolution, is a rare moment in history.
You don't too many chances like this in the life of a nation.
We've got one  -  and we won't let it slip away.


Sydney
PM: Can I begin by acknowledging the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, and in the spirit of reconciliation, offering my respects to elders past and present.
Can I acknowledge my federal parliamentary colleagues the Minister for Health, Tanya Plibersek and Chris Hayes,the Member for Fowler who is here among a large number of federal parliamentarians, state parliamentarians and local representatives.
It's great that we've all be able to gather here today.
Can I also acknowledge the Ingham family. We wouldn't be here without you. What a fantastic speech and to see the video too was truly heartwarming.
So thank you very much for letting us be here today in what is really your place.
Can I acknowledge too Terry who has spoken to you, Michael and Amanda. I think their enthusiasm for this project just shines through and has shone through in those contributions to date. So it's been great to be able to listen to them.
Can I also acknowledge Gary Gray. Actually Minister Gray wasn't able to be here today, but he particularly asked me to bring his good wishes to this gathering.
He had a long association with Bob, he has enjoyed that long association, he is today with his mother in Whyalla, which I can report to you has not been wiped off the map, and his mother introduced or reintroduced us to that wonderful term bunkum on national television so we should be acknowledging her as well.
But Gary did particularly want me to bring his best wishes to this gathering.
It's nice to share a stage with local girl Lisa and whilst I don't normally acknowledge members of the media, because where would you start, where would you finish and some days what terminology would you use; I do understand that Peter Harvey is with us today back at work so a special hello to him.
I was here in 2009 turning that very first sod and it's great to be back.
Thank heavens we didn't have to do all the work in between the turning of that very first sod and where we're standing today.
But because I was here in 2009 I have kept an eye on this project ever since and I was always full of confidence that on time and on budget was going to be the only way.
And so it's great to be back today having paid a special attention to this place for the opening.
When it comes to medical and scientific research, our nation, Australia, is a world leader. We should congratulate ourselves on that.
And that means that Australians themselves are living longer and living more fulfilled lives than ever before.
And that happens because of the dedication, persistence and sheer hard work of generations of medical researchers.
Now, the economic value of medical research is real but it's never the whole story.
The human value is what it really is all about and the human value is beyond calculation.
The work of institutes like this improves lives; it saves lives. And we can think of some of the triumphs of the past that I know will be added to in this place.
Australians have brought medical triumphs to the world including developing penicillin for use in humans, medical ultrasound, the heart pacemaker, the Humidicrib, trials of chemotherapy for children with leukemia, Cochlear ear implants, most recently the Gardasil vaccine.
I mean, what a miracle - a vaccine now going to protect generation of girls and women to come from cervical cancer and recently extended to Australian boys.
It's that kind of research that our nation has done in the past that we can do in the future.
The Gardasil vaccine - I remember when I first heard about it, just thought it was inconceivable that you could get a vaccine for a cancer, what an amazing thing and yet that's Australian research.
So I'm very proud of our researchers, proud of what they've achieved and proud that they are working today on the breakthroughs that will make a difference tomorrow.
And now, Sydney's south-west is firmly in the race to be the custodian of that next big breakthrough.
There's no law of nature that says great medical research institute institutions, great hospitals, and great healthcare have to be in the inner city.
Just like there's no law of nature that says successful people have to forget where they came from.
Quite the contrary.
Bob and Jack Ingham decided to found this institute back in 1996 because they always remembered where they came from and they wanted to give something back to Liverpool.
We've heard from Bob himself about how his ultimate vision was for a state-of-the-art research precinct integrated with Liverpool Hospital and the local community.
How he had that tremendous vision and no doubt many thought that it was unachievable and thought, it's a pipe dream, I'm sure there were many who indulged him and the family, listened politely and respectfully and thought to themselves on the inside "gee, that will never happen."
And here we are, that vision has taken shape and become a reality.
I'm glad we were able to help along the way with $46.9 million of Australian Government funding.
We're in the market for good ideas and this was a great idea whose time had come.
The Liverpool community will be closely involved in the pioneering work that is carried out here by some of Australia's finest medical minds and this vibrant and flourishing community will be first in line to benefit from that work.
Bob, if I can say to you, if I can say to every member of your family, I want you to know and I want the people here to know that we are all so proud of you.
We are proud of what the Ingham family has achieved here, the people of Liverpool are proud of you, the people of the south-west of Sydney are proud of you, proud of your family's success.
That is to be celebrated, but proud too that you've taken that success beyond your own family and delivered it back to the community. It's a lovely thing.
I am therefore very, very honoured to be the one who after the sod-turning in 2009 gets to declare this magnificent building officially open.
We are going to work our way to the front entrance for some formal ceremonies, but I think we should all applaud the endeavours of those who brought us here, the Ingham family, everybody who has worked so hard along the way.
And I think some applause is due for the research to come, I'm sure it's going to be truly groundbreaking.
Thank you very much.


Adelaide
I'm here to really offer my congratulations to Adrian, to Ben and to Richard for what they've achieved here. And I'm very proud to be able to do it in my home state.
This is the place I grew up. This is the place that my mother spent quite a lot of time yelling at me to turn lights off that shouldn't be on. Telling me, you weren't born in a tent, as her way of  you recognise that one? She's the cat's mother would have been up there with her other favourite sayings I think.
But you weren't born in a tent so shut the door, keep either the heat in or the cool in because she was very focused on making sure that we saved electricity and we saved power.
It wasn't just electricity that she was talking about, she brought her great thrift from the United Kingdom with her into Australia and she didn't want to see us waste money. And here we are all these years later, and we're focusing on electricity for a different reason.
Yes we're focusing on it because families still worry about the family power bills  and I'm sure that there are plenty of parents who are saying to their kids not only turn the light off, but what's the computer still doing on and why is games console still plugged in, and the list goes on and on.
But we're talking about the way in which we generate energy for another reason and that is because of our need to combat climate change and reduce the amount of carbon pollution in our atmosphere.
So it's great to be here at a business that has had the foresight to forge ahead and to bust two big myths that I think are unfortunately too common to our national debate.
Myth number one: that there's really nothing that we can do in the face of climate change; that there's no action that we can take.
Well we can act and we have acted as a nation by putting a price on carbon and consequently forever changing the economic equation about where we get our power from.
And that means having changed that economic equation, that there are plenty of opportunities for clean energy businesses to come along and to fill that growing need. And here we are today at Tindo Solar, one of those great businesses.
And the other myth that's been busted is that we are a country that can't manufacture anymore. That can't see new manufacturing enterprises; that we can't compete. And yes, competing is tough and it's hard and we are never going to roll out manufacturing the way countries with a lower cost environment roll it out.
We are never going to win a race with China or India or Indonesia on wages. We can't do it and we wouldn't want to do it because our future as a nation isn't going to be going to the bottom in terms of a race on wages. It's going to be forging our future as a high skill, high wage, high innovation economy.
And the innovations here speak for themselves. You see being done here through advanced robotics what in other nations would still be done by a factory of people by hand. And it's because of that degree of innovation that you can see us being able to compete with those other nations.
Now I've taken on board the words about the trade equation and some issues about dumping and I can assure you that as a Government we are continuing to focus on what should be the trading rules that make the trading system work properly. So that's not about protectionism, but it's about the global rules system for trading and making sure that there is no unfair advantages taken. So I've certainly taken those words on board.
But standing here we can really say this is a business that is going to make a contribution for the future. I know that you are looking to quadruple over the next 12 months, having made such a good start, and I certainly wish you well with that.
And I wish everybody in the business well as you go about that challenge. It takes a degree of courage to start a business like this. It takes a lot of hard work to keep it running. It takes an eye for continuous improvement so that you can see the growth and harvest the rewards. And I know here in this business you are doing all of those things.
Today in South Australia I feel like the Premier and I are working together and speaking about two of the great environmental challenges of our age. One is climate change, and a bit later today we will be talking about that great environmental challenge of water, and the River Murray.
It's nice to be able to start the day therefore in an audience with some children in it, not the world's youngest workers as I found out as I met the children. Certainly kids who are going to have to do a bit of homework on the weekend to make up for a day off school  I've seen a frown there  you didn't do any extra homework on the weekend? I can kind of understand that.
But when we're thinking about these great environmental challenges and how we work to address them, really it is about the kids who are here today. The kids of our nation and the kids of the world, and because of how long term these challenges are it's about the generation that follows them, and the generation that follows them.
So it's great that being here, declaring Tindo Solar formally open, that we are not only surrounded by management and the workforce, but also the families, the children who have all come together to make this a very special business venture.
So without further ado, I would like to declare Tindo Solar formally open and we will now do what is always the truly terrifying thing which is to see if we can get the plaque unveiled.


Adelaide
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
It really is good to be back. Back here in this State with such a proud progressive tradition and such a great Labor government.
Hiring 700 extra teachers.  Investing $900 million in healthcare.
And under Labor, South Australia has found room in a tight budget for priorities we all believe in and share.
You've said yes' to a national plan for school improvement. And you've said yes' to a National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Jay, leading your Labor Government is leading a Government that is fighting for the people of South Australia every day. And it is a Government that we will fight to see the re-election of in 2014.
It's good to be back here amongst friends. Can I acknowledge your State President, Matt Pinnegar. State Secretary, Reggie Martin. Ministers and Parliamentary colleagues. Thank you all for being here today. A roomful of true believers. Keepers of the faith, every one.
Most of all, it's great to be back in the city that made me who I am. The city where my father first taught me to stand up for what is right.
Where some wonderful teachers gave me lessons I've carried throughout my life. This place of incredible leaders who inspired a young woman growing up with high hopes for the future. Leaders like Doug Nichols, Roma Mitchell, Len King, Mick Young and Don Dunstan. A great South Australian track record.
From their wonderful examples I absorbed lessons about progress in society. And about what optimism and resolve is needed to achieve progress.
For those of us in the Labor family, that optimism and that resolve leads us to find our to-do list in the too hard basket. Where the big decisions sit, where the big problems have been left for someone else to solve.
Throughout Australian history, that someone else, the people who get things done, is always our Party, always Labor. 
And in 2012, it's up to Labor once again.
No other Party could deliver national high-speed broadband. We're getting it done.
No other Party could deliver for this nation a clean energy future. We're getting it done.
No other Party could deliver a national plan for school improvement, or the first full reform of school funding in forty years. We're getting it done.
No other Party could conceive of, let alone deliver, a National Disability Insurance Scheme. We're getting it done.
And friends  -  no other Party could deliver the Murray Darling Basin Plan. Our Party in Government will get it done.
I know nothing is more important to South Australia than the waters of the Murray. Everyone who grows up here knows this, everyone who lives here knows what the Murray means to us.
I know how the people of Adelaide feel about being at the end of the Murray-Darling system. I grew up here listening to all of the jokes about Adelaide water whenever you travelled interstate. I know what that is like. I know what it's like to worry about the waters of the River Murray during drought. I've lived here during drought; I know how the people of Adelaide feel. The waters of our great river, which nourish and feed our great nation, must be shared all the way down the stream.
And as Prime Minister, I've brought that understanding of this city and this state to this great national task. I've been out to the Coorong and the Lower Lakes and I've seen the environment in crisis.
I've put out a hand of co-operation to the Premiers of the basin states. And I've lent an ear to their advocacy for their legitimate interests.
I know South Australia is not asking for rivers of gold. You're just asking for a river that flows, and that's not too much to ask.
And Delegates, I want you to know today  -  your State Government has been a strong and powerful voice for you.
Both our Governments want a Basin Plan that delivers a healthy River Murray. Both our Governments want decisions that are based on sound science. Above all both our Governments want a plan for the River's future that is based on the facts. And we have the political will to achieve it.
The facts show us what to do. The will to get it done is what we possess. And these two things have not come together before.  The facts and the will. Not in all the entire 111 years since Federation.
There remains work to do in the coming weeks and months to gain agreement to the Murray Darling Basin Plan.
But you all now know, that yesterday we reached a key milestone.
So I was so proud to go to Goolwa yesterday. To stand alongside your Premier to announce new measures to ensure South Australia will get the water South Australia needs.
And that is thanks to new scientific modelling that we've been able to understand what it is that South Australia needs. We now understand the environmental outcomes that can be achieved with 3,200 gigalitres being returned to the Murray.
By relaxing capacity constraints and providing an additional 450 gigalitres  -  that is, above the 2,750 described in the plan  -  we know by doing that we can deliver better environmental outcomes.
The water outcomes South Australians have sought for decades can be achieved. More water in the Lower Lakes; more water for our wetlands and our River Red Gums; more productive soils with less salinity; and more days when the mouth of the Murray can be open at the sea.
And we can deliver these outcomes in a way which gets the balance right. We'll achieve it, in the main, by investing in infrastructure, preventing water wastage and cutting river management red tape.
This change requires investment.
And infrastructure-based solutions come at a greater direct cost than water buybacks  -  that's widely understood. To protect this vital investment in our nation, the Commonwealth will put our funding in a new Water for the Environment Special Account  -  a locked box for the river's future.
Doing it this way, we can ensure South Australia gets the water it needs  -  and we can ensure more.
I know you have not just campaigned hard for what is fair for your state. You have campaigned hard for what is in the national interest. This is not just a plan for a fair share of the water here, it is a plan for the smart use of the water everywhere.
By focusing on that national interest, we can ensure the Murray - Darling Basin remains the foodbowl of Australia, as it is now.
We can deliver new infrastructure for the future of regional communities.
And we can secure the food and fibre industries which will be vital to our prosperity in this Asian Century of change.
This is the right outcome for this great state. It is the right policy for our nation. And it is the kind of decision which only Labor ever makes.
Nation-building.
Planning for the future.
Working together for progress.
The Murray-Darling has been a test of Australian governments for more than a century now. It is a test your State and Federal Governments are ready to pass. Now it will become a test for the conservative Opposition too.
This is no time for aggressive negativity. The Murray matters too much, the national interest matters too much.
This is no time for political blood in the water. This is a time to sign up to a plan for the future.
We know the Federal conservatives have turned their back on South Australia before.
When they promised to turn off the construction of the submarines here. When they promised to rip out support to manufacturing jobs. All so vital to your state's high-wage, high-skill economic future.
When they promised to dig up the NBN. The NBN has been connected in Willunga. It's being rolled-out in Seaford/McLaren Vale, Aldinga, Modbury, Port Augusta, Victor Harbour, Port Elliot, Prospect, Strathalbyn, Stirling and Yankalilla  -  with the rest of the state to come. The lifeline of the digital economy, and they want to pull it out of the ground.
In many areas of our national life, the truth is the conservatives always choose negativity and destruction rather than building for the future. The Liberals just won't help build for the future.
On water, time is running out for the Opposition to put the nation first and do the right thing.
We know what they say about the Murray when they're upstream. We know what they say about the Murray when they're downstream. We know their key lines change whenever they cross a state border.
What matters now is what their Leader does.
I call on the Opposition now to do the right thing by the country.
Mr No should say yes to our plan for more water in the Murray.
You know the people of South Australia and the nation are looking for him to say yes and to say it very clearly today. The facts are on our side. Australians look at the closed mouth of the Murray and we know we can make it flow.
Australians look at the 400,000 people living with disability and we know we can help.
We look at the 500,000 children scoring below the national benchmarks in literacy and numeracy, and we know we can act.
We look at suburbs and towns stuck with slow, unreliable broadband and we know we can invest.
The facts are on our side in all the big decisions, on our side in water policy, on our side in the big national debates.
And when you hear the economy is anything but strong, remember; the facts are on our side.
Australia stands tall. 21 years of economic growth. 51st in world population, 12th in world in national wealth. New business investment at a 40-year high  -  over 17 per cent of GDP. AAA ratings from all three credit rating agencies. Federal government outlays at or below 24 per cent of GDP through our Budget forward estimates  -  the longest sustained period since the early 1980s.
Eight hundred thousand jobs created.
And official interest rates at 3.25 per cent. Lower than on any day in the eleven years of the last Liberal Government. Those numbers mean real benefits for Australian families. Take interest rates. The average family with a $300,000 mortgage is around $4,500 a year better off because of where interest rates are now.
All of these facts mean our nation is strong. And our strength means our nation has an opportunity in the years ahead.
Our nation is changing. The world around us is changing. This is a time when true security lies in building on our strengths, in building for our future, in shaping our own destiny, not just drifting with the tides. This is a time when great national goals can only be delivered with a real national plan.
The Australian people know it.
This is a time which calls for nation-building, and so this is a time which calls for Labor.
We are the only ones who will get it done.  The only Party with the courage and the optimism to build the future. The only Party who believes in building a future that can be fairly shared by all of us.
The only Party with a clear plan to deliver that future for South Australians; for the nation.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
History asks great nations great questions. Australia is no exception.
Through generations, our great nation has been asked great questions  -  and we have answered them.
Could we feed a people on this driest of lands?
Could we unite a nation on a continent without the pressures of revolution or war?
Could we carry our weight in the world and fight for the freedom of our friends?
Could we defend ourselves in our greatest hour of need?
Could we rebuild after decades of Depression and War?
Could we embrace change and find new sources of wealth in demanding new times?
Could we say Sorry?
You see the answer in the nation around you:  We got it done.
This is a hard place and we're not angels or saints: the big things are never easy and we don't get everything right.
But we stand today, a proud people in a free land. 51st in global population  -  12th in global wealth  -  one of the most equal economies and mobile societies in the world. 
Respected by our oldest friends in the world  -  welcomed by our newest friends in the region.
But history is calling to us again  -  today, history asks us another great question.
Can Australia be a winner in this Asian Century of change and growth?
Today, I launch the plan which answers this question. 
Today, I launch the Government's White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
UNDERSTANDING OUR STRENGTHS
To plan your future, you have to clearly understand who you are today. Put another way: to build on our strengths, we must know our strengths.
Thirty years ago, there was still a crisis of complacency in Australian public life  -  still a culture of cruise and snooze, still a belief that the world owed us a living.
But today, we don't need a crisis to shake us out of complacency. Quite the contrary.
Despite the strengths our people have built and the confidence they have earned, too often our public debate is marked by an economic cringe.
I am too proud of our nation to let this stand unanswered, to have it wrongly shape our thinking.
We are the nation that deregulated the banks, floated the dollar, introduced enterprise bargaining. We are the nation that had the courage to take what was rigid and brittle and make it agile and strong. We are the nation that stared down the Global Financial Crisis.
We are the nation which has produced twenty one years of economic expansion  -  a generation of economic sunshine.
We are the nation with low inflation, unemployment and interest rates. With strong public finances, triple-A rated.
We are the nation that is now poised to seize a clean energy future, to capture the benefits that flow from ubiquitous broadband, to share the benefits of high profitability in mining, to create a higher skilled workforce.
I am determined that we will be a nation self-confident enough to feel our strengths and wise enough to know we must build on them.
We will embrace change. Not because we face immediate crisis. Not because we are standing on a burning platform.
But because we face unprecedented opportunity. Because we burn with ambition for our nation's future.
That's why I have chosen this moment to lay out a plan for our nation's future, which weaves together the policy approach we have been pursuing in government with new policy directions to create the next chapter in our nation's story.
THE OPPORTUNITY 
Planning for our future not only requires us to understand our strengths, it requires us to understand the scale and nature of the opportunity before us.
While Australia was changing  -  Asia was changing too.
Whatever else this century brings, it will bring Asia's return to global leadership, Asia's rise. This is not only unstoppable, it is gathering pace.
The weight of world's economy is genuinely moving in our direction. When we map the centre of gravity of global consumption we see it is shifting east by more than one hundred miles a year, as demand grows on our side of the world.
By 2025, it will have reached as far as central India. The world economy is coming our way.
We are living through an economic and social transformation on a scale and at a speed which defies comparison.
A new Indonesia, Islamic and democratic  -  a new China, urban and soon ageing  -  a new India, reforming and young.
Above all, a new urban middle class.
Asia will become home to most of the world's middle class by as early as 2025. Not only becoming the world's largest producer of goods and services; becoming the largest consumer of them.
This is good news for Australia and it should drive a profound change in our thinking about our economic relationship with Asia.
Deep in our Australian culture are the assumptions that equate low wages with Asian labour.
Not just in populist politics or at the front bar. These assumptions are never far behind debates about workplace flexibility and international competitiveness either.
In the Asian Century, that changes.
The opportunity which a middle-class urban Asia creates won't fall into our laps. The world will still be a competitive one where we must make our own living and our own way.
But with the right plan, we can make the new middle-class Asia a new market for a high-wage, high-skill Australia.
Think of it this way: back in the 80s Fosters beer tried to get into China. Today it is Grange carrying the flag.
For the first time in our history, Asia is not a threat to our high-skill high-wage road. It is a reason to stay on it.
Our national challenge is to do the things which will ensure that it is Australian products and services  -  Australian workers  -  who get the benefit of this new Asian demand.
A PLAN FOR AUSTRALIA'S FUTURE SUCCESS
Success in this century will be hard fought and hard won. We must have a clear plan to shape our future.
This is the White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
National objectives for 2025, the pathways to get there, across the five key areas where we need to act.
First, economic strength  -  through building a productive and resilient economy.
We will maintain the stable macro-economic framework created after 1983  -  a floating currency, independent monetary policy and strong fiscal rules.
This is the essential platform for the next stage of our economic strategy.
Our national effort will extend our comparative advantage in sectors where Australia already performs well and new markets are emerging.
We will still benefit from Asia's appetite for raw materials and energy. Butbeyond that, we mustbuild greater resilience in the Australian economy.
Strengthening sectors like agriculture, tourism, financial services, health and education, transport and logistics, manufacturing.
Helping Australian firms win work and create jobs here in Australia. Helping them open up new opportunities to export and win business in the region.
Shaping these efforts will be our relentless focus on Labor's five pillars of productivity: education and skills; innovation; infrastructure, tax reform and deregulation.
Tax reforms to create the right incentives to invest in the new capital and research.
Long term planning and partnership for future infrastructure needs, including in those parts of Australia where Asia's rise is driving greatest change, like Darwin.
Greater collaboration between universities and firms, helped by Government, to turn specialist knowledge into commercial advantage.
Shared commitment to developing an 'Asia-capable' workforce.
Our plan is to grow: business innovation, new partnerships, new methods, new practices, new ideas.
Our 2025 goal is to be in the world top five for ease of doing business and the world's top 10 innovation systems.
Second, strong minds  -  an education and skills plan to build capabilities.
More than ever before, it's impossible to maintain a strong economy without a world-class education system.
I am determined that our nation will set high expectations for every student and deliver the support they need to meet them.
Unlike in ages past, we will not settle for a student sitting at the back of the class not learning and then drifting away from school early. 
We can no longer tell ourselves this is all ok because a manual job will materialise for the child who cannot read, write or count. 
Our national passion must be to ensure all students are achieving, not just some. With the nation benefiting from the skills and knowledge of all Australians, and with all Australians getting the opportunity for a life of dignified secure work.
Above all, success for an open Australia in a middle-class Asia starts in the classrooms, training centres and lecture theatres of our nation.  
Where we open minds, not just markets, to our region.
Our plan is to drive excellence, grow equity, get the most out of everyone. 
Our 2025 goal is that our school system is in the top five in the world, 10 of our universities are in the world's top 100.
That every Australian student has continuous access to high-quality education through our national plan for school improvement and that education includes access to Asian language learning.
Third, expanding and integrating regional markets, and building the presence of Australian firms in those markets.
For the whole economy to be as strong as mining and agriculture, the whole economy must be as engaged in the region as mining and agriculture.
Yes, we are actively working to lower trade barriers, particularly at APEC and through comprehensive free trade agreements.
We want capital and ideas to flow more easily across borders for investment, innovation and jobs growth. 
New integration of regional markets is needed but we must aim higher and create new regional business relationships, new models and partnerships.
This means business pushing into the new spaces and operating across the borders we are lowering.
Broader and deeper supply chains across the region, enabling small businesses as well as multinationals to take advantage of growing markets. 
Our plan is for a new kind, not just a new level, of private sector engagement.
Our 2025 goal is that Australia's trade links with Asia will be at least one-third of GDP, up from one-quarter in 2011.
Fourth, deep and broad relationships with the region at all levels.
We should devote a truly national effort to building more comprehensive relationships with our key partners across the region, including through our diplomatic networks.
Australian social and cultural life will gain greatly from enhanced people-to-people links.
Leisure and sport, work and holidays, learning and culture are all being refined and redefined in contact with neighbourswe will know even better through this century.
Our "diaspora" in the region are not just an asset to our economy  -  they are faces of our cultural diplomacy.
And through these kinds of personal connections, our public conversation will become more Asia-centred.
Think about the media time given over to reporting the challenges of fiscal policy in Portugal or Greece or the US presidential elections. 
Should less time really be devoted  -  as it is now  -  to reporting the economic trends of Indonesia, the debates around freer trade in Japan, the political transition in China?
Our plan is for a myriad of stronger, deeper, broader cultural links with the nations of Asia at every level of society.
Our 2025 goal is drive broader change by ensuring one-third of board members of Australia's top 200 publicly listed companies and one third of the senior leadership of the Australian Public Service will have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.
History tells us as economic weight shifts, so does strategic weight. 
The new Asia dissolves simple strategic triangles; we seek our security in a region of dozens of strategic intersections.
So fifth, sustaining the security of our diverse region.
Our past engagement is a strength in this crowded and complex environment.
Regional militaries are modernising.  Economic growth will put more pressure on energy, water and food resources. 
At the same time, all countries in the region, particularly the major powers, have a deep interest in strategic stability.
So we need not be pessimistic  -  but just as we work to shape the economic future of our region, so too do we work to shape our security environment.  
We are supporting the stabilising presence of the United States, a strong DefenceForce, building habits of trust and co-operation in our region and a rules-based regional order.
We have an ally in Washington  -  respect in Beijing  -  and more. 
An open door in Jakarta and Delhi, Tokyo and Seoul.
We are engaged institutionally through the developing East Asia Summit and at the United Nations  -  now through Australia's membership of the Security Council. 
Our plan is to stand strongly in our changing region as a mature and confident power. 
Our 2025 goal is for Asia to be a region of sustainable security in which habits of co-operation are the norm.
These are our five long-term national directions.
And with these long-term directions as our guide, I announce today the first policy steps.
All schools will engage with at least one school in Asia to support the teaching of a priority Asian language, taking advantage of the National Broadband Network.
We will fully implement the Australian Curriculum, which includes the cross-curriculum priority of Asia and Australia's engagement in Asia'. 
All students will have access to at least one priority Asian language: Mandarin, Hindi, Indonesian and Japanese.
These strategies will be part of our National Plan for School Improvement.
We will provide 12,000 Australia Awards to Asian nations over the next five years, to promote people-to-people links between Australia and the region.
We will support business missions through an Asian Century Business Engagement Plan, which will be led by Trade Minister Craig Emerson.
We will appoint a Jakarta-based Ambassador to ASEAN to support engagement with the ASEAN Secretariat, ASEAN members and ASEAN-related forums.
We will make it easier for low-risk visitors to come to Australia and we will encourage more tourists from China and other Asian markets.
We will expand work and holiday program agreements with countries in Asia over time, starting with an increase to 1,000 places in our Work and Holiday Visa program with Indonesia.
These are important, immediate steps for Government.
They are the beginning for our long-term national plan.
OUR VALUES
My aim is not only to have a plan to succeed in this century. My aim is that we succeed on our own terms.
Right from the beginning, our nation has been different and we have tried to build a new kind of society and economy here. 
Free of privilege given at birth.
Free of the snobbishness and obsequiousness that infects older nations. 
And free also of the deep economic injustices that so many of us, or our forebears, left behind in another country. 
A hundred years ago, we spoke of the workingman's paradise.
Today we speak of the high-wage, high-skill road.
We have always wanted to do it our way.
We long saw Asia as a threat to all this  -  racially, militarily and economically.
Indeed this was precisely the moral paradox of the workingman's paradise  -  a hundred years ago, high wages meant white man's wages.  No more.
Thirty years ago, Australia was still a closed and isolated economy, pockets of engagement were the exception and the old model of economic and social protection was breaking.
Thirty years ago, Asia was still largely a continent of poverty where the ascendant islands of opportunity in the North East didn't outweigh the reality of the whole.
Back in the 80s we had to liberalise a closed economy to compete with the old Asia.
Today we have to educate an open society to compete in the new Asia.
Today, we no longer have to juggle our social democratic values and our Asian regional context  -  they come together as our two great national strengths.
There has never been a better time or a better age to be a Labor Prime Minister.
Today, our strength doesn't defend our social model  -  it relies on our social model.
Today, Labor still believes in opportunity for all as the best vision of the future.
Today, opportunity for all, through education and work is also the best national plan for prosperity.
Because we can only win in this century if every child gets winning results at school.
We can only win in this century if every working person can win a great job.
We can only win in this century if every sector of our economy is dynamic, productive, engaged.
Australia in 2025: Winning in the Asian Century.
This is the plan Australia needs in the Asian Century.
A plan for national success.
A roadmap for the whole of Australia  -  governments, business, unions and the broader community.
We know Australia has changed and Asia has changed and we know this demands new changes of us today.
We know what national success means to Australians.
Australia only wins if every Australian wins. Australia is only strong if every Australian is strong.
We know we need a plan to build on our strengths. 
This White Paper is the plan.
And with this plan, we know the answer to the question asked of Australia today.
Can we be a winner in the Asian Century?
Absolutely we can get it done.


Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Speaker, eleven years ago, under Taliban rule, terrorists trained freely in Afghanistan to kill Australians and to attack our ally the United States. 
Today, international terrorism finds no safe haven in Afghanistan.
The fifty nations of the International Security Assistance Force, the eighty nations engaged in development and governance, the United Nations, our Afghan partners  -  we are all determined to make sure it never does again.
Speaker, today the House, and through it the people, should know what progress we are making in Australia's mission in Afghanistan  -  and what this progress means for our commitment in the coming year and the years ahead.  The House and the people should know what the Government is doing to help Afghanistan prepare for its future after transition is complete.  And the House and the people should resolve not only to remember the thirty nine Australians who have died in Afghanistan  -  but to care for those they left at home and their mates when they return.
2012 has brought important progress in transition in Afghanistan. 
Three years ago, at West Point in December 2009, President Obama announced a new strategy: focussed on counter-insurgency, designed to achieve transition.  Two years ago at Lisbon in November 2010 the nations of NATO, ISAF and the Afghan Government agreed to the transition plan: for Afghanistan to take charge of its security by the end of 2014. 
These are the facts on the ground in Afghanistan today.  Three of the five tranches of Afghan provinces and districts have begun transition.  All the provincial capitals and 75 per cent of the country's population are in areas where the Afghan National Security Forces lead on security.  The forces they lead are close to their full surge strength of 352 000.  They lead on more than 80 per cent of all security operations and make up more than three-quarters of all uniformed personnel in the country.
As transition proceeds, international forces will do less partnering in the field and provide more support through smaller advisory teams.   This does not mean the end of combat for international forces, but it does mean, gradually and carefully, international forces are moving to a supporting role. By the middle of next year, when transition is due to begin in the fifth and final group of provinces, the ANSF will have lead responsibility for security across the whole country.
I met General John Allen, the ISAF Commander, on the 14th of October during my visit to Kabul.  He is pleased with what he sees as the ANSF continues to demonstrate this increasing capability and capacity.  With two years remaining before the end of transition, he is confident that ISAF's mission will conclude with the ANSF well prepared to maintain long-term security in Afghanistan. The Minister for Defence will also update the Parliament on detailed developments in Afghanistan today.
We can and should conclude that today, across Afghanistan, the process of transition is on track.
In Uruzgan province, where Australia's efforts are centred, transition commenced on the 17th of July of this year and will follow this model. These are the facts on the ground there.
Transition has commenced and the 4th Brigade is assuming the lead on security operations.  The main district centres are under government control.  The Afghan security presence in outlying districts has expanded over the past two years with the growth of the ANSF.  Insurgent attacks have fallen.   One of the 4th Brigade's Kandaks is now operating independently  -  and based on current progress, the other three should commence independent operations by the end of this year.
As transition proceeds in the province, Australia will adjust our military and civilian posture there.   Our main focus will be at Brigade Headquarters and the provincial Operations Coordination Centre.  The ADF will advise and train the Afghan National Army's logistics, engineering and other combat support elements.  Our Mentoring Task Force will shift to a smaller Advisory Task Force model, we will cease routine partnered operations at the Kandak level and our presence will consolidate in the multi-national base in Tarin Kot.
Speaker, let me emphasise that this shift in posture, likely to occur around the end of this year, is not the end of our combat operations in Uruzgan. 
Our Special Operations Task Group will continue to operate against the insurgency and our Advisory Task Force will retain a combat-ready capability.
This is the course of transition in Uruzgan.
On the 18th of October, Australia assumed command of Combined Team  -  Uruzgan.  We now oversee the critical phase of transition in the province.  We will take account of the conditions on the ground and the evolving capabilities of the 4th Brigade.  The shift in our posture will be gradual and measured  -  closely aligned with the broader ISAF transition strategy and consulting closely with Afghan and provincial authorities.
This is the key judgement which will be before us in the year to come: judging the progress of transition and delivering the phases by which it is completed.  When I addressed the Australian Strategic Policy Institute in April, the Government's view was that once started, transition in Uruzgan should take twelve to eighteen months and that when transition is complete, the majority of our troops will have returned home.  Six months on, and three months in to transition, our analysis is that this remains the case.
As we begin detailed planning for its final phases, which of course remain some time off, it is likely that we will identify the need for some additional personnel and resources to complete those final phases of practical extraction and repatriation.  We will apply the lessons of previous operational drawdowns, to ensure stability and security through the whole period.  And when transition in Uruzgan is complete, we will remain committed to the ISAF strategy for nationwide transition  -  advising the ANSF as they develop their command and logistics capabilities and providing institutional training.
The Australian Federal Police has done important work training the Afghan National Police at the Police Training Centre in Tarin Kot.  As transition proceeds, our future effort will focus on leadership training and strategic advisory support at the national level.  This will help the Afghan National Police manage their own transition: from paramilitary activity as part of the counter-insurgency to a constabulary force performing conventional civilian policing roles.
Our development aid effort will continue.  Australian aid is making a real difference to the lives of the Afghan people  -  and helping their nation on the path to development and peace.  In Uruzgan, the Australian-led Provincial Reconstruction Team does great work: contributing to a six-fold increase in the number of schools operating, tripling the number of active health facilities and a stronger provincial administration.   As transition proceeds in Uruzgan, our aid workers and diplomats will continue their important task.
This will be the work of transition through the year ahead.
A new threat to our mission has been emerging in Afghanistan for some time  -  insider attacks.  In my discussions with President Karzai this month, it was clear to me that he understands the threat these attacks pose to our mission. 
In my discussions with General Allen, he expressed his personal sympathy with Australia's losses.  He was also just as conscious as our own commanders of the need for the right mix of force protection measures.
Australia is not alone.  Many of our international partners have also suffered casualties.  Overnight we have received reports of an insider attack on British troops in Helmand province. Indeed, insider attacks have targeted Afghan troops in even greater number than international troops. 
This is how we are protecting our troops. 
First, in order to know how best to counter the threat, our commanders have analysed the attacks and their circumstances.  Each attack has specific motivations and specific circumstances.  We must understand them to defeat them.
Second, in the wake of the insider attack on the 29 August this year, we reviewed force protection to counter the risks of insider threats.  Naturally, we do not publicly detail the nature of these.  The Government continually reviews the professional advice on force protection measures to ensure the risks of such attacks are minimised: I am confident that we are doing all we can. 
Third, the Afghan Government has now been conducting biometric screening and other information gathering of all ANSF recruits for two years.  Recruits are subject to an eight-step vetting process; supported by information sharing and overseen by the international force.   The Afghan Ministry of the Interior, along with coalition partners, works to identify insurgent sympathisers and subversive elements within the security forces.
These are important counter-measures.
We know it would be a strategic mistake to overestimate the enemy's strengths or achievements.  To see an adversary's hand where it may not exist only enhances the propaganda value of an attack.  This difficult military environment and determined insurgent enemy breeds asymmetric threats  -  spectacular attacks, roadside bombs, insider attacks  -  often designed to influence international opinion.  We know the impact of these attacks on the troops and their units, their families and the Australian public is very significant.  Australia has suffered four insider attacks in all so far, with seven killed and 12 wounded.   The greater strategic threat of insider attacks comes not from the attacks themselves, but from the risk that we respond to them wrongly.
The best evidence that we will prevail against the threat from insider attacks is this: we have not allowed it to disrupt our training and operations with the 4th Brigade.  Every day, our troops and police, diplomats and development advisers get on with the job.  I saw them during my most recent visit to Kabul and Tarin Kot on 14 October and I can tell this House:  Their courage will not fail.
They are getting the job done today.  And they are determined to complete their mission of training and transition.
2012 has brought progress in Afghanistan  -  it has also brought important decisions on our future course there.  As a partner of Afghanistan, as a member of ISAF and, now, as a member of the UN Security Council, Australia will be an active participant in this planning in the coming year.  In May, when President Karzai and I signed a Comprehensive Long-Term Partnership, Australia joined a growing group of countries, including the United States, India and China, who have partnerships with Afghanistan to help consolidate and build on the gains of the past ten years.  The Chicago NATO-ISAF Summit set milestones for transition and agreed to a new NATO training mission post-2014.  The Tokyo Conference saw international agreement to an aid and development plan and specific pledges of support.
2013 will now bring important preparations for the period after transition is complete.  When transition is complete across Afghanistan at the end of 2014, the Government of Afghanistan will have full responsibility for security.   The broad outlines of a comprehensive framework for supporting Afghanistan beyond 2014 are now agreed.
There will be substantial international financial support to sustain strong Afghan defence and police forces.   The international community is looking to commit $3.6 billion in US dollars each year from 2015 to 2017.   As I announced in Chicago, Australia is contributing $100 million in US dollars for three years.
There will be a new NATO-led mission after 2014  -  not for combat, but to train, advise and assist the ANSF.   Australia will make a contribution to this mission including through the Afghan National Army Officer Academy.
To guard against any possibility of a return of international terrorism to Afghanistan, I expect the United States and Afghan Governments to discuss possible future arrangements for counter-terrorism training and operations.  As I have stated previously, the Government is prepared to consider a limited Special Forces contribution  -  in the right circumstances and under the right mandate.
There will be substantial international development assistance and support for Afghanistan's economic and social development: the ultimate proof against conflict and instability.  At Chicago, I pledged Australian development assistance to Afghanistan will rise from $165 million Australian dollars in 2011-12 to $250 million Australian dollars by 2015-16  -  as part of the international community's commitment to provide $16 billion US dollars over four years from 2014.
Beyond 2014, Australia will still have a national interest in denying international terrorism a safe haven in Afghanistan.   It will still be in our national interests to remain part of the broad international effort to support Afghanistan  -  and to ensure the Afghan Government remains an active partner.  At Tokyo, Australia joined in the Mutual Accountability Framework, by which the Afghan Government made important commitments in this respect.  Through our aid program we will encourage the Afghan Government to fulfil its reform commitments.   It must strengthen governance, combat corruption, promote the rule of law and uphold the rights and freedoms for Afghan men and women guaranteed in the Afghan Constitution. 
We will also help the Afghans prepare for the 2014 Presidential elections.  I welcome the Afghan Government's commitment to announce the elections timeline soon.  Credible, inclusive and transparent elections  -  following the Presidential elections of 2004 and 2009 and the parliamentary elections of 2005 and 2010  -  are among the most important signs of Afghanistan's decade-long transformation.  So our aid will support the electoral process.
With Afghanistan firmly responsible for the security of its sovereign state after 2014, international political and diplomatic efforts to support peace and stability in Afghanistan and in its region will be central.  We will continue to support an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned process of peace-building which protects the gains of the past decade in areas such as democracy and human rights, including the rights of women and children.  We support reconciliation and the reintegration of insurgents who are prepared to lay down their arms, renounce violence, cut ties with Al Qaeda and respect Afghanistan's constitution.
The constructive engagement and support of Afghanistan's neighbours, in particular of Pakistan, is also essential over time.  For instance, the Istanbul process to strengthen trade links and tackle common security concerns through what is known as the "Heart of Asia" region is an important international initiative.  In a conflict-riven region, there is growing recognition from regional leaders that all have a long-term interest in a secure, stable, self-governing Afghanistan.  I welcome the comments of Pakistan's President Zardari that his country respects and supports reconciliation and peace efforts by the Government of Afghanistan.  I also welcome the Pakistani Government's direct appeal to the Taliban to participate in these reconciliation and peace efforts.   We will work with Afghanistan  -  and with Pakistan  -  in those areas where our best judgement is that co-operation against terrorism which threatens both states is effective and real.  And we will do whatever else we judge best makes a difference in this difficult and sensitive task.
Our progress since 2009  -  our plans through to 2014 and beyond  -  should give Australians cause for measured confidence and resolve.  We are part of a sound international strategy:  transition to Afghan-led security, then support to Afghanistan for development and peace.  Our contribution today is proportionate to our own interest and to the contribution of our allies and the world: our troops number around 1 550 out of a 100 000-strong Coalition force supporting a near 352 000-strong ANSF.  Our mission in Uruzgan is clear and achievable: to prepare the 4th Brigade for a handover of full security responsibility. 
And our commitment to Afghanistan is in Australia's national interest.  We are there to deny international terrorism a safe haven, to stand firm with our ally the United States.
In Afghanistan and in Uruzgan, we see progress, but of course it is not perfect.  We know this  -  I know this  -  and our plans reflect this.  Throughout the three years of the new international strategy, the international coalition and the Afghan Government have held a very realistic view of the evolving environment and changes in the nature of the insurgent threat. 
We know that as Afghan forces increasingly take the lead through 2013, the Taliban will seek to test them.  We know that not every valley or village in Uruzgan or Afghanistan will be peaceful or free from insurgency.  There will be difficult days ahead, setbacks in the transition process, days when our resolve will be tested.
We will stand firm.   As a nation, we have a job to do: it is difficult and dangerous and we are determined to complete it.  Not to make things perfect, but to ensure that Afghanistan will never again be what it was in 2001: a place where terrorists prepared to attack us.   Across Afghanistan, the national Government, the Afghan and international forces are making progress in transition.  And we are preparing for the future beyond 2014.
Speaker, thirty nine Australians have been killed in action in our decade in Afghanistan.  Each that we lose takes part of us.  We have not known loss like this in forty years.
Seven Australians have died since my statement to the Parliament on our mission last year.
Sergeant Blaine Diddams was killed in a fire fight with insurgents on the 2nd of July.
Lance Corporal Stjepan Milosevic, Private Robert Poate and Sapper James Martin were killed by an insider attack on the 29th of August.
Private Nathanael Galagher and Lance Corporal Mervyn McDonald were killed in a helicopter crash on August the 30th.
Corporal Scott Smith was killed by an improvised explosive device on the 21st of October. His funeral will be held in coming days.
The poet John Manifold wrote of the "cairn of words" we build over our silent dead.  Yes, we will remember them.  And it is right that we give words to our sorrow and pride.  But we must do more.  Their widows, their children, their wounded mates these Australians live on, they live amongst us as we who are left grow old. 
I had the privilege of visiting some of them last week. I was overwhelmed by their determination to overcome, to return to their supreme physical fitness, to return to their duties. But they will never forget  -  the bomb, the bullet, the helicopter crash  -  they could not forget, even if they tried. We have an obligation to them too.
The next decade will see more young Australian combat veterans live in our community than since the 1970s.  This is demanding changes in the way the Department of Defence and the Department of Veterans' Affairs care for service personnel and veterans.
Organisations such as Legacy and the RSL have performed nearly a century of service to care for those to whom we owe so much  -  that invaluable work goes on.  In continuing to provide this support and care for Australian soldiers, these organisations will be seeking to adapt to the changing, younger profile of the Australian veteran.  New organisations such as Soldier On have been established to help our wounded servicemen and women and their families achieve great things despite their wounds.
Every Australian should know  -  you can lend a hand.  Give generously, buy a badge, visit, volunteer.  Respect for our soldiers and veterans is precious: say g'day, say thanks.  We have known loss in Afghanistan  -  but we have known more.
We have seen astonishing courage.  Some Australians have performed acts of the most extreme bravery in the presence of the enemy.  Many more demonstrate a quiet courage  -  in their devotion to duty every day under the strain of war ... in the villages, on the airfield, in the workshop.
Their service has kept us safer from terrorism.  They have given us cause for confidence and an example of resolve.  For us, they march down a hard path in Afghanistan.  They know that for our nation, any other path would risk much more. 
We will support them as they serve us in Afghanistan and when they return.  We will see them through.


Canberra
It's a great pleasure to welcome you all to our nation's parliament and our nation's capital.
I know you spend your days in labs, classrooms and field stations.
And often it's not very glamorous being dressed in lab coats and protective glasses.
Though I was recently at Ogilvie Girls High in Tasmania helping the students out with an experiment (someone can explain the meaning of titration to me later on) and my staff reckon they couldn't get the lab coat off me!
But tonight, the lab coats have been put away, the black tie and cocktail frocks have been put on  and it's a night to celebrate.
At the highest level, it's a night to celebrate the values of reason and scientific inquiry that underpin a civilised society.
It's also a celebration of your value as scientists and science teachers.
Each of you has chosen science as your life, and for many of you, that journey dates back decades.
Perhaps you were inspired by one of those great science promoters like Harry Messel or Julius Sumner Miller.
Perhaps a childhood gift of a microscope or an ant farm.
Or a teacher whose memory you treasure.
A few weeks ago I set-up a Who is Your Favourite Teacher?' competition on my Facebook page.
Already hundreds of ordinary Australians are testifying to the inspirational role that great teachers played in their lives.
One young woman, herself now a teacher in Victoria, said this about her science teacher Mr Peter McLaren: He never settled for less than your best, and worked hard as hell with you to get there. Endless time, endless effort and with the strongest positivity and encouragement any student could ask for.
That's science and science teaching as we want it to be.
I know you make it look easy, but it's not.
It takes a long journey to get there through hard years of study and research.
Sometimes you will have buried your head in your arms in despair.
Other times you will have rejoiced in a moment of revelation.
Or been humbled by the power of science to upturn an entire field of knowledge overnight.
So enjoy this evening  because it is special for you, your families and your colleagues.
It's also special because we tonight we can assess what science means for our country, our region and the world.
This week I released a plan for our nation's future. A plan for Australia to prosper and thrive in this century of growth and change in our region  the Asian Century.
The world's centre of economic gravity is shifting our way.
It's a transformation of unprecedented speed and scale.
That is why we need a national roadmap to make sure that Australians benefit from Asia's extraordinary rise.
We burn with ambition for Australia's future and for the possibilities of this century.
Science and education are at the heart of those possibilities.
As our Chief Scientist Ian Chubb has said, many of the solutions to the big problems facing humanity will increasingly require some form of science at their core.
Food production alone will need to increase by 70 per cent by 2050.
And 1.2 billion people lack enough water to meet their needs.
We will need more innovative and bold ideas that translate into real solutions, if we are to rewrite the future of our planet.
Australia can seize these opportunities by building on our strengths in science and education.
By improving the capabilities of our people and using our specialised knowledge to enhance the prosperity, health and environment of the Asian region
By forging closer links to the nations of Asia, including through science collaboration and shared endeavour.
China is now Australia's number one collaborative partner, in terms of publication volume, in the fields of chemistry, engineering and mathematics.
And then there are practical projects like the CSIRO's long-term project to help improve marine aquaculture in Vietnam.
And the partnership between Indian and Australian scientists working to develop a vaccine for malaria - I had the honour of meeting some of those scientists in New Delhi just two weeks ago.
That's why I am pleased that as part of the $10 million research effort of the Learned Academies there will be a focus on the role and potential of Australian science of in the Asian Century.
Our plan for the nation's future also rests on achieving a world class school system across the board.
That is why I have set a goal of Australia being in the top five by 2025  for maths, literacy, science and for having a school system that is high quality and high equity.
That's the thinking behind our National Plan for School Improvement and our embrace of the Gonski reforms:
-        Lifting teacher quality
-        Providing more power to principals
-        Making more information available for parents
-        And ensuring every school has the resources it needs.
Within one educational generation, I want our system turned around. And science education has to be a big part of that.
At the moment, we've got almost 50 per cent fewer senior school students studying science than we had two decades ago.
We have to do better.
That's why in this year's Budget we committed $54 million to lift the engagement and participation of students in science.
And there's no better way to do this than by having a first-class teacher in every classroom.
Every year on this night we hear about teachers who are just that  first-class.
Teachers who run oversubscribed lunch-time science clubs.
Teachers who ask students to do interesting and challenging things like test the antibiotic effects of Manuka honey.
Teachers who explain not just what science can do but what science means.
Teachers like who integrate cutting-edge science into their teaching like Francesca Calati, a 2007 Prime Minister's Science Prize winner who is with us tonight.
This morning I was able to celebrate the success of this year's science teacher winners with some of their classes back home, using Skype; a great example of the real time technology transforming our classrooms.
Francesca and our winners tonight exemplify the quality of teaching I want every Australian child to enjoy.
We can't win the race of the Asian Century without them.
Tonight we have so much to celebrate.
Australia continues to produce world-class breakthroughs which will improve the future of our planet and its people.
Like the first prototype retinal implant, which opens the way to restoring vision for the sight-impaired.
Or the first working components of a quantum computer, tested recently at the University of New South Wales.
We produce public-spirited Nobel Prize winners who lend their voices powerfully to the public debate like Brian Schmidt and Peter Doherty.
We're spending record amounts on new facilities, like the Kinghorn Cancer Centre and the Ingham Institute I've opened in recent weeks.
The Commonwealth is investing almost $9 billion in science and research, a 35 per cent increase in just five years.
And we're preparing to refresh Australia's innovation agenda and to build a new wave of collaboration between government, industry and the research community.
These measures are a sign that your work has never been more valuable, and has never been more appreciated.
So I trust that these awards confirm the esteem in which all Australians hold you, and the very high hopes they invest in what you do.
I congratulate the recipients and nominees for the 2012 Prime Minister's Prizes for Science.
I'm proud to lead a nation that can produce such remarkable individuals.


Government House, Canberra
It's with a tremendous sense of pride that I am here today to honour Corporal Daniel Keighran.
I join with Her Excellency and with every distinguished guest here in paying tribute to you and to your courage.
Daniel, Kathryn, if I can say something personally to you.
We had the opportunity to meet yesterday but it was only for a brief time.
But I've left that meeting with a very clear impression of the two of you.
And I'm very clear in my impression that pomp and circumstance is not your natural home and that there are aspects of today that you have probably thought about a great deal and maybe even lived a little bit in trepidation of. 
I've also left with a very clear impression about your modesty, about the amazing acts of valour that you performed. 
And so to you, Corporal Keighran, here today despite your modesty, we acknowledge those acts of valour.
We acknowledge them because it is always important to accurately record the history of our nation and what makes our nation.
And these acts of courage speak to who we are as Australians.
You don't need to be a religious person to understand the force of the words that greater love hath no man than to lay down his life for his friends.
You showed your preparedness to lay down your life for your mates.
We are so glad that your spectacular acts of bravery still saw you returned home to us safe and to your family and friends safe.
But they were spectacular acts of bravery, where in the moment you did not put your personal safety first but you put that Anzac tradition of mateship first. 
That's why we are honouring you today; that's why it will be another moment in our history where we can say that this is the best of who we are and the best of what Australians can do.
Thank you for proving that once again for our nation.
I trust in the days to come that apart from the whirlwind, there are some quiet moments for you to reflect with your family and friends on what this means.
You can tell some remarkable stories.
You told me some yesterday about the difference in sound a bullet makes depending on how close it is to your head and that you were conscious of that in the moment.
A remarkable story.
Kathryn told me that perhaps she didn't really know why you were getting the VC until it was clear that you were getting the Victoria Cross because you hadn't come home to share that.
That was something that you had kept to yourself and to your mates.
All of that speaks of a tremendously Australian character.
That's who you are and we honour you today.


Canberra
The House will now be aware this is a very special day for Australia.
This morning I attended Government House to witness the award of a Victoria Cross to Corporal Daniel Keighran.
In Afghanistan, Australia has seen moments of great sorrow and great courage; on the 24th of August 2010 in a single engagement we saw both.
That day, our troops were patrolling with soldiers of the 4th Brigade, Afghan National Army at the village of Derapet in Uruzgan province.
Our patrol was attacked from three separate locations at once by a numerically superior enemy.
It was vital that the Australian and Afghan forces could direct their fire accurately against the enemy positions.
Corporal Keighran and another member of the patrol moved to an exposed ridgeline to identify the enemy and to direct our fire.
Corporal Keighran then deliberately drew enemy fire, pushing forward over the ridgeline to identify targets for our gunners  -  and he exposed himself to enemy fire again when he came back to the crest to direct the fire of our light armoured vehicles.
He helped turn the fight in our favour.
Speaker, the fighting brought an Australian casualty.  
Corporal Keighran risked his life, drew enemy fire away from the team treating his Australian mate, and then helped clear the landing zone for his mate's evacuation.
That was Lance Corporal Jared MacKinney.
The 24th of August 2010 was a day of sorrow: Lance Corporal Jared MacKinney was killed in action. 
We remember him.
And it was a day of honour: Corporal Daniel Keighran earned the Victoria Cross. 
We honour him.
And we honour the four other Australians who have been decorated for their acts on that day.
Some Australians in Afghanistan have performed astonishing acts of individual courage which will be remembered forever.
Corporal Mark Donaldson VC, Corporal Ben Roberts-Smith VC and now Corporal Daniel Keighran VC.
Today we pay tribute to their exceptional and extreme acts in the presence of the enemy.
Today we should also pay tribute to the quiet courage of every Australian who deploys.
Whether they are the ground crew who serve the airfield at Tarin Kot, the workshop supervisors who train the Afghans and manage our equipment, the headquarters staff who plan transition, the development advisers who walk the villages of the south to help the Afghan people; their devotion to their duty is incredible. 
Their presence amongst us is one of the privileges of our generation.
We are lucky to have them all and we should be proud they are Australians.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
We should never underestimate the boldness of the decision taken by Ben Chifley to open the doors to mass migration almost seven decades ago.
Yes, we had small ethnic communities like the Chinese who'd been attracted by the gold rush and the Italians who came to work in the canefields in the 1920s.
But overwhelmingly, we were a small, insular, homogenous community, and we were asked to embrace profound and lasting change.
Yet it worked.
Immigration worked.
And it worked because we made it work.
We accepted that our nation would never be defined by race or ethnicity like so many other countries.
Instead, we would define ourselves by our values and our way of life.
Our love of freedom and democracy.
Our egalitarian cast of mind and our relaxed outdoor lifestyle.
Our willingness to work hard and play fair.
And we said that anyone who embraced these things could be called an Australian.
Your admission ticket was your commitment.
The commitment to choose this place from all the world.
To serve it and fight for it, and to always call it home.
Friends,
That's the decision my parents made.
That's the decision you and your parents made around so many kitchen tables  -  in Sicily and Saigon, Beirut and Bangalore.
All those decisions converged, from the four points of the earth, upon this land  -  its future  -  and its possibilities.
In a sense, this is the story of two journeys. Our journey of post-war immigration and our journey of economic modernisation. And how they have intertwined across these extraordinary decades.
Australia was a great country before post-war migration.
But our migrants showed us a way to make it greater still.
Ethnic businesses are a big part of the story.
Your hard work and self-sacrifice are legendary, from the smallest corner store to the great enterprises founded by migrant pioneers like Westfield to business leaders like Ahmed Fahour at Australia Post.
And so many of you have invested time in building links between Australia and the countries from which you've come.
Today, the skills and connections of our ethnic businesses are more valuable than ever as the world's centre of economic gravity shifts our way: the transformation unprecedented in speed and scale, we call the Asian Century'.
On Sunday I released a plan for our nation's future in the Asian Century. A plan for Australia to prosper and thrive in this age of unparalleled growth and change.
This is a century when innovators will flourish.
A century when Australia will be well served by its creative entrepreneurial culture and its vibrant multicultural society.
Our ethnic businesses are custodians of many of the capabilities we need to succeed: language skills; people to people links; knowledge of how business and government operates in Asian societies; and perhaps most importantly, helping to develop greater understanding of the diverse cultures of Asia among all Australians.
Since the first post-war migrants landed in Sydney in the summer of 1947, we learnt to value diversity as a source of strength for our society.
In more recent years, it has also become clear that diversity is a source of strength for our economy as well.
So in 2012, we can say with greater confidence than ever:
Post-war migration began as our nation's greatest experiment.
And it has become our nation's greatest success.
Because as migrants, we accepted that in a new land, we shouldn't only take but give as well.
And if the road was tougher because of our background, we would try all the harder to succeed.
Our parents didn't come here just because they sought jobs or prosperity. They come because they saw a country worth believing in.
A place so compelling they were willing to leave everything they knew and loved to be part of it.
And here on these bountiful shores, they would repay freedom and opportunity with effort and excellence.
The very effort and excellence represented in these awards, and in the remarkable men and women who receive them tonight.
On behalf of all Australians, I thank you for all that you have given to our country.
United in our diversity, and unafraid of the future, let us seize the opportunities of the Asian Century together.


Denpasar 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great pleasure to be back in this beautiful island to support this important meeting.
I want particularly to acknowledge our host, the founder of the Bali Democracy Forum, President Yudhoyono.
Your Excellency, Indonesia is a close neighbour but, more than that, you are a close partner and friend.
Your personal initiative in launching this Forum in December 2008 is only one example of your statesmanship and vision.
The Bali Democracy Forum is also striking proof of Indonesia's own remarkable democratic transformation since 1998.
Australia has been proud to work with you in this important Forum.
From the first, Australia has shared and understood your vision: for this to be an open means to promote discussion about democracy, not a closed meeting between democracies.
In your words here last year, to exchange views, promote dialogue and produce solutions.
We have enthusiastically joined with you.
My predecessor, Kevin Rudd, co-chaired the inaugural meeting with you in 2008 and the Australian Government has been represented at senior levels at every Forum since.
It is an opportunity for Australia to show our support for your initiative and to share our support for democratic practices and values in our region  -  and the fact that we do so here, in Indonesia, is fitting indeed.
Australia and Indonesia are democratic neighbours.
Indeed Mr President, we recall your own words at that first forum four years ago, when you said:I do not believe in the notion that democracy is not for Asia'.   Many of democracy's success stories have occurred in Asia ... There are many records of the practice of pluralism, consultation, tolerance, consensus building, mutual accommodation, egalitarianism, protection of minority rights throughout Asia.
Mr President, I could not agree more  -  indeed I have seen this with my own eyes.
Australia is proud to have provided not just moral support and encouragement but practical, active assistance for Indonesia's three national elections since 1998.
As a young parliamentarian I came here to Indonesia to be an election monitor for those first free and fair elections fourteen years ago.
I'll never forget the remarkable days I spent among the villages of West Timor as they gathered to vote  -  and it is a great privilege to return once again to a democratic Indonesia today.
Here is a thoroughly democratic system, thoroughly home grown and rooted in the people's own culture and values.
Mr President, the experience of your own nation and that of many others has shown us that the practices and values of democracy can be applied in this region.
This is important for the rights of the people.
Human rights are most secure where government is limited by constitutions and laws, where powers are separated, where free and fair elections are the norm.
Where political speech is free, decision-making is transparent and open and the views and aspirations of citizens find a voice.
And your own nation and many others have also shown that over time the path to democracy is also the best path to development and peace.
The wellbeing of societies, no less than the rights of individuals, is built by our democratic practices and values.
The rule of law, stable property rights, functioning markets and free trade unions all foster economic prosperity and social stability, not just individual freedom.
With all this in mind, Australia comes to Bali as a willing partner to all nations who are on the democratic path  -  our people have a democratic temper.
Australia was amongst the first to adopt the secret ballot, to remove property qualifications for the vote, to extend the right to vote and the right to stand for election to women.
As it does for all democracies, our progress took time  -  we bring with us hard-won lessons of many patient decades of democratic innovation.
We are not complacent  -  we work to improve our democratic practices, to increase transparency of political parties, to improve electoral systems.
And our experience of working with our friends in the region as they build their own democracies is considerable.
Right here and right now the question that must be answered is this: what is the best way that we can support the goals and aspirations of this Forum.
First, we can provide practical support to the conduct of elections.
While there is more to democracy than voting, no single measure does more to embed democracy in a society than the effective conduct of free and fair elections.
Australia funded the Global Commission's recent report, Deepening Democracy: A Strategy for Improving the Integrity of Elections Worldwide  -  and we endorse its key recommendation that donor funding and political engagement continue throughout the electoral cycle, not simply at election time.
Through our development aid program, Australia has supported the strengthening of electoral cycle processes in Indonesia, PNG, the Solomon Islands and Afghanistan.
In Timor-Leste, we have also provided electoral support since 1999, including working with the National Electoral Commission to assist with this year's successful Parliamentary elections. 
We help train election officials, civil society organisations and media representatives in civil education and election management, in order to increase the public understanding of, and support for, these electoral processes.
Australia has also supported the Indonesian Government's Institute for Peace and Democracy since its inception here in Bali in 2008, including in its work with emerging leaders of Egyptian civil society.
And I am pleased to announce today that Australia will further support the work of the Institute through a partnership over the next 3 years, from 2013 to 2015.
Australia is also ready to offer practical support and encouragement where countries have taken positive steps towards a democratic future.
As we have when for example, we acknowledge recent progress towards elections in Fiji, where we have been supporting voter registration.
As we have when we respond to political opening in Myanmar, where we have lifted sanctions, normalised trade and investment links and resumed leader-level political contacts.
Second, we should support the development of the civil society institutions which participate in democratic electoral processes  -  and support measures to include minority groups in democratic politics.
Through the Centre for Democratic Institutions, Australia supports the efforts of governments in Melanesia, Timor-Leste and Indonesia to achieve democratic reform through parliamentary and political party strengthening activities.
Australia partners with Transparency International to strengthen citizen engagement against corruption in the Asia Pacific, sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America.
Australia is also currently Chair of the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (IDEA).
Through IDEA we support the strengthening of election observation, capacity building for electoral management bodies, strengthening of political parties and support to constitution building-work in member states.
Third, we must encourage the participation of women in democratic processes.
In Australia, in the region, in every corner of the world  -  all women are born equal to men.
Yet this inherent equality is far from reflected in the politics and functions of our societies.
Consider the Pacific, where women hold five per cent of parliamentary seats  -  compared to a global average of 18 per cent.
This is why Australia's new 10-year $320 million Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development program will include mentoring and training to female members of parliament and candidates  -  above all, so they can run in elections and win.
I recently took up a role as Champion for the UN Secretary General's Global Education Initiative, Education First, with a particular focus on lifting the education of women and girls  -  and in turn, to lift their social and political participation.
As co-chair of the Secretary-General's Millennium Development Goals Advocacy Group my personal commitment is to prioritise education and the rights of women and girls.
Not only because of the transformative power of education in human development but because of the importance of education to deepening democratic norms.
Finally, Australia lends not only our hand, but our voice.
We not only support democratic practices, we speak out for democratic values. 
Our region has many histories and stages of political development.
There is no single template for democracy.
But there are universal and enduring values, enshrined in international law, which underpin democracy and bring dignity to every individual.
Values such as non-discrimination, the right to liberty, equal treatment before the law, freedom of thought and religion, and freedom of speech and assembly.
Australia is committed to internationally stated and agreed values of development, democracy and peace  -  above all, to the right of all societies and nations to exist in security and peace.
A peace in which the rights of every person and every nation are respected  -  in which agreements between nations are respected and no nation threatens another.
I want to leave you with one final, vital observation.
Fifteen years ago, a person who predicted that today the Australian Prime Minister, the Timor-Leste Prime Minister and the President of Indonesia would all be elected leaders of democratic nations would have risked being dismissed as utopian or nave  -  never mind had they predicted that all three elected leaders would meet in an atmosphere of friendship and goodwill.
Yet that is now unremarkable  -  and I am so pleased to be here with President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Gusmao again today.
The lesson is that we should never be imprisoned by the past  -  indeed if the history of the nations gathered here tells us one thing above all, it is how quickly democratic change can come.
The past informs the future, but it should never determine it. 
I look forward to the discussion which will follow, and I know many other important points will emerge.
Thank you.


Canberra
Your Royal Highnesses, I bid you a special welcome to our country and our capital.
To The Prince of Wales, you are a familiar visitor to these shores.
In you, the people of Australia know they have a true and sympathetic friend.
To The Duchess of Cornwall, I hope you have discovered the warmth of the Australian character and a land you will always feel welcome.
Since landing at Longreach on Monday, these have been days to explore and revisit the facets of our landscape and culture:
From the Outback, to the vineyards of South Australia, and the race that stops nation.
Now, we gather here in this capital to reflect on the bonds of history and affinity which made Australia the nation it is today.
The Father of Federation, Sir Henry Parkes, called it the crimson thread of kinship and the associations are all around us.
Not far from here is found the writing table Queen Victoria used to sign into law the Constitution that led to the creation of this capital.
Up on Capital Hill meets the Federal Parliament first inaugurated by King George V as Duke of Cornwall and York in 1901.
A quarter of a century later, another Duke of York came to open these old Parliament buildings  -  a shy prince who came to show the heart and stomach of a king'.
Like Your Royal Highness, he too was accompanied by a gracious Duchess. Your beloved grandmother.
It is a story also inscribed in the streets and parks of this beautiful zone where, one by one, the East-West terraces have been named in recognition of our monarchs since Federation: Queen Victoria Terrace, King Edward Terrace, King George Terrace.
Today, the symmetry is made complete with the naming of Queen Elizabeth Terrace.
At the same time, the green space in front of Old Parliament House and two roads either side will stand in honour of Sir Henry Parkes reflecting the mix of ancient tradition and contemporary democracy that underpin our constitutional order.
This place will be a lasting tribute to Her Majesty The Queen on the occasion of her Diamond Jubilee inscribed forever in the architecture of this capital.
It will remind future generations that for more than half of our journey as a united nation, Elizabeth the Second has been our monarch.
No-one in the history of our Federation has shared more consistently in the affairs of our Commonwealth or followed them with deeper interest and goodwill.
As Canberra prepares for its centenary, it is fitting that The Queen's life of duty is given recognition here in our nation's heart and her wisdom and dignity are honoured among the people she has so faithfully served.
I thank Your Royal Highnesses for sharing this commemoration with us.
And I know you will convey to Her Majesty the sentiments we share in naming this place today.
No Head of State could be more worthy of this honour, and no nation could more freely or gratefully bestow it. 


Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Throughout my time in Government, I've been struck by the desire of many businesspeople to see a plan for Australia's future. 
That's the purpose of our White Paper. And tonight I want to reflect on the projects over the next couple of years which get it done.
As a nation we've got a clear choice: to drift into our future or to actively shape it. 
When I commissioned the White Paper I took a clear decision that our nation should shape its own future.
Now you can't do that without a view about what the future will look like, and predicting the future has its risks. 
But whatever else this century brings, it will bring Asia's rise.
Australia can shape our future from a position of strength.
The White  Paper is a plan to make change work for us  -  not because we face immediate crisis  -  not because we are standing on a burning platform.
But because we face unprecedented opportunity  -  because I burn with ambition for our nation's future.
We can shape our future from a position of strong engagement.
We have an ally in Washington, respect in Beijing, an open door in Delhi and Jakarta, Tokyo and Seoul.
We're engaged through the ongoing strength of the APEC forum and the now-developing East Asia Summit where I will take part with President Obama and Premier Wen next week in Cambodia.
As you know, I've also recently been to India, where we revived the relationship between our countries.
And I'm just back from the Asia-Europe Meeting and from co-chairing a really important regional forum, President Yudhyono's Bali Democracy Forum, a unique enterprise in Asian diplomacy.
We can also shape our future with a strong budget and a strong economy.
We stimulated in the downturn, we made the right call, that's clear.
And now we're returning to surplus.  
That's keeping inflation contained  -  and keeping business costs down.
On the latest RBA data for average business interest rates, the net reduction in the last 4 years has been around 240 basis points. 
With Australian business sector debt in the order of $730 billion this now yields a saving for the business sector of around $18 billion a year.
And we're doing it at the right stage of the cycle and in a targeted, responsible way  -  while delivering solid growth, continued investment, low unemployment.
And I know there's a few small government advocates in the room: well, you got it.
We've cut badly targeted subsidies, means-tested benefits, reformed the tax and transfer system to lift participation  -  and now we're sustaining spending below 24 points of GDP for the first time since the oil shocks.
The long-term savings decisions we've already made improve the Budget balance this year by around $14 billion this year  -  and they'll be making a $51 billion difference in a decade.
Take away the politics, look at what the market is saying about us. 
Three triple-As and a stable outlook on each. Just six other sovereigns are rated so highly.
Australia's budget is one of the seven economic wonders of the modern world. 
That means we're strong at the right time, reinforcing confidence in trying global circumstances.
It means with further structural savings, we will have the opportunity to improve schools and deliver the NDIS on a sustainable budget footing.
That's our track record  -  major reform in health, aged care, dental, paid parental leave, pensions  -  alongside smart savings to improve the budget position over the long term.
We've managed fiscal policy well though a challenging economic cycle.
We will maintain the stable macro-economic framework  -  a floating currency, independent monetary policy and a strong fiscal framework. 
We will also maintain the investments in education and skills that spread opportunity to all and that mean all can contribute to wealth creation. 
This is what has brought us twenty one years of growth, a generation of economic sunshine, and it is what gives us a moment of strength when we can shape our future.
In structure, what the White Paper does is to weave together the policy approach we have been pursuing in government with long-term policy ambitions for the nation's future.
 * 	First, economic strength  -  building a productive and resilient economy.
 * 	Second, strong minds  -  an education and skills plan to build capabilities.
 * 	Third, expanding and integrating regional markets and building the presence of Australian firms in them.
 * 	Fourth, deep and broad relationships with the region at all levels  -  leisure and sport, work and holidays, learning and culture are all being refined and redefined.
 * 	And finally, sustaining the security of our diverse region.
This is a set of specific goals to guide us  -  specific policy measures to start the work  - and a call to action to all parts of Australian society  -  with the business community central to that.
I know that many of you already lead Asia business strategies  -  and work on the new business models and new ways to engage with these growing regional markets.
Private sector engagement is vital to the success of our plan.
To build on the strength of mining, but also the strength of financial services, of education, of legal and professional services, of architecture and design.  And yes, of manufacturing, of transport and logistics.
That's why we're not driving a set of categories of government policy or slicing up the economy into sectors, but instead driving a cohesive, coherent, collaborative approach.
Think about the connections which emerge when we use APEC to drive further deregulation in our region, when we use the Business Advisory Forum and COAG to streamline environmental regulation, when we get rid of single desk wheat marketing, and our firms can sell their sorghum in Korea with a marking saying what field it grew in and charge a premium for that kind of high end service.
Or when we lift school standards, have a rational model for school funding, give our schools the broadband our competitors take for granted and then we revive our relationship with India, agree to uranium sales, identify Hindi as a priority language, and for that matter, give Sachin Tendulkar the AM and make the front and back page in the biggest newspaper market on earth.
These are genuine and clever deployments of all the elements of national power to achieve a national goal: success in Asia. 
That's what you can do with a plan for the nation's future and with a nation strong enough to seize it.
This is a national plan and one that calls on genuine national effort. 
It's also a very authentic Labor plan.
These five pillars of productivity I speak about  -  education and skills; innovation; infrastructure, tax reform and deregulation  -  these aren't laws of nature, they're the policy of a Labor Government.
It's been observed by some that there are controversial Labor policies reflected in the White Paper  -  like the NBN, like school improvement, like pricing carbon.
Well, yes.  First of all, because this Australian Government is an Australian Labor Government.
Second, because this is national plan is a plan to win in Asia  -  and the policies which get us ready for Asia come from Labor Governments.
There's always national consensus on Labor's past achievements in getting into Asia.  We'll have a forty year anniversary shortly of the commencement of diplomatic relations with China. 
It'll be universally hailed as the right decision and it will be an entirely non-partisan event.
When Gough Whitlam visited China the year before he established diplomatic relations, Australia's conservative Prime Minister of the day said he'd been played like a trout.
And there was nothing inevitable about the decision to open up our economy in the 1980s. 
If Labor lost the 1983 election, those changes wouldn't have happened when they needed to.  It's that simple.
So we have a national plan for a moment of strength, policies on the table and ambitious goals for 2025  -  and a Labor Government with a vision for Australia: winning in the Asian Century.
I want to leave you with this thought:   What I am really focussed on now is a fascinating sequence of work over the next couple of years, the 2014 and 2015 projects that sit in the space between our immediate policy agenda and the generational goals.
This is a time when complacency equals defeat, when political negativity must be met by disdain from thoughtful people.
This is a time when you only win if you do the work, when you only succeed if you shape your own future.
Consider this: in just ten years, Apple's market value has increased from US$6bn to around US$500bn.  Nokia's market value has declined from US$70bn to under US$10bn.  I know which path I want us to be on  -  that's why we have a plan.
While all of you are working through what I think of as the Kodak moment, what some call the digital disruption, remaking your business models and retooling your workforces for the new economy, we're playing our part to keep you ahead of the game.
Building the NBN and encouraging the use of IT services such as telework and cloud computing across Government.  In three years' time, we'll have fibre broadband connected at around 3.5 million premises and two satellites will be up. 
The benefits of our reforms to the tax and transfer system and the benefits of our investments in skills will be being felt - in particular what we're doing for women.
Tripling the tax free threshold, delivering paid parental leave, extending gender equality - and I'm looking forward to seeing that flow from the shop floor up to the leadership level, where I'm sure that in a couple of years' time I won't still find myself meeting with boards where the only other woman is serving food.
In 2014, the first stages of our National Plan for School Improvement, including the funding architecture that to its credit the BCA has supported, will be in place  -  and the real work to put Australian schools in the top 5 globally by 2025 will just be beginning.
With the election season now past in the US, President Obama's immediate task is to keep the US economic recovery on track while solving their fiscal problems; and I'm looking forward to the work that follows, where we'll be working together with other leaders to rebalance the global economy, including when the G20 meets here in Australia in 2014.
And the other Presidential contest, the Chinese leadership transition is taking place today.  In 2015, China should take its pilot emissions trading scheme national. 
In total around sixty per cent of the world's GDP is either subject to a carbon price today, or has one legislated or planned for implementation in the two or three years ahead.
International carbon markets will cover billions of consumers this decade.  Ask the bankers at your table whether they want Australia to clip that ticket.  We're going to help them get their share.
So that's the work of coming years, that's what preoccupies my thoughts as I think through the agenda for this country.  
Big opportunities for the future-makers  -  complacency the greatest risk of all. 
I'm looking forward to working with you as we get it done.


Canberra
A little over 20 years ago, three men in Toronto, Canada, decided to act.
Responding to the senseless massacre of 14 female university students, Jack Layton, Ron Sluser and Michael Kaufman established a campaign that has gone on to become an international force for good.
A campaign; led by men, to end violence against women.
The White Ribbon movement reached our shores in 2003. And each year more and more Australian men pledge themselves to its principles.
More than 58,000 Australian men have now sworn an oath to reject violence in their own lives and speak up when they encounter it in the lives of others.
Some of Australia's first White Ribbon Ambassadors are still spreading the word in 2012.
Staying the course, driving cultural change. Continuing to act.
Refusing to accept the attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence against women and girls.
Refusing to be silent, or to make excuses for other men.
To every Australian man, every partner, husband, brother, father, son, colleague and friend who takes the White Ribbon pledge, thank you.
The impact of your actions is real.
You challenge the behaviours and cultures around you.
You lead through example.
You look to your own behaviours, and inspire the men and boys around you to do the same.
Just two months ago in Melbourne, tens of thousands of people were galvanised by another atrocious act of violence against a young woman.
They marched peacefully through their community to say no more'.
But to achieve a sustained reduction to violence against women and girls, every sector of the Australian community must act.
Everyone must take ownership and responsibility, in every home, in every workplace, every school, every campus, every church, and on every street.
That's where White Ribbon is so effective. It has evolved, growing out of, and involving, the communities of which it is a part.
Finding practical ways to raise awareness and change behaviour.
Practical actions like the White Ribbon pilot workplace project which is seeing the Australian Army, the AFL and ARL, government agencies and private-sector workplaces looking at their own cultures and exploring strategies to drive behavioural change.
Practical initiatives like the information day organised by students at Loftus TAFE, in Sydney.
Practical campaigns like the See, Hear, Speak campaign, which is raising awareness of workplace sexual harassment among Australia's youngest working men and women.
Practical sharing of expertise, like the inclusion of a White Ribbon Ambassador on the panel at a recent Victorian forum discussing violence against women with disabilities. 
Practical on-the-ground work like this, deep in the community, is crucial.
It encourages open conversation, often the first step towards real change.
Conversation and collaboration is also going on at the governmental level, through the National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women and their Children and a new action plan, released in September.
But just as crucial as practical exertion and action is robust research.
In May next year White Ribbon will hold an international conference in Australia for the first time, in a bid to connect research, policy and practice.
Today it gives me pleasure to announce that my Government will support this important Australian first', with funding through the Women's Safety Agenda.
I hope that the lessons from this conference will be shared widely and help inform future White Ribbon initiatives.
Once again, congratulations and thanks to all of the White Ribbon Ambassadors here today, including the Ambassadors here in the nation's Parliament.
Your leadership is important, your example essential, if, as a community, we are to really bring about the changes that will ensure the greater safety of Australian women and girls, tomorrow and in the future.


Canberra
Speaker, the Bill before the House today gives this 43rd Parliament an opportunity none of our predecessors have fully shared.
We can enshrine in law our nation's expectations for our children's achievements at school.
We can enact in law a plan, not only to teach them well, but to fund them well.
This Bill is the Government's plan for the future of Australian education  -  our National Plan for School Improvement.
Speaker, five specific new legislative measures form the centre of this Australian Education Bill.
First, a new citizenship entitlement.
A quality education for every Australian child will no longer be a privilege extended by the State from time to time, it will be an entitlement arising from their common citizenship in our Commonwealth.
This Bill places learning at the centre of Australia's beliefs and rights, liberties and laws.
Second, new goals for Australian education.
For Australia to be ranked as a top five country in the world in Reading, Science and Mathematics by 2025.
And by the same year, for us to be ranked as a top five country in the world for providing a high-quality and high-equity education system.
Third, a new National Plan for School Improvement.
The Bill provides for the directions for our plan: quality teaching, quality learning, empowered school leadership, transparency and accountability and meeting student need.
The Bill further sets the basis in law for agreement between the Commonwealth, the States and Territories, and Catholic and independent school authorities, to implement the plan in full.
Fourth, new principles for school funding.
The Bill provides for a new funding standard, based on what it costs to educate a student at schools we know already get strong results.
With a benchmark amount per student and extra needs to be met through a system of loadings: additional funding to help children who the evidence shows need help.
And fifth, a new link between school funding and school improvement.
The Bill provides that the Australian Government will deliver future funding on the principles legislated in this Bill, to those States, Territories and non-government authorities, which agree to implement the National Plan.
Speaker, this is a truly national plan for a matter of the greatest national import: the education of all our nation's children.
No matter how rich or poor your parents are, the school you attend or the circumstances of your birth, our nation should provide a core level of support to your education.
There should be Australian Government support to educate every Australian child  -  in the poorest and most remote school  -  at the best known and best resourced school.
And Speaker, this is a distinctively Labor plan for a matter of the highest Labor purpose: to eradicate the great moral wrong which sees some Australian children denied the transformative power of a great education.
It's now clear, with the information we have today, that in Australian schools, it is poorer kids who have been let down most in the past.
By year three, 89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average.
By year nine, the average child from the same battling family is two years behind children from the most well-off quarter of Australian homes in reading and maths.
Just having this evidence is an achievement of this Government.
This is only now clear because under this Labor Government, we test the reading, writing and mathematics of our children and publish the results of those tests.
When Labor came to office there was no one who could say which Australian schools needed the most help.
Imagine if Treasury couldn't tell you the unemployment rate: that was the state of Australian education policy in November 2007.
And fixing it took more than good intentions: we were told it hadn't been done because it couldn't be done.
The unions would never allow NAPLAN results to go on My School.
The profession would never accept greater principal powers and community involvement.
The States would never agree to a national curriculum.
Australian education has been on an enormous journey of change since then  -  a journey of change which has opened the opportunity for the Bill I bring into the House today.
None of it was done without opposition.
No doubt there are still voices of opportunism and negativity  -  and I am sure there are still some who doubt our will.
But all my determination, all our resolve, is directed toward getting this done.
Making sure no child misses out on the education which could change his or her life has been the ruling passion of my life.
Applying the power of education to preserve the Australian fair go and strengthen the Australian economy is the governing purpose of my Party and my Government.
And we have worked at this every day in office.
Speaker, the detail of this legislation  -  above all, the school improvement agenda and the structure for school funding  -  rest on the solid foundation we have established over the past five years.
My own project in Government has been to build the opportunity, to make the case, to create the model, for this plan.
I drove My School because I knew if we could measure school results and understand the backgrounds of students the nation would see the need for improvement and respond.
I drove the Low SES National Partnership because I knew if we could demonstrate that when it is used well extra funding for disadvantaged schools lifts performance, then the nation would support extending that approach. 
I drove the National Partnership on Improving Teacher Quality because I knew improved teaching and getting the brightest graduates into the classroom were the most important levers of change. 
I drove big modernisations: computers in schools, Building the Education Revolution, National Curriculum. 
And new rigour: the Literacy and Numeracy National Partnership, new professional standards for teachers.
As Minister for School Education, Peter Garrett has driven these changes further.  
I also drove our White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century  -  a plan to make Australia the winner in the century of growth and change in our region  -  because I wanted the nation to understand that to win the economic race we have to win the education race.
We have to lift quality for every child in every school and properly fund the education of every child in every school.
All this work has made a difference in schools.
For example, at Yarrunga Primary School in Wangaratta, Victoria.
National Partnership funding has helped teachers to improve their professional skills in data analysis and student monitoring so they can teach literacy and numeracy more effectively.
The school has also used specialist mathematics coaches and an After School Support Program. 
The results? 
The proportion of students who achieved above the national minimum standard in Year 3 Reading increased by 23 per cent and in Numeracy by 14 per cent.
While the proportion of students in the highest two NAPLAN bands increased in Year 3 Reading by 24 per cent and in Numeracy by 36 per cent.
We have looked at the results and at the evidence of student background and now we know what the factors are which show that kids need more help.
Students from low SES backgrounds, indigenous students, students with disability, students with limited English skills and students in regional schools all need additional resources and support to succeed.
With the right support, we know they can.
Take Bega Valley Public School in New South Wales.
The school used investment from our Low SES National Partnership to improve teacher skills, develop better classroom resources and offer learning support to indigenous students.
The results?
Bega Valley increased the proportion of students achieving above the national minimum standard in Year 5 Reading by around 26 per cent and in Numeracy by 21 per cent.
In that school the proportion of high performing students increased in Year 5 Reading by around 31 per cent and in Numeracy and 21 per cent.
These are examples of the kind of nation-wide innovation and improvement we have delivered these past five years.
Where we have made a difference in schools  -  but more than that, where we have shown what makes the greatest difference in schools.
Skilled, dedicated teachers, using data and evidence to improve their own teaching strategies, giving constant feedback to students, delivering a high quality curriculum and drawing on specialist expertise.  
We know what works  -  when schools apply these approaches rigorously, results improve.
And we know what extra resources they need.
This is the crucial judgement the Review of Funding for Schooling has helped us form.
I asked an expert panel, chaired by respected businessman Mr David Gonski, to conduct the first comprehensive review of school funding arrangements in almost forty years.
Their national consultation process was comprehensive: the Panel received over 7 000 written submissions, met 70 education groups and visited 39 schools  -  as well as commissioning detailed analysis and research.
Their report is impressive and their findings are important.
The Review found that current arrangements for funding, accountability and transparency of our schools are not supporting quality outcomes for all our students.
Some schools do not get the resources they need to educate Australian children to the best of their ability.
Barriers remain to educational achievement for too many students.
This is why the Review recommended a fundamental overhaul of the way that Australian schools are funded.
This is why the Government has adopted the broad architecture of a benchmark account per student, with extra needs to be met through a system of loadings: a dramatic simplification of the way we fund schools.
And this is why the Bill before the House sets those principles in place.
The Bill before the House legislates for the Commonwealth's funding model and the National Plan for School Improvement.
This Bill legislates for a clear link between school improvement and school funding: agree to the National Plan for School Improvement, get the Commonwealth's funding.
And the Bill sets the grounds for a practical and working transition.
Speaker, the Bill thus provides the architecture of funding, the connection between funding and school improvement, and the directions of the improvement plan.
Let me then turn to the detail of the Bill before the House.
First, the Bill creates a new citizenship entitlement to quality education.
The preamble to the Bill acknowledges that all students in all schools are entitled to an excellent education.
Second, this Bill legislates for new national goals.
These are specific and measureable, ambitious and achievable goals which we must work towards with urgency and realism.
Third, to deliver the entitlement and achieve these goals, this Bill legislates the directions for the National Plan for School Improvement.
In the Government's response to the Review of Funding for Schooling in September this year, I announced that the Commonwealth would work with the states and territories and with independent and Catholic authorities to introduce this National Plan. 
Further, the Bill sets in law the basis for agreement between the Commonwealth, the States and Territories, and Catholic and independent schools, to implement the plan in full.
The agreements we strike will not allow fiddling the books.
We will not allow Federal funding to substitute for cutbacks by Liberal States.
Under this Bill, there are no blank cheques.
The funding flows to States, Territories and Catholic and independent schools who agree to the actions, targets and reporting for improvement which we agree under the National Plan.
Actions, targets and reporting for improvement which will deliver on the five directions we legislate today.
The Bill requires quality teaching.
All the evidence tells us that the single greatest variable in student performance is teacher quality  -  and that the single greatest factor in school improvement is lifting teacher quality.
Our plan will deliver it.
Under our plan, teacher trainees will be among the best and brightest.
New teachers will be more ready for the classroom  -  with practical experience during training and two years of support once in school.
Our young teachers will also have the support to ensure classroom discipline, to deal with bullying and cyber bullying, to prevent one or two disruptive children ruining school for all the others in the class.
Teachers will meet rigorous professional standards and be recognised for improving their skills and performance.
All teachers will be reviewed annually in their school. 
The Bill requires quality learning.
I want all parents to have the confidence that their child, regardless of school or state, will be offered the highest quality learning experience.
Every Australian student is entitled to access a rigorous, world class curriculum. 
A curriculum which sets out the basic knowledge and understanding they need to achieve through education and in later life.
A curriculum which lays the foundation of the skills and dispositions that support them to succeed in the 21stcentury and to contribute to their community.
We have delivered that world class national curriculum.
The first four subjects  -  English, Maths, history and science  -  are already being taught in Australian schools.
Under this plan that curriculum will be extended and delivered to every student in every school.
Quality learning demands even more  -  our Plan will deliver it.
In this digital age it means digital learning.
Through the NBN we will deliver a world class digital infrastructure for Australian students.
In the Asian Century, quality learning means learning more about the region where we live and where our future lies.
Our White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century sets the goal: all Australian students will have the opportunity, and be encouraged, to undertaken a continuous course of study in an Asian language throughout their schooling.
All schools will engage with at least one school in Asia to support the teaching of a priority Asian language, taking advantage of the National Broadband Network.
And every Australian student will have significant exposure to studies of Asia across the curriculum to increase their cultural knowledge and skills.
The Bill requires empowered school leadership.
Ultimately, improvement comes classroom by classroom, school by school, from principals, teachers, parents and communities, who have the authority not just to educate but to lead.
School-level leadership is crucial  -  our Plan will deliver it.
All principals will meet the professional standard  -  to demonstrate their leadership ability, knowledge and skills.
All principals will have the responsibility for building a culture of continuous improvement in their schools  -  with regular performance appraisals linked to development and training.
Crucially, our Plan will empower principals to make the right decisions about staffing and teaching in their schools.   
School communities will be encouraged and supported to work with principals to deliver programs that meet the educational needs of their students.
The Bill requires transparency and accountability.
The datasets underlying the My School website are already invaluable tools for school improvement and policy development.
We are building a system of information in which local communities who want their children to do better in life and who want their local school to improve will no longer have to proceed on hope or expectation or anecdote or prejudgement.
I want local leaders to be able to act on the facts.
Even more transparency and accountability are needed  -  our plan will deliver it.
Students and their families will have access to detailed reports on school performance and to more information on how their school's attendance and finances compare to other, similar schools.
Teachers and principals will have access to more data on their school's performance. 
So we can ensure that students currently falling behind, especially disadvantaged students, can be identified and given extra support.
This information about performance will hold teachers, principals and school communities accountable.
Schools which are falling behind will be given extra help and assistance to lift their standards and keep improving  -  but we can only do this if the whole community, Government, parents, principals and teachers are better informed about performance.
Every school will have a school improvement plan and will be accountable for delivering it.
The Bill requires meeting student needs.
That means getting extra support to every school student who needs it.
Identifying the needs of every child and delivering what he or she needs.
We now have clear evidence about how disadvantage holds many students back.
And we know that when those kids aren't supported with the right resources, every child in the classroom misses out.
So our National Plan will see resources allocated to reflect student need.
Our Plan will deliver it.
This is not just about disadvantaged kids, not just about gifted kids, it's about all students.
To meet their needs, I want a system which is rational, which supports excellence and which is fair. 
A system of per student funding, with extra loadings based on need.
That is the model we legislate today.
Speaker, this is the Government's approach: a national plan for school improvement and a new model for school funding.
It should now be clear to every reasonable observer that we must have a new plan for school improvement alongside a new school funding system.
There truly is no alternative.
Above all  -  because without the Government's plan, the status quo will mean cuts to funding of schools.
The House should understand this point very clearly.
The existing National Partnerships are time-limited  -  new agreement is needed to extend the benefits of the funding they have delivered.
In other words, without new agreement, those National Partnerships simply expire.
What is more, under the current system created by the former Liberal Government, Australian Government funding for schools is directly linked to what State and Territories spend on government schools.
New analysis indicates that the impact of keeping the current funding model means schools could be more than $2 billion worse off over 4 years.
Because when the big Liberal States cut education  -  as they are doing today  -  this automatically means less funding from the Australian Government for all schools.
In every State and Territory.
Speaker, the Government rejects the politics of education cuts and social division.
Through this Bill, we assert that every Australian student is entitled to an excellent education.
And we assert that we as a nation, as a whole community, share a responsibility to deliver that entitlement.
We must accept the need for investment, the need for improvement and the need for accountability.
Speaker, another school year is coming to its close ... an education era is ending too.
For too long, education policy in this country was a playground of division and disregard.
The election of 2007 was the beginning of the end and now the Australian Education Bill 2012 rings the bell on all that.
Flag poles, culture wars, hit lists, the politics of setting school against school: that was yesterday.
This is tomorrow: national education goals, an ambitious national plan, a commitment to smarter funding; parents, teachers, authorities and Governments working together.
Higher standards, better schools, educated children, creative citizens Australia winning the education race and winning the economic race.
That is the purpose of the Australian Education Bill 2012.
I commend the Bill to the House.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Few actions in public life give me greater pleasure than introducing the National Disability Insurance Scheme Bill does today.
The Scheme to be established by this Bill will transform the lives of people with disability, their families and carers.
For the first time they will have their needs met in a way that truly supports them to live with choice and dignity.
It will bring an end to the tragedy of services denied or delayed and instead offer people with disability the care and support they need over their lifetimes.
This is a complex Bill, yet at its heart is a very simple moral insight: Disability can affect any of us and therefore it affects all of us.
To be born with or acquire a disability is to encounter one of those shafts of fate of which Ben Chifley spoke in his last great speech as Prime Minister.
The existence of disability in our community cannot alwaysbe avoided.
But the consequences of disability  -  isolation, poverty, lossof dignity, stress, hopelessness and fear of the future  -  can be.
Every 30 minutes on average, someone in Australia is diagnosed with a significant disability.
Only those of considerable wealth could possibly afford the costs of lifetime care that are required in response.
Most Australians with disability cannot bear the burden alone, nor should they be left to.
Yet in relying on public provision, they are forced to endure a level of care that is often shameful and generally insufficient.
It is a system that reacts to crisis.
A system that metes out support rationed by arbitrary budget allocations, not real human needs.
A system that I have rightly compared to a lottery  -  a cruel lottery where even the best outcome is far from satisfactory.
So today our nation says enough.
Our current system is inadequate and indefensible. It must be replaced.
The risk of disability is universal, so our response must be universal.
The only solution is therefore a nation-wide, demand-driven system of care tailored to the needs of each individual and established on a durable, long-term basis.
That can only be accomplished through the united effort of the community through the positive action of government, supported by the Australian people through our public revenues.
Therefore, this Bill will inscribe in our laws a substantial and enduring reform that will fundamentally change the nature of disability care and support in this nation: the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The Scheme is ambitious, and necessarily so.
Because more than 400,000 people are living with significant and permanent disabilities.
Because carers are required to stretch the bonds of obligation and kinship past breaking point.
Because the nation is being robbed of the human and economic potential of people living with disability and the contribution they can make to our shared future.
Because while the promise of fairness and equality that lies at the core of our national ethos is denied to some Australians,we are all diminished.
The need for this Bill is urgent, and the wait has been long.
My distinguished predecessor Gough Whitlam sought to introduce a national compensation scheme 40 years ago.
Today, a new generation  -  no less idealistic  -  seeks to perfect and complete the work.
So I am proud to present this Bill to the House today.
This Bill has two principal purposes:
 * 	To establish the framework of the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
 * 	And to establish the National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency, to operate the first stage of the scheme in five locations around the nation starting from July 2013.
The Bill reflects the extensive work on design, funding and governance undertaken with states and territories and with people with disability, their families and carers, and with key stakeholders.
This Bill will be subject to scrutiny, to further work, too.
The Government intends to refer this Bill to a Senate Committee to allow consideration in detail.
And we will continue to work with the States and Territories, with people with disability, their families, carers and advocates.
We will also undertake public consultation on the legislative instruments that will be developed in conjunction with this Bill.
Any comments received through NDIS consultation processes will be considered.
It is our intention to bring a final version of the Bill for a vote in the Budget session of Parliament next year ahead of the start of the first stage of the NDIS from July 2013.
This National Disability Insurance Scheme represents a transformational approach to the provision of disability services in this country.
Rather than attempt to patch and mend the existing system through further incremental change, we will build a new system from the ground up.
The current funding model based on historical budget allocations will be replaced by an insurance approach, based on actuarial analysis of need and future costs.
The scheme will respond to each individual's goals and aspirations for their lifetime, affording certainty and peace of mind for people with disability and their carers alike.
The Agency will work with people to plan, and to take account of their individual circumstances and needs.
The Scheme will give people the care and support that is objectively assessed as being reasonable and necessary over the course of their lifetime.
It will give people real choice and control over these supports, including the ability to manage their own funding, if they wish.
It will offer early intervention therapies and supports, where it will improve a person's functioning, or slow or prevent the progression of their disability over their lifetime.
The scheme will move away from the crisis model, where families only receive support if they are unable to continue in their caring role and there are no other options.
Instead, it will work with families before they reach crisis to make sure that the valuable informal care they provide is sustainable.
The scheme will also aim to foster innovative services that are delivered and coordinated by local people.
This Bill also clearly states the rights of people with disability within the scheme, and will give effect in part to our obligations under the Convention on the Rights of People with Disability.
I turn now to the detail of the Bill.
Chapter 1 of the Bill outlines the objects and general principles underpinning the legislation.
The legislation aims to support the independence and social and economic participation of people with disability.
It clearly recognises the right of people with disability to exercise choice and control over the planning and deliveryof their supports.
The legislation is designed to ensure that people with disability can access reasonable and necessary supports, that there is an assurance of support over a person's lifetime, and that the scheme remains sustainable over the long term.
It will facilitate the development of a national approach in access to, and planning and funding of, supports to people with disability, and will promote innovation and quality in the provision of those supports.
The legislation also provides a foundation for all governmentsto work together to implement the launch of the NDIS.
Chapter 2 of the Bill sets out a broad role for the National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency to provide general supports to people with disability and their families.
As part of this role, the Agency may provide funding to individuals and organisations to help people with disability participate in economic and social life.
Chapter 3 of the Bill then sets out the process for how to become a participant in the scheme, and how to develop a personal, goal-based plan with the Agency and receive individualised supports.
A person may make an access request to the Agency to become a participant, and the CEO of the Agency must determine whether they meet the access criteria.
To meet the access criteria, individuals must meet age and residence requirements relating to the five announced launch sites. 
Each prospective participant will also need to meet either the disability requirements or the early intervention requirements for assistance.
The disability requirements assess whether a prospective participant has a current need for support under the scheme, based on one or more permanent impairments affecting their ongoing daily living and social and economic participation.
The legislation also sets out early intervention requirements, which allow support to be provided to help minimise the impact of a disability from its earliest appearance or prevent a deterioration in function over a person's lifetime. 
Additional matters may be specified through a legislative instrument as we learn more about the real-world situations of the people who need this support.
A participant's plan will include a statement of participant supports, prepared with the participant and approved by the CEO of the Agency.
This will specify, among other matters, the reasonable and necessary supports that will be funded by the scheme. 
The concept of reasonable and necessary supports will determine the scope of what the scheme provides.
It means the scheme will provide a participant with what is necessary to achieve their goals and aspirations and take part in the community, in keeping with what it is reasonable to expect a scheme to provide.
The legislation reflects community consultation on the factors to be considered in determining what are reasonable and necessary supports, including:
 * 	whether the support will assist the participant to pursue their goals, objectives and aspirations,
 * 	whether the support represents value for money, and
 * 	whether the provision of the supports takes account of what it is reasonable to expect families, carers, informal networks and the community to provide.
The legislation is designed to allow participants and their families to choose how their funding for supports under a plan is managed. 
It also sets out how a participant's plan may be reviewed over time to take into account of the participant's changing circumstances
Chapter 4 of the Bill sets out the structure for the NDIS, including comprehensive rules to protect personal information and rights to review of decisions.
It also sets out the process by which a nominee can be appointed to make decisions on behalf of a participant, while ensuring that the rights of participants are maintained and that nominees must consider the participant's wishes. 
Chapter 5 of the Bill addresses the interaction between the scheme and other compensatory schemes and common law actions for people with disability, such as those arising from motor vehicle or workplace accidents.
The provision of support and assistance under the scheme is not intended to replace existing entitlements to compensation. 
Accordingly, the legislation enables the CEO of the Agency to require a person to take reasonable action to claim or obtain compensation in circumstances where the CEO is satisfied that the participant has reasonable prospects of success and where taking that action would not cause an unreasonable burden to the person with disability.
The costs of supports paid under the scheme before a compensation claim is settled or before a court judgement may also be recovered.
Chapter 6 of the Bill establishes the National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency.
In addition to delivering the Scheme, the Agency will perform a range of other functions.
These include managing the financial sustainability of the scheme, building community awareness about disability and undertaking research about disability.
In accordance with the Productivity Commission recommendation, the legislation establishes the Agency as a body under the Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act 1997.
This was recommended in order to give the Agency a high degree of autonomy and legitimacy, placing it beyond the vagaries of politics, electoral and budget cycles.
The Agency will be overseen by a Board made up of people with extensive experience in the provision or use of disability services, and in financial management, governance and the operation of insurance schemes.
There will also be an Advisory Council comprising people with lived experience of disability and caring and other relevant experience.  This will ensure that the Board maintains ongoing connection with the interests and lived experience of people with disability, their families and carers.
To ensure the Agency is accountable to government, a Ministerial Council will be established through the Council of Australian Governments.
All governments  -  state, territory and Commonwealth  -  will be represented on the Ministerial Council. 
Finally, there is specific provision for an independent review of the new Act after two years of operation.
The purpose of this review will be to consider how the Act has operated during launch, and to inform all governments on whether changes to the legislation are needed as we move to a national scheme.
These are the main provisions of this Bill which, when translated from dry legal words into action, will change the lives of thousands of Australians  -  lastingly and for the better.
In bringing this Bill before the Parliament, I acknowledge a deep debt of gratitude to some remarkable individuals and organisations whose persistence and belief have made this Scheme possible.
I take this opportunity, publicly, to thank the Productivity Commission, Commissioners Patricia Scott and Associate Commissioner John Walsh, for their thorough and compelling analysis that has been critical to the shape of the NDIS.
I also pay tribute to a remarkable story of advocacy, led by Bruce Bonyhady and Rhonda Galbally, the National Disability &amp; Carer Alliance, the National People with Disability &amp; Carer Council, and friends, activists and advocates in communities right across the country.
Lastly I thank my Ministerial colleagues:
Bill Shorten for his passion for this cause as Parliamentary Secretary and his ongoing support.
Jenny Macklin for her public policy genius in realising our vision for change.
Jan McLucas for her patient, caring and accessible approach in dealing with all who need to be heard.
And to all our colleagues in the Ministry, the parliament and the public sector who are working so hard to make the NDIS a reality.
From our different sectors and backgrounds, we have united around a single idea.
A compelling idea.
An idea whose time has come.
For four years, this idea has grown from seed.
Over the past year, we have built the foundations.
Now this legislation will make the Scheme real.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme is the greatest change to Australian social policy in a generation.
And a mark of how deeply the conscience of our nation has been touched.
The NDIS will stand alongside the minimum wage, the age pension, Medicare and universal superannuation as one of the great Labor pillars of social justice and opportunity for all Australians.
It will change our society in profound and lasting ways, enabling those who live with disability to fulfil their potential as valued and valuable members of our society.
I count it as a privilege to introduce this legislation today.
I commend the Bill to the House and to all those who have waited so long and worked so hard for this moment.


Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
We are now commencing that section of business at the end of the parliamentary sitting which is Christmas valedictories.
I know, to many people who are listening, this will seem quite a strange custom because we are here still in November and talking about Christmas valedictories.
I do want to assure those who are listening that does not mean that their members of parliament, or their government, is ceasing to work on this day.
What is happening on this day is that it is our last parliamentary day. For myself, I have a lot to do before the end of the year and I am raring to getting into doing it, particularly some very big work that we have to do at the forthcoming Council of Australian Governments meeting.
For members of parliament and senators who are returning to their home communities, they have big work programs too.
This is the time of year, particular, that people attend a lot of end-of-year events at local schools and enjoy the opportunity to do that very much.
But this is also the time where we do say thank you to those who make parliament possible for us, and reflect on the year that has been - the year 2012.
In so doing, I do want to mark that the final day of House sitting is actually on a significant Australian anniversary.
It was 60 years ago today that Gough Whitlam won the by-election which bought him to this House. Our thoughts are with him this year and on this anniversary.
I recall particularly the example he has given us in the House of a parliamentary career dedicated to the highest of purposes: the public good.
We will, as we celebrate the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations with China in the weeks to come, have an opportunity to reflect on his remarkable legacy to the nation in opening us up to our world, and particularly to China.
As we reflect on the year that was, this was a year of some happy days. Every Australian who takes even the smallest interest in diplomacy felt pride in our international status when we were elected to the United Nations Security Council.
It was a good day to be an Australian. But good days in Australia often revolve around sport more than they do around diplomacy, if the truth is told. It was a year of Australian achievements in sport, too. Sydney won the Australian Rules Grand Final and Melbourne won the Rugby League Grand Final, and the world has changed.
Unfortunately, the Bulldogs were not there in the AFL Grand Final.
Queensland won the Sheffield Shield and the A-League - with Brisbane - and the State of Origin series, again - so not everything has changed.
The achievements of our athletes were simply olympic. We cheered for seven superb Olympic gold medals for our athletes at the track, the velodrome, in kayaking and sailing and, of course, in the pool.
We were delighted by the world-beating performances of our Paralympians. We were proud of all who represented us in two sets of great games: the Olympics and the Paralympics.
This has been a year of some historic events: the Diamond Jubilee of the Queen of Australia. I was able to pass on the nation's congratulations through her Majesty's son, Prince Charles, who visited us so recently.
We saw the re-election of an American President, and I was able to pass on the nation's congratulations to him in person this month.
We welcomed the Chinese leadership transition, which saw General Secretary Xi Jinping rise to lead our largest trading partner.
It was a year with some sad days too. Some remarkable Australians died this year. Murray Rose, who swam like a fish; and Jimmy Little, who sang like a bird.
Sir Zelman Cowen, who spoke of a touch of healing. Robert Hughes, who showed us the shock of the new.
Bryce Courtenay, who taught us the power of one.
We farewelled the indomitable Jim Stynes and the incomparable Margaret Whitlam.
We have not forgotten Pete Veness, just as it is hard to believe that it has been five years without Matt Price.
Also, my family and I were so moved by the kindness of so many members of the House and the Australian people on our own loss.
We remembered friends and members of the House who died - Joe Riordan, Frank Walker, Lionel Bowen, Gordon Bilney and Senator Douglas Barr Scott. The loss of Senator Judith Adams is still keenly felt by her many friends in this place.
Seven Australians died for us in Afghanistan this year.
The parliament has honoured each of them as we should. As the year ends, we will remember them. We will think of their families facing the toughest Christmas of their lives. We will care for their 32 mates wounded in service in Afghanistan this year.
We had the opportunity, too, to acknowledge the amazing courage of Corporal Daniel Keighran that saw him awarded the Victoria Cross.
Then, of course, Dan amazed us again with his grace and humility having seen that huge honour awarded. We have a good thought for their mates still serving us overseas in Afghanistan and around the world.
Coming closer to this parliamentary chamber, there are many people that I acknowledge and to thank.
To the Leader of the Opposition and the opposition generally: I hope that you enjoy some rest and respite over Christmas with their families.
To you, Speaker Anna: my sincere congratulations, and on some days I feel like I should be offering words of apology.
To your predecessor, Mr Slipper: thank you for your service as Speaker as well during the course of the year. Thanks to the Deputy Speaker and the panel and everybody who works so hard, sitting in that chair to keep the business of parliament turning through.
To Henry Thomson, my department's parliamentary liaison officer, and his team: thank you very much, and thank you very much for making sure that I listed everybody in these remarks, including them - that was very clever - but they do a great job.
To the Clerk and Deputy Clerk: thank you very much for everything you do for both sides of parliament and for the parliament generally to keep the business of the parliament on track here in the House of Representatives.
To the Serjeant-at-Arms, to the attendants, to the guides and to all those who reach out to people in the parliament and help make it work: thank you very much for your special efforts.
To the Parliamentary Library, Hansard staff, the Table Office, the Parliamentary Relations Office, to those who look after our magnificent lawns and gardens, to those who do the cooking, to those who operate the switchboard, the computers, security and everyone else who makes sure that parliament works: we thank you.
We thank, too, our parliamentary cleaners  -  and if I could sneak in just a little reference to my own cleaners, to Ana and Luzia who come and clean my office, they lift my spirits on a lot of mornings. To Aussies, thank you for the coffee  -  I am still very reliant on it  -  it is an institution. Don Watson called it the only place of communion in the building, and he might be right about that.
To the child carers, they are doing some of the most important work that gets done under this roof: thank you for your efforts.
To the staff of HRG who diligently got people where they needed to be, sometimes under extraordinary pressure: thank you for your efforts.
To COMCAR drivers who assist us in getting us where we need to get to: thank you very much for your ongoing courtesy and support.
To broadcasting staff, I do not know that Australians are always grateful for the work you do, seeing some of the images of parliament on your TV screens, but you do your best to faithfully record parliamentary proceedings out in the wider world, and we thank you for that.
To the press gallery, I will host a function for them tonight, and I think what I have to say is probably best reserved for off the record.
To my Deputy Prime Minister, the Treasurer, thank you for being the guardian of our budget, making sure that all of our budget works for us. Thank you for being acknowledged around the world as a great Treasurer, for your stewardship of our national economy, and also for being a guardian of Labor values and Labor purpose. Thank you very much.
To the Leader of the House, Albo, our minister for Fighting Tories and for doing so much more: thank you very much for everything you have done to contribute to the successful work of the parliament this year. I think many members are aware  -  certainly on our side of the parliament  -  of the extraordinary lengths that you go to.
To the Senate leadership team, to Senators Evans and Conroy, possibly a study in contrasts, they are a great Senate leadership team and Senator Evans has been on a tremendous health kick, as people would have seen, so he has not only done well as a Senate leader this year but he is also a far more svelte human being and a healthier human being for it.
I thank them for their efforts and for their occasional reminders about how long they have been dealing with difficulties arising from not having the numbers in that chamber  -  they have reminded us of some of those things from time to time  -  my thanks.
To my cabinet, my ministry and parliamentary secretaries, time does not permit me to name them individually but they are a remarkable team.
I thank them for their extraordinary efforts. They are always full of enthusiasm and full of ideas. I always go out of my way to listen to my colleagues and to treat their ideas with respect. I thank them for being so supportive and for their enthusiasm and Labor faith.
I thank the team of whips here and in the Senate. They do remarkably hard work. I thank them for their efforts.
I say generally to my parliamentary colleagues, to all of them, whatever office they serve, to the backbench here and the backbench in the Senate: we have emerged from 2012 strong and as a political party of purpose.
No-one can leave 2012 doubting the courage of the Labor Party to come to this parliament and get the big things done. I am tremendously proud of you and the way that you have worked under some extraordinary pressures.
To the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Dr Watt: in the tradition of frank and fearless advice, Ian is amongst the best. Thank you to him and to all at PM&amp;C for their support of me. I am very well served by my department and very grateful for it.
To the entire Australian Public Service, I pass onto you the thanks of your ministers. Thank you for what you do to support the agenda of government and to serve your fellow Australians.
Too often, public service is denigrated in our society; this is a moment to applaud it. Thank you for what you do.
To George Wright, the ALP organisation, staff and volunteers and our true believers in their many thousands and growing  -  and thank you for our new true believers as well  -  I know how hard you work and I know you will be out there for us in 2013 as we move finally to an election phase.
To the staff who work with Labor MPs and senators, whether as staff in electorate offices or as staff in ministerial offices, thank you very much for your efforts. There has been some public commentary on political staff this year, but I want our staff to understand my view about them and my view about what they do.
To a person, they are people who could ply a more profitable trade in the private sector. They choose instead to dedicate their lives to the future of our nation, and that is to be applauded. Thanks to you for what you do for Labor and for our country.
I particularly want to acknowledge Jim Chalmers, Dr James Chalmers, who departs the government after years of service. He has been a remarkable contributor to his party and to the work of this government, and I expect that in the years to come he will continue to be a remarkable contributor to our nation.
To my chief of staff, Ben Hubbard, all of my staff in the Prime Minister's office, my electorate staff  -  some of whom have been with me since the very start of this journey when I was first elected in 1998  -  thank you very much for everything you do.
To my branch members and volunteers, I wish that I could be with you for more time than I am able to be, but thank you for keeping the faith locally and doing all your hard work.
To my speech writers  -  they have deliberately inserted a little reference to themselves in these notes! I think it is probably worth saying they have got one of the less enviable jobs in Australian public life; people are always very, very keen to give them a character assessment along the way. I thank them for their hard work too.
To my friends from the Australian Federal Police, we have survived another year together, sometimes in more difficult circumstances than prime ministers and AFP details have faced in the past. Thank you very much to them for their efforts.
Finally, to my own family. To my partner, Tim, to my family in Adelaide  -  I am looking forward to spending some time together. We will make sure that we spend some time in Adelaide over the Christmas break and make sure that we are there together for what will be a different Christmas for us and our family.
Speaker, in a few weeks when the working year ends, I wish everybody a time of rest and recovery. I will be doing that. I know those around the parliament will be doing that. And then we will be back, ready to go, full of energy in 2013, and I am really looking forward to the contest to come.
Thank you.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
The members of National Disability Services support some of the most disadvantaged Australians  -  those to whom we owe the greatest duty of care.
Every day you provide support and assistance that changes lives.
But I know each of you are frustrated that our fragmented and underfunded disability support system doesn't allow you to offer to everyone in need the right level or quality of care.
So today I want to say two things: firstly, I say thank you. Thank you for your great work. Thank you for always believing in the dignity and rights of those with disability.
But thank you is not enough. You know it. I know it.
Patching and mending a broken system doesn't cut it anymore.
That's why beyond the thanks and the hopes and the kind words, there's something better on the way: the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The NDIS will be transformational. A plan that spells hope. A once in a generation opportunity for change.
The NDIS is starting and as Prime Minister, I am determined it will be here to stay.
We started the journey on Budget Night in May with our commitment of $1 billion of new funding.
The scheme will be complete by the end of this decade. And like the old age pension, it will serve for decades as a trusted and fundamental part of our nation's social safety net.
As disability organisations, you are part of the NDIS from the beginning. You will help forge the Scheme's final legislation through your input to the Senate Committee.
We want to work closely with you on the NDIS rules, including the process of registration.
You will also help shape the unfolding nature of the launch sites as we learn from experience.
In all of this, we will value your advice and rely on your expertise. Because while the government can create the NDIS, it is you who will deliver it.
This is where your organisations, with their wealth of experience, can help shape the future  -  including your experience of how not to do things.
But of most immediate importance is the policy work required this week.
This is, of course, the week of COAG  -  the Council of Australian Governments. When those of us entrusted with the future of our nation sit down to establish how that future will look.
In the room will be just nine of us as First Ministers, plus our colleague representing local government. But the ten of us will be watched by 410,000 Australians.
The 410,000 Australians living with disability who are waiting to see their lives transformed.
Five of those Premiers and Chief Ministers agreed earlier this year to be part of the NDIS launch sites.
So this Friday, on behalf of all Australians with disability, I will be holding those five Premiers and Chief Ministers to their word, as they will be holding me to my word.
I want you to do the same.
Talk to the Premiers and Chief Ministers, the State and Territory Treasurers and Disability Ministers. Tell them that you want to see this done.
But don't leave it there.
Remember that as we begin this journey, it is incomplete because our two wealthiest and most dynamic States haven't yet come on board.
Tell them that you want them to stay engaged and at the table, so that they are part of the national scheme when it is agreed.
But notwithstanding, I want to leave the COAG table on Friday with the key arrangements to launch the first stage of the NDIS settled and bilateral agreements secured with the jurisdictions that will host a launch site: NSW, Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia the ACT.
With those Agreements, and the legislation to be passed next year, we can get the launch sites underway.
Starting in the middle of next year, those launch sites mean that 20,000 Australians in five regions with significant, lifelong disabilities will start to benefit from the NDIS.
These are not trial sites. Let's get that word out of our lexicon. This isn't an experiment or a pilot scheme that may or may not go ahead.
It is the beginning of the full NDIS. That's why we call them launch sites. Just as when you lay the foundation slab of a house, you don't says it's trial. You say you've started building the house.
Our house of care and inclusion, the NDIS, is under construction.
The foundation stone has been laid. And we will keep building until the house is completed and everyone is safe and secure inside.
The launch sites will be where it all unfolds.
There we will gain insights into how best to support Australians with disability at different stages of their lives, including through times of transition.
So different approaches will be taken to the first stage of the NDIS across the launch sites.
At the South Australian launch site, for example, we'll be focusing on services and support to children from birth through to age 14. This will be a chance to explore options and opportunities for managing early intervention.
Across the Bass Strait, at the Tasmanian launch site, the focus will be on 15- to 24-year-olds. This will let us learn how to better support young people through the testing physical, emotional and practical transition from adolescence to adulthood.
It will also let us develop a system that is better able to manage the all-important transition from school to post-school options like work, or further training.
These transitions are crucial not just for the young Australians living with disabilities, but also for their carers.
Without meaningful post-school options, parents and carers can find their own work options and life choices dramatically circumscribed.
At the ACT launch site there'll be an initial focus on addressing capacity gaps in 2013, followed by a more general subsequent roll-out to eligible members of the community.
Here in NSW, three local-government areas in the Hunter Valley will be first participants.
In Victoria, it will be residents of the Barwon region.
The work done at these first five sites will shape the full roll-out of the scheme in later years.
But be in no doubt:
We have started a journey that I am determined will only end in one way: with the full NDIS, completed, funded and fully in place in the years ahead.
The full roll-out of the NDIS will take years, not months. Even the most passionate advocate accepts that. Even the Productivity Commission accepts that.
It will be carefully staged. It has to be, if we are to get it right. And together we will get it right.
We'll get the NDIS right because the disability sector will continue to renew and upgrade and unify itself.
You've come a long way already.
The launch sites are just the beginning.
You and your organisations have an important stabilising and steadying role to play in this regard. That in itself may be confronting for some. For people with disabilities and for service providers.
My assurance to you today, and the message I want you to take back to your communities is this: change will be staged and it will be managed.
My Government will work with providers to make sure they understand what the transition means for them, and for the individuals they support.
We propose a series of local conversations over the coming months between program managers, the Launch Transition Agency and service providers.
So far, some small-scale, informal conversations have been held in South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria.
Similar sessions are planned for NSW and the ACT.
In the New Year there will be more of these conversations. There will also be a series of public forums in launch locations, to prepare the broader community and potential NDIS users for the transition.
These conversations will help us all make a smoother transition and allow us to manage the change.
So too, the practical ideas that will emerge from projects funded under the $10 million Practical Design Fund will give us ways to prepare everyone for transition to the NDIS.
I'm looking forward to seeing submissions from those with lived experience'. People living with the challenge of a serious disability. Their families and carers. Disability care workers, service providers and advocates.
Coming up with projects that explore practical solutions to challenges of providing support and services to people in remote locations, perhaps. Or innovative ways of attracting and retaining the staff we'll need in our future disability workforce.
The Minister for Disability Reform Jenny Macklin will announce the successful applicants to that Design Fund later today.
Also critically important during the early days of transition will be the $122.6 million my Government has allocated: to prepare the sector for the new way of delivering disability services; and to help people with disability develop the capacity to exercise more choice and control. 
This investment will drive innovation and support current providers through the transition ahead, with a focus on the launch sites.
It will also help people with disabilities, their carers and families understand the options available to them through the NDIS.
The key to this journey we're embarking on is that it is adaptive.
We'll learn from each other as we go. We'll share successes. We'll pass on lessons.
That means we'll need to hear from you, and from the people you serve. We really need you to talk to us  -  and we'll be listening.
I know that what we are embarking upon is change on a scale the disability sector won't have been confronted with previously.
We'll all be expected to think differently about what we do, and how we do it.
So there's a lot you need to think about.
But there's also a lot we need to do as the national government.
I've spoken often about my determination to get the NDIS done. You can see that in the legislation I brought into Parliament last week. Historic legislation that will change our nation forever.
But the Australian people want to know that those legal words will have meaning where they count  -  in funding.
So I can say this today: we are inscribing the NDIS in the laws of our nation. We will also inscribe the NDIS in the finances of our nation.
It is true we don't yet have the full details on our funding package beyond the $1 billion already committed.
We will need to find responsible savings across the Commonwealth's outlays.
That will require some tough decisions  -  but government is about setting priorities.
We can have responsible economic management and invest in the new services our nation needs.
This work is underway and will continue in earnest over the summer break and into the New Year.  And we will have more to say on this important question in the Budget ahead of the launch of the NDIS in the middle of next year.
We'll fund the NDIS in the same way we've funded landmark reforms like our historic pension increase and paid parental leave: by making tough decisions which also happen to be the right choices.
Just as we have done by means-testing the private health insurance rebate.
Just as we have done by closing fringe-benefits loopholes and getting rid of tax concessions on superannuation for high income earners.
Just as we have done by eliminating tax breaks for golden handshakes.
We also need to work respectfully with the States and Territories on what might be an appropriate share for them to contribute, and those discussions are underway right now.
But be in no doubt about the commitment I bring to the NDIS.
As the 12thbiggest economy in the world. We will fund it.
As a nation with a big and generous heart. We will fund it.
As a government that gets the big things done. We will fund it.
And if you hear people saying the NDIS is a cruel hoax, or we have jumped the gun, or we're raising un-meetable expectations, then those saying such negative, bitter words will simply be proving they are policy weaklings, who lack the capacity or will for a change this fundamental.
As a government of purpose and strong policy commitments, we won't be distracted by their weakness and negativity.
On this, the International Day of People with Disability, I tell you and the Australian people, we will deliver this historic reform and we will deliver in all its parts.
The legislation, the rules and the public sector framework. The Agreements with the States and Territories. The training and sector development. And, yes, the funding as well.
To those who say the country cannot afford this reform, I say we cannot afford to any longer tolerate a broken system. A system that condemns almost half a million of our fellow Australians to a kind of second-class citizenship.
NDIS is the right thing to do. Now is the right time to do it. And led by me, we will get this great thing done.
Thank you very much.


Parliament House, Canberra
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED 
In a formal sense, we gather as friends to acknowledge a single diplomatic event in the life of our two countries.
On December 21, 1972, in Paris, the Governments of Australia and China signed a joint communiqu.
A brief document  -  only five paragraphs  -  recognising One China and marking the beginning of a lasting friendship.
Yet in these diplomatic phrases lay a great act of daring.
For two decades, the Government of Australia set its face against recognition.
Yet one man stood firm all his political life  -  Gough Whitlam.
Gough went to China in 1971 not because it was easy, but because it was right.
The war in Vietnam was still raging and the weight of domestic opinion was against him.
But there was a certain grandeur in the courage of his journey.
Stephen Fitzgerald wrote recently that:
There is nothing in Australian foreign policy history to compare with that China visit. ... It was an expedition of great bravado and exposure but great political judgment and luck.
So in this Great Hall of the Australian people, we recall a meeting in another Great Hall of another great people, four decades ago.
It was a modest group  -  just six Australian members  -  but its impact on our foreign policy was profound.
The meeting with Premier Zhou Enlai was simple and gracious.
Two statesmen ready to embrace reality and open the doors upon an unlikely friendship.
Whitlam made that journey because he understood China was not a country to be feared.
But a nation seeking to right historic wrongs and engage more widely with the world.
For Australia, engagement with China reflected our more confident voice on the world stage.
Like the rest of the Whitlam venture, it was a time of optimism and new beginnings.
Four decades on, let us never forget how high were the stakes or how great was the prize being sought.
So tonight we honour those who were there.
We remember those who shared in the drama of those days but are no longer with us: Margaret Whitlam, Alan Renouf, Tom Burns, Mick Young.
Gough Whitlam cannot be with us in person but he is so very much in our hearts tonight.
So are Graham Freudenberg and Rex Patterson.
With us, though, are others who made this anniversary possible, including Stephen Fitzgerald, who became our first Ambassador to the People's Republic.
The extraordinary evolution of our relationship with China stands on the shoulders of this generation. 
Trade levels increased a thousandfold.
Great Chinese cities built with Australian iron ore.
Growing investment.
The tens of thousands of Chinese students and tourists visiting every year.
Today, we welcome China's rise into the rules-based global system.
We value deep relationships with China at every level.
And we understand that with such different cultures and histories, we will occasionally disagree on matters of policy and principle, yet will always express any disagreement with a sense of proportion and respect.
If this is a night for celebrating a remarkable past, it is also a night to look to the future.
For many years now, trade and people-to-people links have formed the bulk of our relationship.
As we approach the half-century of our diplomatic ties in the years to come, we must craft a new and deeper phase of our relationship.
That will mean stronger government-to-government links.
Stronger bilateral architecture to better coordinate the breadth of our modern relationship, including on foreign and strategic issues, the global economy and our trade and investment ties.
A comprehensive country strategy that gives greater clarity and ambition for our shared objectives for our relationship.
And a stronger diplomatic footprint in China, including a new consulate-general in Chengdu, which I announced earlier this year.
And my Government's commitment to a further post to follow later, in Shenyang.
I am the seventh Australian Prime Minister to have visited China since Gough Whitlam became the first in 1973.
And I hope to have the great honour to return next year as China's new leadership moves into place.
Much has changed in both our countries since our diplomatic relations began.
The Australia of 1972 was an insular land.
Asia was unfamiliar to many Australians, and China more so.
Today one in ten Australians speaks an Asian language and China is the largest source of migration to our shores.
The reality of living in Asia is more present to us than ever before.
China can look back on decades of reform and truly say that her people have never been more prosperous.
The land of Mao suits and bicycles has become the nation of shining cities and high-speed train networks.
When we see poverty halved and high school enrolments doubled, we are admiring of your success.
When we see China lead the world in renewable energy, we are confident in your future.
Forty years on, the work begun with such high hopes endures.
Our partnership is now of deep strategic importance to us both.
Our peoples are partners: working together still.
Creating wealth together.
Working for peace together.
And sharing a bright future together.
So tonight I pay tribute to a nation esteemed by Australia and honoured in the world.
Our true and enduring friend: The People's Republic of China.


Canberra
After all the days of preparation and anticipation, Christmas is finally here. 
However you and your family celebrate Christmas, whatever your own Christmas traditions are, I hope you have a wonderful day.
When I was a child, the run into Christmas always started with mum baking the Christmas pudding and cake.  Even though my mum worked part-time, she always found the time and was rightly proud of the results.
Today, getting ready for Christmas is different. 
For most, the days of mum being able to spend months at home preparing for Christmas are long gone.  Today, dads do more than simply go out and buy the tree.
Now, mums and dads, adult sons and daughters all play a role in scrambling to get ready but when we get to Christmas Day it is still a time of joy.But, even in a nation as blessed as ours, not everyone will have Christmas with family and friends.
For some, work doesn't stop on Christmas Day.  I remember when I was young we would wait for Dad's roster to come out so we'd know whether he would be with us on Christmas Day or at work. 
I am sure many families have done just that in the run up to this Christmas.
So to those who need to work and to their families, we say thanks  -  thanks to the police and the firefighters, the ambulance officers and the nurses, the emergency personnel, the churches, charities and volunteers, to every one we can't do without and to their families.
To our troops abroad, we honour and admire you and I hope your families know how grateful we are to you this time of year.
For some, the joy of Christmas is marked by sadness. For me this will be the first Christmas without my father and I will be thinking of him and of my fellow Australians who will be without a loved one for the first time this year. 
I will be especially thinking of our military families who have lost a loved one.  Your nation pays tribute to their service and your sacrifice.
For some, Christmas can be a time of loneliness and isolation. To those without family, I say please reach out a hand and in this wonderful country you will find a hand of friendship reaching back out to you.
Whatever 2012 has brought you, I hope this Christmas brings you a time of rest, reflection and peace. 
A time to renew our sense of purpose and unity.
A time to look forward to the future with hope and confidence.
A merry and safe Christmas to you all.


Adelaide
Every year, on the anniversary of the Proclamation of a great free colony, we gather to renew our spirit of unity and confidence in this great free state.
More than 170 on from the brave words of our worthy Founders, this is a rare and important day, when our civic leaders publicly reflect on what this city of Adelaide and this state of South Australia mean to our nation and our people.
Today, our words turn to our city of Hindmarsh and Gawler and Light; of our State of dissent, innovation and achievement.
But for me, this time of year, here in Adelaide, is one of personal reflections.
This is the city where I grew up.
This is the city of my childhood memories.
This is the city my father and mother chose to be their home in 1966.
This is the city where my family will make its future. 
These public and private reflections are brought together for me here at Glenelg every year on the 28th: because in his ships Hindmarsh brought more than British custom and law, more than a Government to establish; he brought men and women and their families.
In the years that followed, it was the resilience and hard work of those families that built the city and the state we are proud to call our own today.
And we recall too the suffering and the resilience of families who had lived and loved here before Hindmarsh even sailed.
So in renewing the spirit of unity and confidence in which we govern, let us equally renew our determination to govern for all our people: for the families of every shape and size who will build the city and state in the years and decades to come.
Our task as leaders is to know how family life is changing today and to make family life easier for our people as it changes.
Not only to raise living standards for families, but to meet their changing needs.
Each year when I come to Adelaide, I get to celebrate the next step my niece and nephew have taken in their adult lives - even though it feels not so long ago we talked about their favourite teachers and school friends.
Each year my parents have got older too and this year was our first without Dad. 
Like so many families today, my family knows what it is to wrestle with the options and choices ahead for an ageing parent.
With the annual Christmas trek home, I have come to reflect not only on the changes that come with age but the changes that come to family life through changes in society over the years.
So as we govern for our people, these are changes we must help families navigate too.
The juggling of demands, the changes in expectation: families who will swap shifts and arrange holidays to care for the kids, but perhaps hope at most for a few days where everyone is together at once; the families who spend these days each year sharing care and negotiating where children will spend Christmas morning and Christmas afternoon, or who will be together on New Year's Eve.
So much has changed since 1836, since John Hindmarsh stood near here, as His Excellency Governor and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province of South Australia and as a Knight of the Royal Hanoverian Guelphic Order, to call for order and quietness, industry and sobriety.
Much has changed in the way we live even in the years I have been coming here to Glenelg to address this day.
What doesn't change is that the future of the city, the state, the country, relies on the hard work and resilience of the families who live here.
What doesn't change is that building the future requires leadership, facing up to tough decisions, optimism and unity.



Australians enjoy ringing in the New Year. It's a time of fun and celebration, of optimism and of making New Year's resolutions.
As we mark the start of 2013 we have so much to be thankful for.
We live in the best country in the world.
We enjoy the benefits of peace and security.
Unlike the rest of the world, our economy has proved itself to be resilient.
We are improving health care and aged care.
We are tackling climate change and protecting our environment.
We have a clear plan for our nation's future in this century of growth and change in the region in which we live.
Australia is a wonderful country.  But even for our great nation, every year brings its challenges.
Let me be clear about the ones that confront our nation in 2013.
Our world faces ongoing security challenges.
In this year, as a member of the United Nations Security Council, we will be involved in addressing pressing problems like Iran's nuclear program and the missile tests of North Korea. 
We will also continue our difficult and dangerous mission against global terrorism in Afghanistan.
Five years on from the global financial crisis and despite some progress in the US in recent weeks, problems there and in Europe still threaten global growth. 
Once again we will need to manage our economy carefully to keep creating jobs and economic growth.
And, as always, our future is not assured. We have work to do to ensure that today's children enjoy lives of better opportunity, better health and higher living standards than we do today. 
But as we face these challenges we can enter this year with the confidence that comes from having the right policies and capabilities to ensure we succeed in a changing and sometimes worrying world.
Friends, amongst the many New Year's resolutions made, we should make one for our nation. 
Let's start 2013 with a resolution to embrace a renewed national spirit of unity and confidence.
We have much to do and we will do it best by working together.
I am determined that 2013 will be the year when we together write the next great chapter in our nation's history. A chapter about jobs, opportunity, a better education for our children, a better deal for Australians with disability, and that we do so with a renewed Australian spirit.
Happy New Year. 


Kirribilli House, Sydney
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
Acknowledgements omitted 
This isn't a day for really big speeches. It's a day to come together and to talk about what you've achieved through having the Royal Commission start, and how we can work together to maximise the opportunity that now flows from the Royal Commission having been established.
I'm really aware looking out on this group of people that I'm looking out on a group of people who over years  -  indeed decades  -  have fought for justice for people who were abused as children.
I know that people here have raised their voices time after time after time to say that our nation has to face up to the consequences of what happened.
We have to shine a light on it, it's going to be painful, it's going to be hard, but we've got to do that so that we can learn for the future.
So yesterday's announcement is really a tribute to you for having sustained that campaign over many, many long years.
And I know that there are a lot of people here, individually and as representatives of their groups, who probably thought they would never see this day.
It's probably been very, very hard for many long days to sustain the enthusiasm for campaigning and calling for our nation to really look at child sexual abuse, to look at what happened to people in institutions, to be prepared to listen to the voices of individuals and treat them with dignity and respect as they tell their stories.
And then to learn from that to see what we can do to keep children safer in the future.
So a big tribute to you. We wouldn't be here and we wouldn't have made yesterday's announcement without you. So thank you.
And we can mark all of the work that's happened to date, but I'm actually going to call on you to keep doing a little bit more.
Establishing the Royal Commission is the start of something really big, really emotional, really hard and a lot of people are going to need a lot of support as we go through that process.
So, I can't promise you that there are easy days ahead. I suspect that there are some very traumatic days ahead as people come and tell what happened to them, many of them for the very first time, many of them with a real sense of trauma and emotion as they do it.
But I'm hoping that out of those hard days, can come some really special things.
One, the healing that comes with recognition. I think it's really important that people get the message that we want to hear their story. I know you can carry that message for us to the so many hundreds and thousands that you're in contact with.
I think us saying we want to hear from you after many years of people being shunned and spurned and having doors slammed in their face, to tell those individuals it's your time now to tell your story, I hope that that in and of itself brings some healing.
And then the recommendations of the Royal Commission using all of that information I hope brings some healing to individuals and to us as a nation.
But to get there we're going to need to stick together through what will be at times a very hard process.
So, thank you for everything you've done to date, and we're certainly looking forward to working with you as the Royal Commission swings into action and works its way over three years  -  maybe a bit more time will be necessary  -  but over three years to get our nation some recommendations for change.
Thanks for coming this morning. It's a bit with a sense of a spirit of let's come together and mark what's been achieved through your long years of work with the Royal Commission being established.
And let's commit to doing a lot more work together as the Royal Commission works through.


Sydney
As I think is well known, I love visiting schools. I love visiting schools so much I've contrived to manage to visit one during school holidays. So thanks to everybody who has made that possible.
To our wonderful principal who came off leave to make sure that we could be here today and to our school kids who without any grudging sense have come back to school to participate in this Life Education program. Thank you very much for being here. I know you had other choices today, it being school holidays so it's good to see the kids back at school.
We live in a remarkable age, with many modern opportunities and many challenges. And when we are talking about what happens on the online world with the internet, where we are with the digital age in which we live, we should never forget the opportunities it is giving us.
It's giving us an opportunity to transform education as we roll out the National Broadband Network. So kids in school can get the best of curriculum around the world. They can hook into the best teaching around the world. They can leave school having developed friendships with children in Japan or Korea or China.
They can use that online experience to help them learn a language in our region. They can take all of that with them into the world of work, as well as the benefits of staying in touch with friends through social media.
So this new age and our rollout of the National Broadband Network is creating new opportunities for our kids and our schools, just as it's creating new opportunities for businesses and new opportunities for people to stay in touch.
Ask anybody who regularly Skypes with a friend overseas or grandmum or granddad overseas about how this is transforming our world and the way in which we live.
But with all of those opportunities, there are actually new risks as well and we need to face up to those new risks.
We have taught our kids generation after generation about how to be streetwise and how to face up to stranger danger. If I had a dollar for every time my mother lectured me on the way out about not getting in cars with people you didn't know and not talking to strangers, I would be a far wealthier woman.
So generation after generation we have taught our kids about the dangers that they might encounter in the world that they inhabit and live in.
Now we've got to teach our kids about new dangers in a new environment in the cyber world.
We know many parents worry a great deal about cyber bullying, about the kind of bullying that follows you from the school gates into your home, that never gives you a break, that is there even when you are on school holidays or weekends, that is there even in the middle of the night because kids wake up and check their devices.
They do worry about that cyber bullying and the impact it has on their kids.
They worry too about the predators, the adults who are there, using the internet for their purposes. Pretending perhaps to be children, asking to meet children in the real world.
And I would have to say I was a little bit startled by that statistic that you gave us about how many children responded to your survey saying that they had gone and met someone in the real world that they had first met online and didn't know any other way.
And we don't need to draw too many word pictures for all of us to intuitively understand all of the risks that can come with that happening.
So there are dangers out there. And that's why this program is so important, and I am so pleased to be here to launch the new online cyber safety module that has been developed by Life Education and by McAfee. We really do thank them for it.
It will help our kids learn and I've had an insight into that sitting in the Life Education Australia van as we've worked through some of the things that kids go through in this program. And thank you very much for showing us how all of that works.
But it's very sensible, very practical information about who you would share the most secret and sensitive things with, like your password, as opposed to who you would share things with that you are more happy to have in a broader group, and how you make those judgments between what you would share with absolute strangers, what you would only share with your parent, what you would share with close friends, what you would share with people at school.
The really practical judgments that kids are faced with every day.
So I'm very pleased to be here to launch this online learning. It is going to be taken out to more than 600,000 children in 3,500 schools. I think that's truly remarkable and I want to congratulate everybody who will be involved in that process.
It's very important that our children in this modern world understand all of the opportunities, but also the risks that can come with the new environment in which we live.
I want to take this opportunity to talk about two other matters associated with safety and security.
We know that some of the risks with the online world aren't just risks for children. Through social media, we've seen some of the pressures that can be brought to bear by an environment in which unfortunately people with the benefit of anonymity sometimes say the cruellest and harshest things things to each other.
The trolling that happens, the bullying that happens  -  and that happens to children but also happens to adults. It's true, I think part of human nature, that people will say things that are sharper and harder under the cover of anonymity than they would say to someone's face.
And we see that in the online environment every day.
This has caused a lot of problems for people as they have felt the pressures of being bullied on Facebook or through Twitter or in other social media environments. I think we can all imagine what that feels like.
I think we all know what it feels like to be in a room of people, perhaps you can remember back to a day in your school days when you felt humiliated in front of the classroom or in front of your sporting team and that happened in front of ten, twenty, thirty other people.
Many people are living with the feeling of humiliation in front of thousands, indeed tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people because of the way that these social media environments work.
So that is a cause for concern and it has brought pressures on to individuals.
So I'm pleased that today we will be releasing new guidelines for social networking sites which commits companies such as Facebook and Google, Yahoo! and Microsoft to work in accordance with these protocols. And these companies have agreed to make this commitment.
This commitment is about protocols and guidelines which sets out clear information about the acceptable use of these environments, education and awareness-raising about what is acceptable and not acceptable behaviour online.
And a single point of contact for government, as well as a point of contact for further information.
I think this is a step forward by these giants of social media. We need to see a further step forward. We need to see Twitter also agreeing to use these protocols and guidelines because it is on Twitter that so much of the damage has been done by trolls.
And I do call on Twitter to replicate what has been done by other major social media companies, and embrace these guidelines.
This is part of a continuing package of work from the Government, including our cyber safety help button, which more than 660,000 people have downloaded so they can have an app that gets them help if they are feeling uncomfortable with what is happening online.
So this is an important development, not only because it will help keep our kids safe, but it also will make a difference, I believe, for the way in which adults engage with social media and some of the harm we've seen come from social media.
Today in my view is all about safety and security: safety and security in a new environment, in a modern world. Unfortunately the online environment is not the only safety challenge we face.
And standing here with Julie Owens in this part of the world, I do want to take this opportunity to make a comment or two about some other safety questions.
We've seen overnight yet again a report of another shooting in Sydney's south-west. Unfortunately news of shootings in Sydney's west and south-west has become all too common.
We are seeing reports of violence in suburbs in Brisbane.
Now people who make their lives in these suburbs, in these parts of our great nation, deserve to be able to get about their business, to raise their families in an environment that is safe and secure and peaceful.
Australians overwhelmingly go about doing the right thing every day. They get up early, they work hard and their biggest aspiration is to make a good life for themselves and their children, and they deserve to do that in an environment where they can feel safe and secure.
So whilst these questions are always principally for State Governments and for our police authorities, they do concern me. It's not my intention as Prime Minister to try and step into the shoes of State Government. That wouldn't be right.
State Governments needs to get about their responsibilities and I'm not going to be running commentary on how Premier O'Farrell or Premier Newman or indeed anybody else is responding to this violence.
I also do want to congratulate the police. They do an incredibly tough job in very difficult circumstances and often don't get much thanks as they do it.
But I do think that at this time, all levels of government need to be doing everything that can be done to address this violence.
So in that spirit I have asked Jason Clare, our Minister for Home Affairs, to prepare for Cabinet and for Government some options to address this violence and to explore the limits of the Federal Government's legal and constitutional responsibilities in this area.
What we can do, we will be working through that because I am very concerned about the circumstances for communities in Sydney's west and more broadly.
If I can go back to where I started at today's event, I do want to thank everybody who is involved.
I want to thank those people who have shown such dedication to making a difference for our kids. I suspect when people first conceived of some of this idea that there was plenty of fashionable advice that that wouldn't ever work, you are going to take a van around the country and do what?
And here we have a real demonstration today that it can work and can make a difference to kids. And when I can be told sitting in that van that upper primary school-age kids sit engaged for an hour-and-a-half in this module of learning, and that they want to know about it and they want to take all of the lessons with them, I think that's a remarkable thing to learn.
Many Australians would be shaking their heads in wonderment that kids can be engaged for an hour-and-a-half in anything. So well done to you for achieving that and I'm very proud to be here today and to be associated with this launch.
Thank you.


Canberra
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
In Coonabarabran recently I met a woman who told me with tears in her eyes that she had lost her home.
The next thing she said was, but the family's all safe and that's what matters'.
Words from the heart and words of wisdom.
When you have faced the worst, the recognition that life, safety, security is what matters most is sharp.
As Prime Minister, for our nation, I have to keep that recognition sharp every day.
To join realism with patriotism and to act to keep our nation secure in the modern world.
Our national security is and will always be the most basic expression of our sovereignty.
Through the work of national security, we secure our borders, protect our people and pursue our interests in the world.
Like every country, those interests often overlap with those of allies, neighbours and partners.
But ultimately, our national interests are distinctively our own  -  pursued for our own reasons, driven by our values and dictated by no other.
So conscious of the weight of the responsibility and conscious too of the need to continually refresh our thinking in this time of change, I today launch Strong and Secure: A Strategy for Australia's National Security.
This National Security Strategy is Australia's first. I have decided that our nation must have such a strategy for three clear reasons.
First, because national security is the most fundamental task of government.
Second, because we are transitioning from one decade, the decade of 9/11, to a post 9/11 era where some risks and challenges endure and others are evolving rapidly.
Third, because national security absorbs some eight per cent of what the Federal Government spends on behalf of the Australian people, and the priorities for that expenditure should be defined.
For each of these reasons, clarity is demanded in our strategic thinking and actions.
Today, I will outline that thinking and those actions.
On September 11, 2001, in those dreadful short moments when we watched the twin towers collapse half a globe away, we all learned what it feels like to have your assumptions about your life and your security ripped away.
Even as we mourned our losses, it was clear to lay people and security professionals alike that the world had changed in an immediate and fundamental manner.
We entered what Allan Gyngell has described as the national security decade' but what could also be described as the 9/11 Decade.
A decade in which we also lived through the Bali attacks, the Iraq war and Afghanistan, where the fight continues.
A decade in which we were called to mount missions in East Timor and Solomon Islands.
In the wake of 9/11, new anti-terrorism laws were introduced and our overall intelligence budgets tripled.
Terrorism dramatically changed the way national security was conceptualised and the way it was undertaken.
It broadened our view of which agencies across government contribute to our nation's security.
It keenly highlighted the need for a joined up national security community  -  within and between intelligence agencies and across the fields of intelligence, law enforcement and border protection.
The private sector and the wider community became closer partners in achieving this endeavour.
We looked at how we could maintain cohesion and harmony in a multicultural, multi-faith society placed under a period of tension and strain.
We understood that 9/11 was an attack on our values and way of life and so in responding we carefully weighed what needed to be done for our security with our values of democracy, fairness, respect for individuals, their rights and freedoms.
Adding it all together, we carved out a new understanding of our national security.
Australia's responses to this period of transformation culminated in Prime Minister Rudd's National Security Statement in 2008.
This Statement outlined, for the first time, a pathway of binding the detailed and diverse work of the national security community into a coherent, coordinated whole.
The Statement recognised the need for even closer integration of our national security effort, and the modernisation of Australia's national security structures.
As a result, the Government appointed our country's first National Security Adviser to improve strategic direction within the national security community and across the public sector.
We introduced better coordination of budgets across national security agencies.
We established this institution, the National Security College, to educate Australia's current and future national security leaders.
And since the galvanising events of September 11 and Bali, our partners and Australia have secured some significant successes.
Osama Bin Laden is dead.
Al Qaeda's senior leadership is fractured.
Jemaah Islamiah has been decimated in our region.
Here at home, numerous terrorist plots have been thwarted, and 23 convictions have resulted from the prosecution of those who planned such attacks.
Afghanistan will soon take full responsibility for its own security, with transition in Uruzgan on track to be completed by the end of this year and by the end of 2014 for Afghanistan as a whole.
There have been other changes since Mr Rudd's statement.
Our work in Iraq has been completed.
In East Timor, our security presence has been drawn down after almost 13 years of involvement.
Likewise, the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands is transitioning to a law enforcement assistance mission.
At the same time, the effects of the Global Financial Crisis  - only then beginning to unfold in 2008  -  are now very clear.
We can see that years of fiscal stringency lie ahead for Australia and for our allies and partners in the United States, the UK and Europe.
These changes and continuities inform the National Security Strategy I launch today.
The National Security Strategy is an open statement to the Australian community, our business sector and to domestic and international partners.
Our plans and intentions are clear for all to see.
The Strategy identifies our national security objectives and surveys our national security outlook.
It sets out what we judge to be the key risks to our security and describes the policies, institutions and capabilities  -  the key pillars  -  which protect us.
The National Security Strategy will also inform priority-setting in a time of fiscal constraint.
This will ensure we maximise the return on the considerable investment made by taxpayers in our national security efforts.
It will also help bring our national security agencies closer together, providing greater coordination of effort as we meet the challenges of the future.
Importantly, the Strategy builds on the changes heralded in the 2008 National Security Statement and complements the Asian Century White Paper and the forthcoming Defence White Paper.
The Asian Century White Paper is the roadmap for how Australia can thrive in an Asian Century replete with opportunities.
But it also made clear that our national objectives in the region can only be realised if there is sustainable security in Asia.
The National Security Strategy therefore charts the course for Australia to play its part in achieving that aim  -  a secure nation in a secure region.
This Strategy is being released as Australia enters a new eraof national security imperatives.
I offer you three intersecting conclusions about the national security imperatives of the next decade and consequently the risks our nation will face.
First, our principal national security focus will be on our own region, as the global economic and strategic centre-of-gravity continues to move east, bringing great opportunities but also risks and challenges that must be managed.
Second, it will be an era in which the behaviour of states, not non-state actors, will be the most important driver and shaper of Australia's national security thinking.
Third, it will be an era in which diplomacy will be critical as we and our friends and partners in the region strive to master the complexities and new dynamics of a multipolar world.
The key risks that we see ahead include:
 The traditional and familiar risks that nations have always faced such as espionage and foreign interference,state-based conflict, and coercion affecting our interests;
 The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, specifically Iran's nuclear program and North Korea's continuing missile and nuclear programs, which are serious threats to world peace and regional stability; and
 Instability in developing and fragile states.
While understanding and managing state-based risks will require renewed effort, this does not mean that terrorism is defeated or we should ignore the malign intent of non-state actors.
Therefore, the National Security Strategy also identifies as clear risks:
 Terrorism and violent extremism; and An increasing burden from serious and organised crime.
Recent events in Mali and the terrible murders in Algeria remind us that terrorism remains an enduring threat
Global terrorism showed us on 9/11 that it has the capacity to surprise us and surpass our worst fears.
It could do so again, so we will always be vigilant.
And as we transition in Afghanistan, our commitment to our goal of ensuring it is never again a safe haven for terrorism remains undiminished.
As a result we are making a significant commitment to funding the Afghan National Security Forces after 2014, and we will make an ongoing contribution to their training.
The Government will also consider a contribution to a Special Forces counter-terrorism mission in Afghanistan, but under the right mandate.
In fighting organised crime, we work at the interface between national security and domestic policing issues.
For example, our current work at Australia's borders to stop and seize illegal guns matters for community safety.
Communities, such as those in Sydney's West, rightly want to know every level of government is acting on their concerns about community safety and we are working together.
In this digital era we also face the new and growing threat from state and non-state actors of malicious cyber activity which poses such dangers to government, to business and to individuals.
So this too is a risk clearly identified in the Strategy.
Understanding these risks clarifies the strategic environment and the likely contours of the decade of the ahead.
But in commissioning this Strategy, I did not want this merely to be a list of risks and challenges, or a statement of doctrine.
I also wanted clear priorities to direct Government activity and resources in a real and concrete way.
Accordingly, the National Security Strategy identifies three specific areas where the Government will be dedicating increased effort over the next five years.
First, effective partnerships.
In an increasingly complex and interconnected strategic environment, we can only succeed by working smart and by working together.
Working smart means clear priorities.
Defining those priorities is the purpose of this Strategy and I today commit to updating this strategy every five years or sooner, should events require it.
Under the auspices of this Strategy, we will continue to refine our analysis of national security risks and further improve our coordinated national security budget process.
We will also develop a National Security Capability Plan to complement the Defence Capability Plan.
In pursuit of clear priorities, it is easier to reach out and include others in the effort.
By others, I not only mean all parts of the Federal Government, but also our colleagues in the States and Territories, foreign governments and non-governmental partners, particularly business.
So, in pursuit of partnerships, my message to our national security community is: if you see a silo, dig it up.
Not just because a silo mentality constrains thinking but it also risks wasting resources.
The National Security Decade was a time of rapid ramp-up in resources.
Now, inevitably, we are in a period of consolidation and we need to get the most value out of every dollar expended.
Therefore our national security arrangements must adapt and respond, harnessing information, ideas and capabilities from all sources and prioritising our spending in a clear-headed way.
The second identified area for increased effort is cyber security.
As we roll out the National Broadband Network, we are deploying a more sophisticated focus on cyber security.
Australia is an attractive target for a range of malicious cyber actors, from politically-motivated hackers and criminal networks to nation-states.
This not only has the potential to affect governments but businesses and the community alike.
For the public sector, we must ensure that our most important networks are some of the hardest to compromise in the world.
But government alone cannot develop a secure and safe digital environment.
We must continue to work closely with industry and international partners to develop a set of global norms' for online behaviour.
The Internet must remain open but also be secure.
The Government has already committed substantial funding and additional effort to strengthen our cyber capabilities, including $1.46 billion out to 2020 to strengthen our most sensitive networks.
I have also established the Office of the Cyber Policy Coordinator within my Department to provide leadership and coordination on this important issue.
In the same spirit, tomorrow I will formally announce the development, by the end of this year, of a new Australian Cyber Security Centre
This will be a world-class facility combining existing cyber security capabilities across the Attorney-General's Department, Defence, ASIO, the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Crime Commission in a single location.
It will provide Australia with an expanded and more agile response capability to deal with all cyber issues  -  be they related to government or industry, crime or security.
Importantly it will also create a hub for greater collaboration with the private sector, State and Territory governments and international partners to combat the full breadth of cyber threats.
Malicious cyber activity will likely be with us for many decades to come, so we must be prepared for a long, persistent fight.
Perhaps nothing better characterises the National Security Strategy than the third of our key focus areas, enhanced regional engagement.
This acknowledges the shift in the global strategic and economic centre-of-gravity to our region and the need for security as the indispensable foundation of prosperity.
Asia's rise is, of course, no surprise for Australia.
As far back as 1989 the Garnaut White Paper served notice, if any was needed, that Australia's future lay in Asia.
Indeed, our engagement with the region can be traced back to the Chifley government's support for Indonesian independence in the 1940s and the commerce agreement with Japan in 1957.
We have a long tradition of engagement to draw on.
But Asia is changing as economic growth leads to shifts in the established strategic order.
We are seeing rising government incomes enabling many states to modernise their defence forces with more advanced capabilities.
At the same time, population growth and rising wealth levels are putting pressure on energy, water and food resources.
All this means our strategic landscape is becoming more crowded and complex.
But it also remains true that it is the relationship between China and the United States that more than any other will determine the temperature of regional affairs in coming decades.
We remain optimistic about the ability of China and the United States to manage change in the region, but their relationship inevitably brings with it strategic competition as China's global interests expand.
None of these developments of themselves make major power conflict inevitable but they do make the consequences of any conflict more far-reaching and dangerous.
They raise the cost of any miscalculation that may occur in a range of regional flashpoints such as North Korea, the Taiwan Straits, the South China and East China seas or India-Pakistan.
And they underline the need to build a regional order in Asia which can manage strategic change peacefully.
The remarkable growth we see in Asia could not have happened without an environment of relative peace and stability.
Continuing and deepening that climate of relative peace and stability is at the forefront of Australia's national security agenda.
Indeed, nothing is more important in Australia's security outlook.
That is why last year's Asian Century White Paper made it very clear that we need to construct
a peace in which all the region's countries have a voice in its future, which is guided by established rules and transparent behaviour and in which decisions are taken without threats of the use of force or other forms of intimidation.
In other words, we must strive to shape a secure international environment that builds trust and is built on trust.
It is the only the way we will continue to enjoy the growth and prosperity that has so transformed our region and its future.
In preparing for the future, Australians need to be confident that we can also shape that future.
The post-war period has taught us just how successful we can be as a creative middle power with links to the old and new worlds, backed by credible military and economic strength.So Australia has a key role to play in building patterns of cooperation and trust, in the Asia-Pacific and in the wider world.
This understanding is an enduring pillar of Australia's approach to national security.
We know that no single relationship, arm of government or multilateral body will deliver the understanding, trust and action required to secure a peaceful and stable Asian Century.
It is more complex than that but I am optimistic of our ability to manage this complexity.
After all, Australia is the world's twelfth largest economy.
We have a place on the G20 and have secured its hosting.
We now hold a non-permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, putting us at the centre of international cooperation on peace and security.
We have long championed a multilateral, rules-based order in our region in which disputes are resolved peacefully, without the use or threat of force or coercion.
We support efforts to build a stronger East Asia Summit in which all countries have a voice and which can help manage regional strategic change and build confidence.
We are helping strengthen defence-to-defence dialogue through the ASEAN Defence Ministers plus meeting.
We support our ally the United States in continuing to play its role as a stabilising force in the region.
We are building deeper relationships with China, Indonesia, India, Japan and Korea, amongst others.
We will increase our diplomatic footprint abroad, and increase the expertise of our professionals working in the Asian region.
Our diplomatic efforts are complemented by an aid program that focuses on the Asia-Pacific and a strong network of law enforcement and intelligence relationships.
Importantly, Australia will continue to maintain one of the strongest military capabilities in our region.
Let this be clear: in a time of fiscal constraint, we will keep the Australian Defence Force strong.
Our level of defence expenditure will ensure that Australia remains one of the top 15 nations for absolute defence spending, and second only to the United States on a per capita basis among the G7 countries plus China.
Our ADF will have the best people with the right equipment for the challenges of the Asian Century.
As we transition from East Timor, Solomon Islands and Afghanistan, our Defence Force will fix its sights on extending and deepening relationships across the region.
This will include joint military exercises and high-level military exchanges with China, reflecting in defence the cooperative spirit that exists in the other aspects of our friendship.
A strong nation will possess a credible defence force.
A wise nation will work hard never to require its use.
The 9/11 decade is ending and new one is taking its place.
That's why I launch this National Security Strategy today.
As an active middle power with global interests, Australia will work hard to anticipate threats and protect the nation.
Nothing in our grasp will be left to chance.
We will shape the world in our interests and values not just respond to events as they arise.
We will ensure that Australia remains secure at home and strong in the world.
We will keep our nation safe.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
PM: Thank you very much.
I can see this is going to take a bit of neck-craning from me to be able to include everybody as I speak, but I'm very pleased to be here today and I'm here with the Minister for Defence, Stephen Smith, and of course with the Secretary of Defence too, Dennis is with us as well.
I've never been here before as you know so it's a great opportunity to come and say hello and a great opportunity to say thank you too.
I've chosen today to come here to the Defence Signals Directorate, to you, because yesterday we launched our National Security Strategy.
There's no more important role for government, for any of us, than keeping our nation safe.
And that means we always have to have the strategic analysis which is up with the times. We've always got to make sure that we are doing the deep thinking necessary to guide our national security efforts.
And we've done that work and put it into the National Security Strategy, which we want people across the Australian Public Service, but across the Australian community too, to understand and absorb.
As we've looked at the challenges ahead, the challenges in the next decade, the decade beyond 9/11, we have identified cyber security as a principal challenge.
Which is why it's been a great opportunity for me to meet with and better understand some of the work that you do down in the pit, to use the terminology, the Cyber Security Operations Centre, and thank you to the staff down there for their time this morning in explaining their world to me as best they could with television cameras rolling.
The importance of cyber security isn't just reinforced by a visit to the pit.
We've also reinforced it from yesterday's National Security Strategy where we have said it will be a key focus of the work ahead and that we will by the end of this year launch a new Australian cyber security centre which will bring together people across all arms and agencies of government who work on cyber security.
An important initiative because cyber security encompasses so much, so much in terms of threats, the threats that we see from state and non-state actors, and so much in terms of the security of our community.
Not only government networks but business networks; critical networks across our community.
I was joking with Stephen Smith as I walked round. I'm someone who sits with a Prime Minister &amp; Cabinet computer on my desk and when you haven't used it for a while it flicks to the rotating screen saver, one of which is a message on cyber security which does say in a very pithy way That Nigerian prince does not need your help.
A message for community members but of course what you do here is much more sophisticated.
Can I say more broadly to all of the staff that work here at DSD, all of the big range of work that you do here, cyber security and so much beyond, thank you for the work that you do to keep our nation safe.
Thank you for every effort you make and efforts that we can't thank you for, one success at a time.
We're never going to go out there and say Guess what DSD has done today, they've done a really good job.' We never go out there and say that for very good reason.
But even when we can't go out there and say that, I'm really conscious that the work that you do here is a pivotal part of our national security efforts, it's a pivotal part of keeping our nation safe. And thank you very much for doing it.
I do also want to congratulate you on having, I think, the most succinct and powerful mission statement of any of our arms of government: Reveal their secrets, protect our own.'
Thank you for the clarity of that vision and that statement and thank you for living up to the mission that that vision says.
That is what we need to do, reveal their secrets and protect our own.
So it's a good opportunity to be here. Obviously I can't be here every day with the Minister for Defence, but I do want to say to you every day we are conscious of the work you do, of the efforts that are happening from this place.
So thank you very much.


The Lodge, Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We're here to honour every finalist, everyone who is here. Some very excited people who are part of the Australian of the Year process.
You all should be very proud of yourselves and you are very welcome here.
And if you needed to explain to anyone what Australia is, what our self-image is, then perhaps the easiest way to do it would be to bring them to this room and to ask them to look around these faces as I am doing now.
Because by looking across this crowd, you are seeing the diversity of Australia, you are seeing the best of Australia.
People who have made contributions and who have been honoured for those contributions by their communities; people that their fellow Australians wanted to put forward to be acknowledged.
And certainly diversity is the word. We are looking at a crowd of people from representatives of our First Australians, to people who made Australia home during their lifetime.
We're talking about people who have had distinguished careers and can point to a lifetime of achievement, and people whose lifetime of achievement still lies in front of them.
We're talking about people who always go that extra yard to make a difference to their fellow Australians and their community and we want to acknowledge you for it.
So it is truly great to be able to welcome everybody here and to once again participate in the remarkable set of events that end up giving us the Australian of the Year, the Senior Australian of the Year, the Young Australian of the Year and our Local Hero.
Whenever I get the opportunity to go walking in Canberra  -  it's not all that often but sometimes I do get the opportunity  -  and one of the best places to walk is past the plinths on the edge of the lake that honour each Australian of the Year.
It tells you a story of our nation; it tells you about the many ways in which people can serve our nation.
Whether it's being in the military, being in the arts, being successful in business, being a philanthropist, being a scientist, being a farmer; the many ways in which people can contribute to our nation.
This year we are adding to that rich history.
So I'm very much looking forward to tonight's event followed by the concert.
I know that I will see you all there and that there will be a real air of excitement as we go into the final announcements of the Australian of the Year, the Senior Australian of the Year, the Young Australian of the Year and the Local Hero.
But one of the best things about this process is how it brings people together.
I was talking to Gilly before and one of the things that we remarked upon is that this really does create an esprit de corps between a very special group of Australians that endures as people leave these events and go back to their lives.
A very important thing for the future.
So it's with a real sense of welcome that we have you here for this morning tea.
Adam will say a few words too and then please feel free to just wander and enjoy.
That's what it's all for.
Thank you very much.


Parliament House, Canberra
PM: Thank you very much.
Over the past half century we've learnt to celebrate our national day in a very special way: by singling out some of our fellow citizens who absolutely embody the best of what it means to be Australian.
Tonight four names will be added to the roll of honour as Australians of the Year: a roll of men and women who collectively tell our nation's story.
Some of the Australians of the Year can trace their connection with this land back countless centuries, like the Yunupingu brothers, Neville Bonner and Mick Dodson.
Others, like Fred Hollows, Gus Nossal and John Yu, were born elsewhere.
But all of them, every Australian of the Year, has helped shape our nation.
They've helped made a nation of men and women who take on the world's greatest medical and scientific challenges; a nation that excels brilliantly in the sports and the arts; who extends a hand of healing and friendship to those doing it tough.
The men and women we honour are our tall poppies, who have grown high in achievement and stature under our very bright southern skies.
Through the Australian of the Year awards, we don't cut them down, we lift them up; honouring in them all that is best about our nation, our values and ourselves.
I warmly congratulate the 2013 Australian of the Year award winners and commend them to the nation; a nation they've done so much to enrich and so much to serve.


Canberra
I begin by honouring the traditional owners of this country upon which we gather, and in the same spirit of friendship, I greet all indigenous Australians.
On this day above all days, I honour and recognise your ancient cultures, your unbroken story of pride and endurance, and your continuing connection to this land.
And in a spirit of reconciliation, I pledge my untiring efforts to build a nation in which all Australians walk in dignity and equality together.On this day of celebration and affirmation, I acknowledge the outstanding work of the National Australia Day Council in bringing Australia Day festivities to all Australians.
And I extend a very warm welcome to everyone gathered here today in our national capital in the centenary year of its founding.
I greet those of you about to become citizens and those who have come in support.
Not just friends and family but those local residents and visitors who have chosen to celebrate their Australia Day by sharing your first Australia Day.
In 1949, my great predecessor, Prime Minister Chifley, officiated at the inaugural Australian citizenship ceremony.
It was held here in Canberra, and seven aspiring Australians read the new pledge that swore them to bear faithful and true allegiance' to King George VI and his successors.
Today in 430 ceremonies across Australia, a record number of people  -  more than 17,000  -  are taking the pledge of citizenship.
The words of the pledge have changed and so has our nation.
Since that day in 1949 more than four million people, drawn from every nation in the world, have chosen to swear their loyalty to Australia.
And I am proud to be one of those four million.
As migrants, we did not just adopt a new country.
We helped transform and enrich it.
And together, as new Australians and old, we made this experiment work.
My colleague, Penny Wong, has used the term muscular multiculturalism to describe how it was done.
In this concept of multiculturalism, our nation is not just a patchwork of identities and backgrounds.
Ours is a land where flag and oath, mateship and fairness, work and opportunity, are open to all and embraced by all.
In this way, our multiculturalism is revealed not as an ornament, but as an organising principle not as a decorative feature of our society but as a decisive element in our national success.
This is true nation-building  -  firm in the faith that Australia's best days lie ahead and firmly determined to make those days possible through the loyal, productive lives we lead and the national purpose we share.
As migrants we have come from many places and on many pathways.
Whether yours was a flight across the Tasman that lasted hours or a flight from persecution that lasted years, those journeys measured in time and distance are over now.
A new journey  -  a journey of the heart and spirit  -  can begin.
It begins in the words of citizenship today and it continues in a lifetime of deeds here on this ancient soil.
This is your new country, and you'll never want another.
Welcome to citizenship.
Welcome to Australia.
Welcome home.


Manuka Oval, Canberra
It's a delight to be here at Manuka Oval. 
I had the rare joy of seeing a Bulldogs victory the last time I was here and I says rare, I mean rare joy, and I think that that good run can continue as we go to the next session of play with the Prime Minister's XI.
This is a great special occasion for Canberra and for cricket: the first match played under these magnificent new lights.
And I know that the people of Canberra have waited decades to be able to see day-night cricket, here it is.
The light towers are going to make a transforming difference to complement to the ground and this is a fantastic ground with the scoreboard, caretaker's cottage and the rows of trees, so retaining much of its traditional atmosphere.
It's a tribute to the modern Canberra and the way in which Canberra seeks to preserve the best of its past.
It is also always a good time to be here with our friends from the West Indies here for a game of cricket.
Such a diverse collection of islands, nations and peoples brought together by their shared love of cricket.
And of course it brings us and the West Indies together; cricket force for breaking down barriers between us.
There, and here, cricket is a game for the people.
As the Deputy Prime Minister, Wayne Swan, observed last week, Australians' attitude to cricket is a democratic code and I know the West Indies are no different.
Just as fun and just as fiercely contested in the backyard and on the beach as it is in the middle of Kensington Oval or at the MCG  -  we're always enjoying a terrific contest between bat and ball and we are enjoying that today.
For Prime Minister's XI selection is really the heart of this match and like all complicated decisions I take the best possible advice.
So thank you for every one of the selectors who've done such a great job.
The PM's XI has a long and proud history of giving the rising stars of Australian cricket an opportunity to perform against top international competition. 
In future years, we might be saying of one of today's team I saw him first at Manuka.'
The crowd has always turned out to support the local champions who play in this game and there's no prouder vice-captain than Brad today and no prouder product of this district.
And this match has a record of honouring great champions like Border, Hayden and Langer.
And I think it's been a thrill for everyone to see Ricky today  -  one of the genuine greats.
Over the years, the match has hosted some amazing performances. I just want to give you an insight into one.
Back in 1955 a dashing young all-rounder by the name of Richie Benaud made a quick-fire 113 here.
Richie's spectacular century delighted the crowd that day as you'd imagine.
But it was also the source of mounting unease for one local businessman, who had pledged to donate to local charities 30 shillings for each six and 10 shillings for each four in the game. 
That gentleman ended up 35 pounds out of pocket.
And the story of that match goes on.
On that day, the then-Governor-General Sir William Slim even managed to catch one of Richie's sixes.
I've already advised Major-General Jeffery that if the ball comes in our direction the pressure is on.
We'll see what happens in the next session and if a ball is coming that fast, our way, I'll be getting out of the way.
So thanks to everyone who's made today possible.
There are so many people involved, so many people who've worked so hard to bring this to the people of Canberra; a very big thank you.
It is no exaggeration to say that in Canberra's centenary year this is one of the most exciting weeks in the history of ACT cricket, and I'm sure each of you who has worked hard to achieve it will be very proud of the part you have played.
I hope you have all enjoyed the match so far there's plenty more cricket to come so please enjoy the evening under lights.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
New years bring new reflections and new work to do.
So it is as we get down to business in 2013.
Today, I intend to do three things: To take stock of our nation's position; To outline the action needed to shape our future; To detail a plan for this year.
First, let's take stock.
Action begins with the evidence. So let's take a warts-and-all look at who we are today and the opportunities and risks which confront us.
We are a nation of 23 million people, whose median age is 37, an average which continues to rise.
Around four in five men and women will have children, and the average age of a mother when her first child is born is now 29 years.
We share the world's twelfth-largest economy, up from the fifteenth-largest under this Government, and the median wealth of Australians is among the highest in the world, ahead of nations like Japan, Italy, Belgium and the UK by a considerable margin.
Our travel time to work keeps getting longer: we know that in our biggest cities, the time spent travelling every week has increased by as much as an hour and a half in the past decade  -  as many as 1 in 6 workers spend more than an hour every day getting to and from their job.
The price we pay for electricity and gas has increased by 120 per cent in the last decade and 26 per cent in the last two years.
Despite low inflation and low interest rates, we still feel these pressures on living standards.
Superannuation returns are only just beginning to recover from the hit delivered by the Global Financial Crisis. Capital city housing prices have not grown at all in the past twelve to eighteen months, compared to the average yearly gains of eight to ten per cent in the years before the GFC.
These two impacts have us worried that our dreams of financial security are harder to achieve than ever before.
Today, we save over 10 per cent of household income. In the years before the GFC, we used to save nothing as a nation.
It was a phase that could not last  -  but unsurprisingly, many Australians miss those days when they could spend all of their income, see wealth increase through ever-rising house prices, and through easy credit, borrow against the house again to spend more.
We have seen 9/11 and the Iraq war, we fight still in Afghanistan, we are living through climate change, through the aftermath of the biggest economic meltdown since the Great Depression and through an economic and strategic re-ordering from West to East as well as the upheaval of the Arab Spring.
While an Australian is four times less likely to be a victim of homicide than is an American, some communities are understandably concerned about crime and cohesion.
We get our information and connect with each other in new ways. Australians use 16.2 million mobile phones, 3.5 million iPads or tablets  -  a number expected to double this year  -  and we have 11.7 million Facebook accounts.
What does all this mean?
It means it can be a struggle to make ends meet and it can seem far harder to get ahead in the post-GFC world.
It means we are more likely than earlier generations to face the challenges of parenting and caring for older parents at the same time.
Combined with the travel time to work and, for some, concern about community safety, life can be very stressed and pressurised.
Through all this, we are more connected with information about world events and causes of community anxiety than ever before.
Over time, the uncertainties and pressures we live with have led some of us to be concerned that our children won't live a better life than us.
I want this audience to feel all the force of that concern.
I most certainly do.
These are complicated facts, driving big changes  -  in family life and in society as a whole. My stock-taking tells me this:
Australia is a great country with a smart, hardworking people.
We face ever-changing, ever-new challenges and opportunities in a fast-changing world.
Our future is never assured, shaping it is up to us.
In the real world, real solutions means understanding the modern world, developing serious policies ... and offering detailed costings.
That is the only way to build a nation's future.
We enter 2013 with more strength to shape our future than anyone else in the world.
While our world has risks, we live in peace and security at home, and we have a comprehensive strategy for our future national security, which I delivered last week.
While the strategic order of the world is changing, we have accrued new opportunities and new respect as we move on to the United Nations Security Council and prepare to host the premier economic forum of the world, the G20.
We are a democracy with our squabbles and contests but above all with an inherent strength that is served by quality institutions.
As we live through climate change, we've done, painfully but for good, the single biggest thing we need to in order to reduce carbon pollution  -  pricing carbon.
As our nation ages, we are modernising our health care, aged care and retirement incomes policies.
As the global economy still splutters, unlike the rest of the world, we have managed our economy so we have low inflation, low interest rates, low unemployment, solid growth, strong public finances and a triple-A rating with a stable outlook from all three of the major ratings agencies.
We live in the economically strengthening region of the world and we have a clear plan to make sure Australia taps in to this growth in Asia and enjoys the opportunities it brings.
As a generation of Australians, our greatest task, our highest calling, is to build a future of greater shared opportunity and less risk for the next generation.
I want to eradicate any sense we can't get this done.
As a nation, we are strong, fair by instinct, smart.
I know that we have it within us to ensure the next generation of Australians is stronger, fairer, smarter.
I am an optimist; everything we have achieved as a nation reinforces that optimism, everything we are planning delivers on it.
This is the central work of government  -  leveraging our strengths, addressing risks, implementing our plans, shaping our future, delivering security and certainty.
Today, I will outline my approach to this work of governing, my approach to delivering jobs, opportunity and fairness and meeting the needs of families feeling the weight of modern pressures.
Both for the creation of jobs today and to shape a future of prosperity and shared opportunity, we have to manage our economy well.
We have done this well so far with more than 836,000 jobs created during the worst of economic times. More than 836,000 ways in which we have reaffirmed that for our Labor Government nothing matters more than the jobs of working people.
That belief will guide us and drive us as our nation now faces up to further challenges: specific challenges to our economic diversity and competitiveness  -  as well as a revenue challenge.
At the intersection of my concern about economic diversity and competitiveness is the strength of the dollar.
Our dollar has appreciated around sixty per cent in the last three years.
Economic orthodoxy prescribes that falling terms of trade and falling interest rates will result in a fall in the value of a currency.
But even though our terms of trade peaked around fifteen months ago and interest rates have been falling, our dollar is now actually higher.
Consequently, we have to have a plan which can withstand the possibility of a persistently strong dollar into the future  -  not simply rely on the economic assumption that our dollar will fall.
This is critical because over the coming year or two we expect to move beyond the peak of the investment phase of the mining boom.
Before any one is tempted to construe this as me saying the mining boom will end in eighteen months' time, let me be clear that beyond this point mining investment will remain historically high for some time, while a sustained higher level of production will deliver enduring incomes and export returns for our nation for years.
But when the peak of the investment boom is behind us, associated as it is with peak demand for labour as huge ventures are built, we will see slowing jobs growth in the resources sector.
Ordinarily, economists would tell you this change, bringing with it a lessening of demand for capital, would be associated with a reduction in the Australian dollar that would assist export exposed industries like manufacturing, tourism and services that are exported, like education. This would enable these industries to grow jobs faster, offsetting slower jobs growth in resources.
However, just as the dollar's strength has persisted in this period of declining terms of trade and interest rates, we need to be prepared if it persists despite a lessening of demand for capital.
The economic diversity and competitiveness pressures our nation faces now, because of our strong dollar and the huge boom we've had in mining investment, may well persist even though economic orthodoxy would predict their lessening.
We cannot control a number of factors that have kept our dollar strong: like the weakness in the global economy, the close-to-zero interest rates of many nations and the increasing view that Australia is something of a safe haven.
Where we can make a difference is to other factors that matter for competitiveness and economic diversity.
So we can and must focus on increasing skills, building a national culture of innovation, rolling out the national broadband network, investing in infrastructure, improving regulation and leveraging our proximity to and knowledge of a rising Asia into a competitive advantage.
These are the five pillars this Government has identified as key to increasing jobs, prosperity and productivity.
We can also make a difference to the diversity of our economy through industry-specific plans.
I am determined that we will always do everything to support jobs and growth in our nation, to give individuals and families the best chance to build a life and get ahead.
Conventional economic forecasts are also being severely tested by the persistence of relatively low government revenue.
What we know for a fact is this: in Australia, revenue to government for every unit of GDP has been at its lowest since the recession of the early 1990s.
In other words, for a given amount of economic income generated, less money is finishing in the public purse, to be used for the Australian people.
We are experiencing a proportional reduction in the amount of revenue being generated from any given amount of economic income.
This is part of a trend which is felt worldwide.
Now, the immediate effect of this was made clear by the Deputy Prime Minister last December.
While within our medium-term fiscal strategy, spending is tightly constrained, the amount of tax collected from all sources  -  particularly from company tax  -  is significantly lower than independent forecasters or the Treasury have anticipated.
Compared to the public revenue which was forecast on the eve of the global financial crisis in 2008, what has actually been collected in tax since is far lower  -  on average, lower by more than thirty billion dollars every year.
Even compared to what was forecast once the worst of the global financial crisis had passed, annual revenue is tens of billions of dollars below what was expected.
There are domestic and global factors at work.
The domestic factors include our nation being in the investment phase of the mining boom, not its peak production phase; the new savings and consumption approach of families; the slowdown in capital gains; and the lack of profitability of many firms in trade exposed areas due to the high dollar.
Some of these factors are cyclical, some will be longer lived.
A number of these have their sources in global events and there are other global factors at work.
For instance, we see more genuine competitive movement of capital and of profit centres to seek the highest private returns than there has ever been; although, as the Assistant Treasurer has noted, some of the movement does look like it is about movement of the accounting of capital and profit.
This is an area where the G20, which Australia will chair next year, can and should find a fruitful agenda and we will be using our special status to get this done.
With pressure on revenue, it is the wrong time to be spending without outlining long-term savings strategies which show what will be foregone in order to fund the new expenditure.
Put another way, we are in an era when new structural calls on the Budget need to be associated with new structural savings.
This is the approach the Government will take as we make sure every child gets a great education and every Australian can live with the greater peace of mind that comes with knowing that if they or someone in their family become profoundly disabled they will get a fair chance and a fair deal.
I am determined that every child in this country gets the chance at life that can only come if he or she gets a world class education. I believe in this as a moral cause  -  a crusade  -  but I also believe that our future prosperity is inextricably linked to us winning the education race.
I will fight to get this done.
At the same time, as modern medicine saves the lives of more people who in earlier ages would have died, our modern nation must be able to provide those who then live with disabilities with decency and respect.
I will fight to get this done.
As we build a future of jobs, opportunity, fairness, I am determined to support modern families as they cope with the pressure of modern life.
Indeed we can't be at our strongest as a nation unless we help families be at their strongest.
Australians, overwhelmingly, are people who work hard and show personal responsibility.
They want government to work with them as they live their modern, busy, pressurised lives.
Whether it is dads wanting paid parental leave to spend time with their new child, teenagers being supported to stay on at school, steps to counter the scourge of cyber bullying, women wanting a Government that understands their lives and respects their choices, older Australians wanting dignity and real choices about their care, or communities asking for new approaches to community safety, I will always be determined to modernise government to better meet those needs.
Spreading jobs, opportunity, fairness.
Helping modern families with modern pressures.
Delivering security and certainty for the nation.
This is the work of government. This is the work of 2013.
First: in coming weeks, the Government will release our Industry and Innovation Statement.
The Statement will lay out our plan to secure jobs in Australia.
It also forms our response to last year's report of my Taskforce on Manufacturing.
Backing Australian firms to win work at home, win business abroad, and create new jobs and growth, above all through co-operative innovation, through firms and employees, researchers and governments all working smarter together.
Second: In the lead up to and in the Budget we will announce substantial new structural savings that will maintain the sustainability of the Budget and make room for key Labor priorities.
Our record of cutting wasteful programs, in line with our Labor values and purpose, is already strong.
The dependent spouse tax offset, the tax breaks for golden handshakes, tax concessions on super for high income earners, the millionaires' dental scheme and fringe benefits loopholes for executives living away from home all gone.
The private health insurance rebate is means-tested: something many said could never be achieved.
This year we will make the tough, necessary decisions to ensure our medium-term fiscal strategy is delivered, and our centrepiece plans for Australian children and Australians with disability are funded, in this new low-revenue environment.
Third: I will put to April's Council of Australian Governments the critical decisions to implement the National Plan for School Improvement: quality teaching and learning, power for principals, new transparency on results and in return, the future funding arrangements which will meet the needs of every student.
Across all our schools, over more than a decade, we have been slipping behind the education standards of the region and the world.
Changing that is the crusade which defines this term of my Prime Ministership.
Then in May, the Budget will set the fiscal and economic course for the coming four years and beyond.
Strong modern families can only thrive in a strong modern economy. Fairness can only be funded through economic strength.
On 1 July, we launch the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme Launch Transition Agency will be operating the first stage of the scheme in five locations around the nation.
Like Medicare and universal superannuation, a smart policy to make us a fairer nation; like fair pay and the aged pension, a model of Labor's vision for Australian society.
This is the plan for 2013.
A plan to govern.
A plan to deliver for modern families.
A plan for certainty and security.
A plan to take the right decisions now to build a stronger, fairer and smarter future.
A future of shared opportunity, where those given the hardest starts in life can still rise to the greatest heights and those who work hard can still get ahead.
A future where risk is shared as well, where those hit with life's cruellest blows get the help they need.
A future in which our nation puts aside yesterday's squabbles and unites to share the work of today.
In a world of many risks, our future is not assured.
Time is not for wasting.
And so, decisions have to be made about how we use our time this year.
We must get on with the business of governing and an election must be held.
In that order.
Governing first, electioneering second.
In 2012, the patience of Australians was tried by months of boiling hot political debate, with most of it  -  somewhat ironically  -  about global warming.
In 2013, I am determined their patience is not tried again. That policies and plans are at the centre of our national discourse.
The principal concern of Australians isn't what a day in 2013 means for the politics or timing of the election campaign, but what it means for the life of the nation.
What does it mean for their job, their family, their future?
Not everything about the tenor and temperature of debate this year is in my control.
But I can act to clear away the carry-on that comes with speculation about when the election will be held.
And I can act to create an environment in which the nation's eyes are more easily focussed on the policies not the petty politics.
I can act so Australia's Parliament and Government serves their full three-year term and it is clear and certain when the election will be held.
So I today announce that later this year, I will advise the Governor-General to dissolve the House of Representatives with writs to be issued on Monday the 12th of August for an election for the House and half of the Senate, to be held on Saturday the 14th of September.
I do not do so to start the nation's longest election campaign. Quite the opposite, it should be clear to all which are the days of governing and which are the days of campaigning.
Announcing the election date now enables individuals and business, investors and consumers, to plan their year.
But the benefit of fixing the date now is not just the end of speculation about election timing.
It gives shape and order to the year and enables it to be one not of fevered campaigning, but of cool and reasoned deliberation.
Not a year without passion, because elections are the time in our national life when values should contend, when alternate plans can be compared and considered.
No surprises also means no excuses.
Australians aren't interested in campaigns without content, platitudes devoid of purpose.
There is now clearly the time and certainty necessary for the people and parties contesting the election to lay out their fully detailed, costed plans for the timely consideration of voters.
There's plenty for this Government to be getting on with  -  plenty of work to do for our nation.
I will devote the days of governing to that work and then, at the time now fixed, to asking the Australian people to endorse my plan to keep building a strong, fair, smart nation.
I'm looking forward to all of it, and I look forward to your questions about it all.
[ENDS] 


Fairfield Showground, Sydney
In 1977, a small wooden vessel threaded its way through the Gulf of Thailand and the waters to our north before finding landfall near Darwin.
The boat's cargo:
 * 	Thirty one people in search of a better life.
The boat's name:
 * 	Tu Do... Freedom.
Friends, this land tells us many stories.
From the world's oldest living culture to those who came on the first wooden boats of the First Fleet, to today's newest migrants coming from war-torn Africa.
But perhaps one of the most remarkable is the story of the Vietnamese.
Vietnamese migration was particularly challenging for us because it was the first broad-scale migration from Asia since the gold rush.
I don't want to minimise the challenges you sometimes faced.
But overwhelmingly, Australians opened their doors and opened their hearts.
Now, 38 years after the first Vietnamese came to Australia, this community is seeing its pioneers grow old.
Its children succeed and prosper in all aspects of national life.
Its grandchildren speak in broad Aussie accents.
But one thing that does not change is Tet.
A time for visiting loved ones, honouring ancestors and giving gifts.
A time to forget the worries of the year just past and to embrace the possibilities of the year ahead. 
A time to remember your old homeland from the safety and prosperity of the new.
Friends, you came from a sad and difficult past.
And sought a place to build a new and brighter future.
You looked out across those seas to a land under the Southern Cross.
A place that celebrated freedom in its laws and intuitions in the same way you treasured freedom in your hearts.
Friends, so many Vietnamese refugees came to these shores with only the clothes on their backs.
Yet you did not come empty-handed.
You came with hope to this land of new beginnings.
Hope, ambition and high expectations that honoured the welcome offered by your new home.
You matched opportunity with effort.
Citizenship with commitment.
Acceptance with goodwill.
So four decades since the journey began, we are here as civic leaders to share this festival and to say: thank you.
We enriched by your culture.
Strengthened by your hard work.
And blessed by your faith in the nation you chose and made your own.
Happy New Year!
May the Year of the Snake bring happiness and prosperity to you and all those you love.


Canberra
Good morning to everyone and I know that I am speaking to a group of people who are here because of their passionate belief in Labor's purpose.
And across all of the years of our political party  -  the Labor Party  -  we have pursued a mission with two things at its centre.
One, to create and to share opportunity.
Two, to protect people in the most difficult of times.
This has always been Labor's driving purpose, the driving purpose of Labor Governments over the ages. And the driving purpose of the Labor Government I am very proud to lead.
When we reflect on what the Government has done so far, we have held true to that vision of creating opportunity and sharing opportunity.
No better definition of that than creating more than 800,000 jobs during the worst of economic times around the globe.
Everything we have done to give kids a better start in life.
To improve schools.
To increase apprenticeships.
To bring a historic shift in our universities.
To create 190,000 more places.
And for the first time, to be able to say truly in our nation a kid from a poorer household can get a chance and a start and a university place. And we see this in our communities already working and transforming lives.
So we have held true to that purpose of creating opportunity.
But we've got more to do for our nation to be able to say that no matter what the circumstances of your birth, you will always be in our great nation able to seize an opportunity, to see the benefits of your hard work, and to have the place in our nation that lets you get ahead.
The Government has started doing that work. It's work very much based on the future of our economy because we can't create and share opportunities if we don't have a strong economy.
And we live in a time of tremendous change. We're seeing the out-workings of the global financial crisis.
The world economy is never going to be the same as it was in the days before the global financial crisis.
We are in a period of profound transformation in the global economy, and in our economy.
It shows in a variety of ways.
People are saving more, and that's a good thing, but it has changed the way in which they live.
People are anxious about their job security. They're seeing the consequences of the high Australian dollar press on many industries and many regions around the nation.
They know that we live on the doorstop of a lot of future growth in Asia, and that this can give us opportunities but we need to reach out and get them.
They know that what is happening with information technology is changing our world and changing our future.
And they know that climate change is real and there's no point denying the consequences of a changing climate. We are living through climate change. We know it and we can see it.
So the Government has been making prudent preparations so that we in the future can still be a land of creating opportunity and shared opportunity.
That has meant that we've needed to take tough decisions like putting a price on carbon so we do seize the clean energy sources of the future, and I'm very proud that we've got that done.
It does mean that we've needed to focus on modernising our infrastructure.
We inherited from the former Government a nation with a huge infrastructure deficit, and piece by piece we have been working to improve our infrastructure.
Traditional infrastructure: roads, rail, ports to make travel times for working people; to ensure that we can get our goods to market.
But also the infrastructure of the future: the National Broadband Network. Because we cannot be a competitive economy in the long-term, we cannot roll out the services that we want to for working Australians unless we have the National Broadband Network around our country, and we are working to get that done.
We've also worked hard to boost productivity by looking at the regulations in our nation.
We do need clear laws and clear rules about how we do business. But they need to be efficient laws and efficient rules, and we've worked hard to do that.
And we've played out a very clear strategy to make sure that we can seize the growth that is happening around us in the region in which we live.
I mean, what a change in our world.
When I grew up people used to think of Asia as a place of poverty and their eyes would look across Asia to Europe or America.
What the smart young things wanted to do when I was growing up, they wanted to go and spend some time in London, see Europe. They wanted to go to the west coast of America.
Now young people still legitimately want to do those things but increasingly we know the wealth of our age and our era will be Asia's wealth.
Asia's rise will transform the opportunity for us as that middle class grows and wants the things that we have and have to sell in abundance. Whether it's agriculture, whether it's wine, education services, legal services, manufactured goods, the list goes on.
So to be a nation of opportunity for the future which can be shared, we have to tap into that growth and we've laid out the strategy to do so.
Nothing is more important to opportunity in the future than what is happening in our schools today.
We've already brought a transformation in Australian schools, and I'm very proud of it. I'm proud of the national curriculum. I'm proud of MySchool.
I'm proud that I can walk into disadvantaged schools today who through our national partnerships can get out the information  -  the cold hard data  -  and show me that they are giving kids a better life and a better start than they were able to do before we started our education reforms; practical changes.
Children who used to struggle to learn to read and write, now being able to do so. And if they learn to read and write and do maths in primary school, they can succeed in high school, they can get an apprenticeship, they can get a job. They can get one of our new university places.
But if your life goes off the rails when you're five or six or seven or eight, and you never learn to read or write, you never learn to deal with numbers, to deal with maths, then we know that sets people up for a lifetime of disadvantage.
We have been changing that, but we've got more to do so that we can say that every child in every school has the resources available at his or her disposal to get a great education.
That it doesn't matter whether we're talking about an indigenous girl in the Northern Territory, a boy in the western suburbs of Melbourne where I'm from, or people in your communities.
Where ever in the nation most children are getting educated, they are getting a great education.
This is the work of governing, and this is the work of 2013.
And we will do it as we deliver our response to the funding review undertaken by David Gonski, and as we outline our national plan for school improvement.
Creating opportunity, sharing opportunity. A Labor purpose, a Labor mission.
But we also know that life brings with it human risks. Anybody could have a child with cerebral palsy born into their family.
Anybody could be diagnosed in middle age with one of the worst degenerative diseases, Parkinson's disease.
Anybody could the family member of someone who  -  perhaps a young person, an incautious moment, dives off that jetty and the water is too shallow. Drives a little bit recklessly and has an accident.
These are the things of real life, and these are the things that can give people a disability.
We have worked hard to protect people from risk. Whether it's the risk of ill-health and their need for a great healthcare service, we've been building that as a Labor Party over many years now through Medibank and Medicare and free public hospitals.
And this Government has done its share to improve our health services for the future. To make them sustainable, to put them on a strong footing, to bring reform and change which means that there are more doctors, more nurses, more local control.
To change our aged care system so that older Australians have more options, more choices, more dignity, more respect than we have afforded them in the past.
So we have worked hard on life's risks.
But we've got more to do to make sure that the risk of disability isn't something that keeps families up at night worrying.
That if a disability strikes, it doesn't break families and their finances, potentially for generations.
But that they know that their community through their Government is there with them to help out and to give people a fair go and a fair chance.
That's the work of governing, and that's the work of 2013 as we roll out the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
We've got a lot to do in this period of time. To make sure in this era of change we are securing Australian jobs, continuing to add to our proud track record of more than 800,000.
Securing new opportunities for our nation to make its way in the world, and to profit as it makes its way in the world.
Securing a new future for our kids through world-class schooling.
And better protecting our families through the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
I'm looking out on the front line of taking these arguments, these debates, these values to communities around the nation.
I'm looking to you to be out there in your communities explaining to them that this is the work of governing and we are not done yet.
That for us to keep increasing opportunity, to keep protecting people from risk not only requires us to work hard between now and the election day in September.
But it requires us in the Labor Government that lies beyond that election to keep working with their interests always at our forefront with our Labor purpose always driving us on.
That's why we're here today and I'm very proud to be able to have the opportunity to spend the time with you.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
Speaker,
On behalf of the nation, I present the fifth annual Closing the Gap Statement.
I am here today because the Indigenous and non-Indigenous people of this country have decided to walk the path of Reconciliation together.
Because the workers of Wave Hill said no and the voters of 1967 said yes.
Because in a proud Labor tradition, Gough Whitlam poured the soil and Bob Hawke handed Uluru back.
Because Paul Keating inscribed native title in our laws and Kevin Rudd said our nation was Sorry.
Because this Government intends that our Constitution must speak for all Australians and the gap that separates our opportunities and living standards must be closed.
Speaker,
Closing the Gap is a plan of unprecedented scale and ambition.
A plan not only to uplift the lives of Indigenous Australians but to do so in a shared endeavour of partnership and respect.
That high level of ambition commits us to two decades of annual reckoning until we bridge the gulf that stands between us.
Few if any of the men and women who sit in this Parliament today will still be here when a future Prime Minister delivers the final Closing the Gap Statement in 2031.
A short walk to this despatch box that we hope will mark the end of a monumental journey.
Wherever we are on that day, the people of this land will want to hear one thing.
That we have, at last, accorded Indigenous Australians the health care, education, job opportunities and community services they deserve.
Above all, the opportunity unknown to many Indigenous people today  -  the chance to grow old.
These goals require us to raise our eyes and lift our expectations; to invest, plan and think for the future.
It is the work of an entire generation and work that has begun with us.
So I account to the Parliament and people of Australia today.
Speaker,
This is the fifth such Statement since the task began in 2008.
Already we know that some targets, like life expectancy, will be enormously challenging to meet, even with almost two decades still to run.
On others, progress has been encouragingly swift.
Across the board, our sources of data and information are stronger than ever before.
The report I make today is especially significant because this year, the very first of the target deadlines established five years ago falls due.
In 2008 we pledged to deliver access to early childhood education to all four-year-olds in remote communities within five years.
Well, the five years are up.
I'm proud to say  -  we've got it done.
This target is on track and will be met on schedule.
That means little children like Curtisha Kalinic, a pre-schooler at Robinson River in the Gulf country can now go to pre-school.
Her mum, Roberta, was never given the opportunity to attend school when she was a girl, let alone pre-school.
Think about that.
An Australian woman young enough to be just now making a family of her own.
A woman who, in our own lifetimes, while we did our exams and gained our qualifications, was denied the chance to go to school.
Yet already Curtisha has completed preschool  -  she knows how to hold a pencil, listen to the teacher, and adapt to the formal routines of the day.
She's ready for school.
Ready for the future.
The mistakes made in one generation are being repaired in the next.
The gap is being closed.
So for all the challenges we will inevitably encounter between now and 2031, this is a moment to savour.
Not just because we reached a target  -  but because we showed what we can do together.
Speaker,
Pre-school only takes us to the schoolyard gate.
We must ensure that progress flows through to the other targets relating to later schooling and employment.
One of the first things we need to do is ensure that improved access to early childhood education is accompanied by improved attendance rates at school.
That the children who reach the school gate enter and stay there until education has done its transforming work.
Supporting regular school attendance will be one of the 2013 priorities of the Stronger Futures program in the Northern Territory.
It will also be one of this Government's early priorities as we implement the National Plan for School Improvement, in partnership with States and Territories and non-government sector.
The National Plan for School Improvement complements Closing the Gap philosophically and practically.
Both programs are about cultural change and generational change.
Resourcing schools according to their need  -  and measuring them according to their success.
Thus, with reliable data, we can swiftly see what works and what doesn't work.
With reliable data we can turn access into attendance.
Attendance into achievement. Not just in pre-schools but right through the educational journey.
Speaker,
Encouraging progress is also being made on two other Closing the Gap targets.
In 2008 the nation set itself the challenge of halving the gap in Year 12 attainment by 2020.
In 2006, just 47 per cent of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders aged between 20 and 24 had a Year 12 or equivalent qualification.
In the 2011 Census that had risen to 54 per cent, a level of progress that puts us ahead of schedule to meet our Closing the Gap target.
Yet compared to the 86 per cent rate in the non-Indigenous population, it's clear that substantial further improvements will be needed if our target is to be met in 2020.
Another Closing the Gap target is now also within sight.
In 2008 leaders pledged to halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five within a decade.
I can report that real progress is being made and, if current trends continue, our target will be met.
This is a precious human achievement.
Babies will live who might have died.
Infants will thrive who once would not.
And the tragic reality of Indigenous children dying before their fifth birthday at twice the rate of other Australians will become a sad relic of history.
Behind these positive trends lie a lot of hard work and a lot of investment:
Improvements in antenatal care; access to public health services; immunisation; neonatal intensive care.
Anyone who says things can't change: you are wrong.
Anyone who says change is not a matter of extra staff or extra funding: you are wrong too.
Time and effort and resources are saving lives today.
Speaker,
I can also report encouraging progress on another key indicator: Indigenous employment.
Our pledge in 2008 was to halve the gap in employment between and non-Indigenous Australians aged 15 to 64 years.
This is one of the truly vital indicators, because each job not only brings opportunity and esteem to the person who secures employment.
It models habits of work and self-discipline to children, younger siblings and the wider community.
So every job advances a virtuous cycle.
The 2011 Census shows progress since the previous Census in 2006.
The number of Indigenous Australians in mainstream employment has risen from 42.4 to 44.7 per cent, a small but encouraging increase.
There was a particularly striking rise in mainstream employment in the Northern Territory  -  from 21.3 to 30.3 per cent.
This reflects the progress made by Indigenous Territorians who are seizing the growing economic opportunities in their communities.
Overall, Indigenous employment has been rising steadily since 1996 and the long-term trends are positive.
However, with the rate of non-Indigenous employment standing at 72 per cent, it is clear a massive and unacceptable gap remains.
Last night I attended a dinner hosted by Reconciliation Australia, along with business leaders representing organisations who have signed Reconciliation Action Plans.
1.7 million Australians now work for an organisation with a plan in place.
This is Reconciliation in action, happening every day, right across the country.
Speaker,
On the final of the five Closing the Gap indicators  -  literacy and numeracy performance  -  progress is more mixed.
On Year 3 Writing, for example, 78 per cent of Indigenous children reached or exceeded the national benchmark in 2012.
That's well on the way to the non-Indigenous level of 96 per cent  -  a gap of 18 percentage points.
In Year 9 Writing, however, the 2012 gap is almost double that  -  35 percentage points.
Overall, significant disparities remain between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students.
Most troubling, some results such as Year 3 Reading actually declined in 2012 after improving between 2008 and 2011.
Overall, only three out of eight indicators in Reading and Numeracy are tracking as expected and the other five will need considerable work.
So NAPLAN will continue to challenge us with its annual output of hard, clinical data.
I cannot conceal that these literacy and numeracy results are a source of personal disappointment.
Last year's optimism gives way this year to a starker realism.
Yet that is how Closing the Gap will be.
The set-backs that make us aim higher.
The successes that make us glad we did.
Speaker,
In 2013, we will reach our first formal Closing the Gap target and can see two more within reach.
These results show that the gap is not only closing but closable.
They are proof of what we can achieve when we work together.
When we hold ourselves strictly to account.
When we end decades of chronic under-investment.
When we genuinely involve Indigenous Australians in the design and delivery of programs.
At the same time, I'm acutely conscious that gains can be contingent.
Yesterday's breakthrough can be today's failure if we let our vigilance falter.
Speaker,
Progress on Closing the Gap is hard enough without taking retrograde steps and undoing the good work that has already been accomplished.
This is why I am very concerned about the alcohol policies adopted by the Country Liberal Party since it came to government in the Northern Territory.
I am concerned about plans touted by the Liberal National Party in Queensland to wind back restrictions in that state, too. Tragedy' was the word Noel Pearson used to describe the Newman Government's plans.
I have a real fear that the rivers of grog that wreaked such havoc among Indigenous communities are starting to flow once again.
The Government will take action in response to any irresponsible policy changes that threaten to forfeit our hard-won gains.
We saw the Banned Drinkers Register dismantled by the Northern Territory Government on 29 August last year four days after the NT election.
Yet we know the Register was working.
According to the then Northern Territory Government, after its first year of operation, alcohol related assaults dropped in Darwin, Palmerston, Alice Springs and Katherine.
There were 10,000 fewer anti-social instances reported.
People felt safer walking around their home towns. 
Now, since it was pulled down by the Country Liberal Party in the Northern Territory, we're hearing worrying reports about the rise in admissions to the emergency department at Alice Springs Hospital due to alcohol-related accidents and abuse.
People are witnessing more alcohol related violence. In and around Alice Springs over the Christmas/New Year period there were at least five alcohol related deaths.
Former banned drinkers are now again on the long list of alcohol related offences coming before the Alice Springs Magistrates Court each day.
Today I call on the Country Liberal Party to reinstate the Banned Drinkers Register, immediately.
I call on the Liberal National Party to exercise extreme caution in reviewing remote community alcohol restrictions in Queensland, too.
Every Australian who puts the interests of Indigenous children first and the alcohol industry second will support this call.
Let's always remember:
Closing the gap is not inevitable.
Keeping it closed is not inevitable either.
We must guard our gains and never allow a backward step.
Speaker,
Closing the Gap is Reconciliation in the sense that when we truly embrace our shared humanity and equality, we embrace equal rights to services and support.
Let us also remember that Closing the Gap is not the solution to every problem in Indigenous communities.
So many of the problems faced by Indigenous Australians since 1788 are not just issues of material deprivation.
They are matters of the spirit.
Matters of fundamental justice and human understanding.
So as we comprehend a complex and sometimes bitter past, we must also pursue Reconciliation by finding the right words to express our co-existence in this ancient land.
No specific act or event will make us reconciled  -  but each sign and gesture plays its part in our healing and brings forward the moment of its accomplishment.
Half a century ago, this Federal Parliament made possible the first step in the journey we now know as Reconciliation.
In 1963, all Indigenous Australians were able to vote in a national election for the first time.
In 2013, I hope this will also be the year in which our Parliament delivers another landmark on the journey of Reconciliation  - 
 * 	an Act of Recognition acknowledging the unique and	special place of our First Peoples.
This Act will be a down-payment on that great piece of unfinished national business: constitutional recognition.
It's a vital opportunity for this Parliament to show its commitment to recognition.
It's a striking way to attune and prepare our nation for the profound decision that lies ahead.
Speaker,
I believe that constitutional recognition is fundamental to the process of Reconciliation so that all Australians can feel pride in our Indigenous heritage and understand its centrality in our national story.
Without it, that story will remain incomplete and the soul of our nation will remain unhealed.
We also know that amending the Constitution is far from easy.
Just eight out of 44 attempts have enjoyed success, and only two of those eight referenda concerned social issues.
The most shining of those attempts  -  and the most relevant to us now  -  is the referendum of 1967. It was a time of healing, uniting our nation in empathy and accord as never before.
I want this constitutional amendment to be equally unifying, so I am determined that the referendum will be held only when the nation is ready.
As the nation's leaders and representatives, it is our job to do all we can to bring that unifying moment closer.
That is why my Government is investing $10 million in a campaign, led by Reconciliation Australia, to build support for constitutional recognition.
It's why there's a Joint Select Committee to secure multi-partisan consensus for the Bill and on the timing and detail of constitutional reform.
And it is why we are proceeding first with the Act of Recognition this year.
As referendum day draws closer, so too may all Australians draw closer.
Reconciliation is a journey but it must also be a journey with a purpose and an end.
Speaker,
That journey is not yet over.
Yes, we are far from the days when the Aboriginal activist William Cooper sought to petition the King but the Federal Government of the day refused to forward the petition to London because it would serve no good purpose.
Now we have a good purpose.
An abiding purpose.
Now we share a purpose that goes to the very integrity of this nation, its founding, it history and its future.
Closing the Gap is part of that purpose since our democratic temper rejects notions of inherited privilege and equally drives us on to eradicate inherited disadvantage.
Here in this country, we believe, everyone must get a fair go.
The oldest and the newest Australians alike.
In that hope, I present the fifth annual Closing the Gap Statement to the Parliament and people of the nation, proud of our successes, more determined than ever to remedy our failings and cautiously optimistic for the long road ahead.
[CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY]


Canberra
Speaker, on indulgence, as you would know, Australia's Catholics and their many friends received remarkable news overnight that His Holiness, Pope Benedict XVI will resign in coming weeks.
You would have to have lived several hundred years to have heard news like that.
The Pope's announcement marks a genuinely historic moment which many Australian Catholics will greet with great emotion. 
Many Australians saw Pope Benedict during his visit here for the Church's World Youth Day in 2008, and I'm sure many members remember the scenes and the crowds on that visit.
Thousands of others travelled to Rome in 2010 to see him declare Mother Mary MacKillop as our nation's first saint: Saint Mary of the Cross. And that was a time of jubilation across the nation.
They will miss him.
Australia's Catholic community has made an enormous contribution to our nation, in absolutely every field of life. 
But our thoughts naturally turn to the contribution in school education, health care and relief for the most disadvantaged in our society.
I personally think of Mary MacKillop who, as the Pope put it when he was canonising her attended the needs of each young person entrusted to her, without regard to station or wealth.
I think too of my own Party: our historic achievements and enduring purpose are unimaginable without the influence of the Catholic tradition.
Since 2008 Australia has had an accredited Ambassador resident in the Vatican State, reflecting the importance of the many global issues in which the Catholic Church is so vitally engaged.
Whoever is elected to take Pope Benedict's place, the Catholic Church will remain one of the most important human institutions, containing within it all the strengths and faults of its hundreds of millions of believers; one facing all the challenges of the modern world.
My thoughts today are with Australia's Catholic community as they prepare for Ash Wednesday tomorrow and the season of Lent, and as they live through what is an historic coming few weeks.


Canberra
Speaker, this Parliament is the gathering place of our nation's representatives.
But we stand on land that was, from time immemorial, the gathering place of the Ngunnawal people.
So I speak here today, as I always do, in a spirit of friendship and respect for the First Australians, and with honour to Elders past and present.
I'm also conscious that on this special anniversary, we acknowledge the courage that enabled Kevin Rudd to offer the Apology and the generosity of spirit that enabled Indigenous Australians to accept it.
We are only able to consider this Act of Recognition and constitutional change because the Apology came first.
Speaker, the Constitution of our Commonwealth came into force on January 1, 1901.
It was the start of a new century and a new year.
Alfred Deakin wrote thatNever on this side of the world was there a New Year's Day with such high expectations.
Those expectations were high because with the Constitution had come Australia's birth as a nation.
But not all our people shared those expectations.
In the decade of deliberation that created our Constitution, there were conventions and debates across this land.
But there is no record of any Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander person taking part.
Indigenous people did not ordain our Constitution nor contribute to its drafting.
They had no opportunity to vote for it, and yet all were affected by what it said and what it failed to say.
They were affected by provisions that even by the standards of the time seem questionable and strike us now as harsh and inhumane.
But they were also affected by the great Australian silence which fell upon our founding document.
Because among the 128 sections of the Constitution, there is no acknowledgement of Australia's First Peoples.
No mention of their dispossession.
Their proud and ancient cultures.
Their profound connection to the land.
Or the unhealed wound that even now lies open at the heart of our national story.
Speaker, in 1967, the people of Australia sought restitution and repair, but their work was incomplete.
Today, a new generation dreams of finishing the job with the same idealism and the same means.
Not through protests or law suits.
But by this Parliament summoning every Australian elector to a referendum.
And there, in the sanctity of the polling booth, to inscribe their agreement to a successful constitutional amendment.
On that day, as the polls close and the ballots are counted, individual assent will merge into a collective yes.
In that way, we will forge an accord  -  bi-partisan and unanimous  -  to right an old and grievous wrong.
A step that will take us further on the path of Reconciliation than we have ever ventured before.
Speaker, voting is the solemn act of our democratic order.
But amending the Constitution is even more profound, because it occurs so rarely and succeeds even more rarely still.
At the election of 2007, it seemed the prospect of constitutional recognition was very close at hand, supported, as it was, by both major parties.
But in difficult and volatile times, we have not yet found the settled space in our national conversation to make the promised referendum a reality.
So the government has advanced this Bill for an Act of Recognition.
To assure Indigenous people that our purpose of amendment remains unbroken.
And to prepare the wider community for the responsibility that lies ahead.
This Bill is thus an act of preparation and anticipation.
In this legislation, we, the nation's 226 legislators will serve as proxies for Australia's 14 million voters, bridging the time between now and referendum day.
That is why this Bill has a sunset clause of two years.
So that the 44thParliament can achieve what the 42ndand 43rd have been unable to do.
Speaker, this Bill introduced by my friend and colleague, the Minister for Indigenous Affairs, has two main purposes:
Firstly, it acknowledges in law that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are the first inhabitants of this nation.
It acknowledges they occupied this land from time immemorial  -  they honoured and cared for it, and do so to this day.
Secondly, this Bill seeks to foster momentum for a referendum for constitutional recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
The Bill gives the Parliament some of the tools it will need to build the necessary momentum for constitutional change.
These include a legislative requirement for a review of public support for a referendum, to be tabled here in Parliament six months before any referendum bill is proposed.
This Bill, and the referendum to come, are closely informed by the work of the Expert Panel, itself an outstanding example of Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians working together.
The Expert Panel's report was informed by intensive consultations across the nation  -  from Sydney to Ceduna, Longreach to Launceston.
That work gives us the solid foundation upon which to build parliamentary and community consensus.
I again thank the Expert Panel, ably co-chaired by Patrick Dodson and Mark Leibler, for its important work and I acknowledge the Panel members who are present today.
But ultimately, a Referendum Bill will be the creation of this Parliament.
So I also commend the work to date of the Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples.
And I look forward to their continued work in the months ahead to prepare the way for the Parliament, most likely in the course of 2014, to debate and pass the Referendum Bill.
This is the critical work because it will require all of us in this Parliament to find consensus around the wording and the content of the proposed constitutional amendment.
Speaker, the work of preparation is vital and timely.
But, ultimately, recognition is not a matter for politicians or experts.
Instead, the Constitution belongs to the people.
It was created by them.
It serves them.
And it is amendable by them alone.
So this is a task in which all Australians must share.
I do believe the community is willing embrace the justice of this campaign because Australians understand that Indigenous culture and history are a source of pride for us all.
But I also believe that their good will needs to be galvanised.
Some of the work of building consensus is being led by the Joint Select Committee.
Some of the work is being led by Reconciliation Australia and other organisations that are building grassroots support for change.
The Government is investing $10 million in this community-based work.
But most of all, the push for change is increasingly being led by ordinary Australians  -  Indigenous and non-Indigenous  alike.
This morning I met with some remarkable young Indigenous leaders who are deeply engaged in the campaign for recognition.
Men and women who were not born in 1967 but who share the spirit and optimism of those days.
They will be among the many Australians actively working in communities around the nation in coming weeks and months.
I trust that we will be out there too, every one of us, in our electorates, doing the same.
Campaigning with optimism  -  campaigning with hope.
Speaker, the experience of 1967 gives us abundant cause for such hope.
In an era where the nation was perhaps less open and socially-aware than our own time, that ballot yielding the highest Yes vote ever recorded in an Australian referendum  -  almost 91 per cent.
I believe we can do it again.
This year the youngest voters of that referendum are turning 67.
I hope they will soon be able to return to the ballot box, perhaps with their children and grandchildren, and again make history.
After all, a foundation document is more than just a set of rules and procedures.
It can articulate a nation's sense of itself.
But our nation cannot articulate such a sense of self when there is still great unanswered questions in our midst.
How do we share this land and on what terms?
How adequate are our national laws and symbols to express our history and our hopes for the future?
We must never feel guilt for the things already done in this nation's history.
But we can  -  and must  -  feel responsibility for the things that remain undone.
No gesture speaks more deeply to the healing of our nation's fabric than amending our nation's founding charter.
So I commend this Bill to the House as a deed of Reconciliation in its own right.
And as a sign of good faith for the referendum to come.
We are bound to each other in this land and always will be.
Let us be bound in justice and dignity as well.


Canberra
I bid you all very warm welcome to Parliament House  -  this place of gathering that belongs to every Australian.
I welcome you all to Techfest in this, NICTA's tenth anniversary year.
And I offer you a very warm welcome to Canberra in its centenary year.
I can't think of a better place to be holding Techfest because at their best, this House and this city are places of ideas.
The nation sends 226 of us to this parliament as legislators, not just to debate the issues of today but to imagine the nation of tomorrow.
Our best ideas are the ideas whose results are measured in decades.
Stanley Melbourne Bruce established the CSIRO at the same time as this city was being carved out of the Molonglo plain.
Sixty years later, the brilliant researchers at CSIRO came up with something that has changed the world called wi-fi and one those pioneers, Dr Terry Percival, now works for NICTA and joins us today.
The same concern for the future saw Bob Hawke set-up the Cooperative Research Centre program as part of his vision for the clever country.
In a bi-partisan spirit, I can say the same for the Howard Government's decision in establishing NICTA.
NICTA is one of the real game-changers transforming the Australian economy.
NICTA has brought scale and depth to ICT research, training and commercialisation in this nation.
Ten years later, NICTA is the largest and most successful ICT research organisation in Australia.
Last year NICTA had a stellar performance in attracting wealth and creating new jobs  spinning-off four new companies and working with major companies such as George Weston Foods, Healthscope and the Commonwealth Bank to improve their productivity and competitiveness.
A Deloitte study estimates that NICTA projects will have a combined annual impact of $3 billion a year on the national economy.
Innovations conceived through NICTA are part of our everyday lives.
One NICTA invention now provides the live audio platform for major outdoor events and concerts all around the world.
Another provides the operating system for 1.5 billion mobile phones.
I know NICTA didn't come here today empty-handed; there are some amazing innovations on display here.
For example NICTA has today announced the spinout of new company, Saluda Medical, which has developed a miniature smart chip implant that will transform the way chronic pain is managed.
Today I witnessed the signing of a landmark agreement with NICTA and the global software leader, Infosys.
I acknowledge the presence of Mr Narayana Murthy here today, the co-founder of Infosys, who is also on NICTA's international Business Advisory Board.
In my walk-through today I've also had the opportunity to see a fantastic new initiative that NICTA is developing called the lens.
It's an open-access tool to help start-ups and entrepreneurs navigate the incredibly complex world of intellectual property and break down the barriers to innovation.
I acknowledge the presence of the Global Senior Vice President of Qualcomm, Roger Martin, who has come from the US today to support this initiative.
These announcements are a measure of NICTA's ten-year journey to date and the qualities that have brought you so far: ambition, curiosity and a restless search for excellence.
It's no coincidence that Techfest is the single most important event in the NICTA calendar.
The scientific mind is inherently optimistic.
Innovation is always about the future.
Always asking the question what's next?
In an advanced economy like Australia, that's the way it has to be if we are to secure high-wage, high skills jobs for our children.
That's the way it has to be if we are to succeed in the Asian Century.
The way we get there is innovation.
Innovation equals productivity, equals prosperity.
That's why next week I'll be making a major statement on Australian innovation and jobs.
Studies show that in advanced countries like Australia, more than half of all growth in productivity comes from innovation.   
We know that growing productivity is the best way to create and support jobs for the long-term.
That doesn't happen by accident.
It comes from deliberate investments like NICTA, CSIRO, our CRCs, and the policies that go with them.
Investments and policies that help bring the future closer.
That's a perfect description for NICTA.
It's also a perfect description of the NBN  -  bringing the future closer.
We won't be the nation we want to be in ten or twenty years' time without universal high speed broadband.
Not half-baked, but the real thing.
Not to the node, but to the home.
Earlier this month I was privileged to spend some time with Sir Tim Berners-Lee.
Sir Tim congratulated the Government on the NBN and our vision for the digital economy because he knows that the Internet is the great equaliser.
So much of how we deliver services - education, social welfare, health care, even energy use  -  will be mediated through the Internet and that means the NBN.
But it's more than just services.
It's about an outlook and a philosophy.
A free and open Internet served by a universal, competitive, world-class broadband market is about empowerment.
It's about choices and possibilities.
We think we understand the digital world, but we haven't even scratched the surface.
When I entered this Parliament in 1998, there was no wi-fi, no smart phones, no iPads, no apps.
But the ideas were there; the people were there; the research facilities were there.
And in those facilities, remarkable men and women were rehearsing the future that is now our today.
Here at Techfest we see the very best Australian ICT innovation and development.
And here we also catch a glimpse of the future.
We see that future not just in the inventions being showcased but in the young people present with us.
I know some of you students are road-testing the new smart phone app to that gives you a window on a career in ICT.
It's my hope that in a few years, your own ideas and apps will be showcased here at a future Techfest.
Now Hugh Durrant-Whyte, Ian Chubb and the other scientists will have lots of advice for you today.
I'll just leave you with this thought as the Prime Minister who is delivering the NBN, the NDIS, the price on carbon and our National Plan for School Improvement:
The future doesn't belong to the timid.
And no dream is ever big enough.
I warmly congratulate NICTA on its ground-breaking achievements over the past decade.
I look forward to your continued work to strengthen our economy and improve our lives.
And I proudly declare Techfest 2013 officially open.


Melbourne
This is a great day for this shipyard, for our Navy, for the Australian Defence Force and for the defence of Australia.
Seventy one years ago today, the great British fortress of Singapore surrendered.  The Royal Navy's Prince of Wales and the Repulse had been sunk only two months earlier.
Within days, Darwin was bombed.  Within months, the first Canberra would be fighting in her final battle for us. 
In those days, we truly learned that while our alliances are vital and our friends are many, our security is always ultimately in our own hands.
That is the lesson of the 15 February 1942 and it is a lesson we carry with us on the 15th of February 2013 as we name this ship.
That the best defence is self-defence: that for an island nation, its own Navy is its historic guarantee.
From those days to these, from Savo Island to the Middle East Area of Operations, the name Canberra has served our Navy and our nation well.  
I am proud that soon it will serve us again.
The Canberra and her sister Landing Helicopter Dock ship will give our Navy, and our Defence Force as a whole, an entirely new ability to defend Australia and our interests.
They will give our Defence Force an unprecedented ability to exercise and operate on land and sea  supporting amphibious operations and operating independently in our region and beyond like never before.
And when the Australian Navy is called on to provide humanitarian assistance, the Canberra will be ready.
The new Canberra will carry some of our finest war fighters  and it is a tribute to some of our most impressive skilled workers.
935 Australians will work on the Landing Helicopter Dock ships before they put to sea: hundreds of fine Australians doing great Australian jobs.
The Government is committed to maintaining industries here in Australia with the capability to support the Australian Defence Force  and we are committed to creating and supporting the kind of skilled, well-paid work done here at Williamstown.
That's why projects such as the Air Warfare Destroyers and the Future Submarines are so important.
To the veterans and members of the HMAS Canberra/HMAS Shropshire Association  we honour you on such an important day.
I pay my deepest respect and our nation's deepest gratitude to the veterans who served on the first HMAS Canberra during the Second World War.
They never let us down.
No HMAS Canberra has ever let us down  I know we will be proud of the new ship Canberra and all who sail in her.


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
This is a great day for this shipyard, for our Navy, for the Australian Defence Force and for the defence of Australia.
Seventy one years ago today, the great British fortress of Singapore surrendered.  The Royal Navy's Prince of Wales and the Repulse had been sunk only two months earlier.
Within days, Darwin was bombed.  Within months, the first Canberra would be fighting in her final battle for us. 
In those days, we truly learned that while our alliances are vital and our friends are many, our security is always ultimately in our own hands.
That is the lesson of the 15 February 1942 and it is a lesson we carry with us on the 15th of February 2013 as we name this ship.
That the best defence is self-defence: that for an island nation, its own Navy is its historic guarantee.
From those days to these, from Savo Island to the Middle East Area of Operations, the name Canberra has served our Navy and our nation well.  
I am proud that soon it will serve us again.
The Canberra and her sister Landing Helicopter Dock ship will give our Navy, and our Defence Force as a whole, an entirely new ability to defend Australia and our interests.
They will give our Defence Force an unprecedented ability to exercise and operate on land and sea  supporting amphibious operations and operating independently in our region and beyond like never before.
And when the Australian Navy is called on to provide humanitarian assistance, the Canberra will be ready.
The new Canberra will carry some of our finest war fighters  and it is a tribute to some of our most impressive skilled workers.
935 Australians will work on the Landing Helicopter Dock ships before they put to sea: hundreds of fine Australians doing great Australian jobs.
The Government is committed to maintaining industries here in Australia with the capability to support the Australian Defence Force  and we are committed to creating and supporting the kind of skilled, well-paid work done here at Williamstown.
That's why projects such as the Air Warfare Destroyers and the Future Submarines are so important.
To the veterans and members of the HMAS Canberra/HMAS Shropshire Association  we honour you on such an important day.
I pay my deepest respect and our nation's deepest gratitude to the veterans who served on the first HMAS Canberra during the Second World War.
They never let us down.
No HMAS Canberra has ever let us down  I know we will be proud of the new ship Canberra and all who sail in her.


Melbourne
Thank you very much. Thank you to everybody here, and particularly thank you to Ian and the Boeing team for having us here again.
I've always enjoyed coming here because I do feel as I wander through that I'm seeing the future of Australian manufacturing.
So thank you for having us. And it's good to join my ministerial colleague here, Minister Combet.
I want to say a few words about a plan we are announcing today and it is a plan for Australian jobs.
I believe that modern Australia can have a great blue collar future.
By that I mean that we can continue to be a manufacturing nation, we can be a nation in which people make their living through blue collar jobs.
Blue collar jobs that aren't intermittent or insecure or low paid; blue collar jobs that are highly skilled and highly paid.
But we aren't going to get there by accident. We have to make sure that we shape that future. 
Which is why you need a plan that shapes that future for you and is right for current economic conditions.
And if I can say a few words about current economic conditions, and it's a discussion I've had with Ian and others through the Prime Minister's Manufacturing Taskforce.
The world in which we live today has been shaped by the global financial crisis and its aftermath.
What that means is that a number of the wealthier countries around the world that have been our traditional customers for exports are still struggling with their economies.
President Obama presides over an economy where 12 million people are unemployed. That is the size of the Australian labour force unemployed.
Around the world, 28 million people have fallen into unemployment because of the effects of the global into financial crisis.
And if we look to Europe, what we see is over the last 12 months, they have gone backwards by around 1 per cent, and even an industrial powerhouse like Germany, in the last quarter of last year, went backwards by 0.6 per cent.
So when we look at the global economy, developed nations around the world are struggling in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. 
And that has an effect on us because they are nations to whom we want to sell the things we make.
At the same time we have seen a resources boom in our economy and, of course, that's a good thing. It's been creating jobs and growth.
We are yet to see the peak of the investment phase in the resources boom but $270 billion of investment has been committed in the Australian economy.
What that means is that we are seeing a big capital inflow to our country. 
So combined with global economic weakness and Australia's status increasingly as a safe haven currency, because of our strong economy, we are seeing the Australian dollar very high.
Now that means there are some good reasons why our dollar is high. 
Of course, we want the resources boom and of course, we are proud that everyone worked together during the days of the first impact of the global financial crisis; employers, unions and government, to save jobs in this country.
And we're glad that in this country we do not see unemployment rates like you see in America and Europe. 
But it does mean that our strength, the inflow of money into our resources sector compared with weakness around the world is keeping the Australian dollar very high. 
Indeed, our dollar has gone up by more than 50 per cent in the last few years.
What that means is that the things that we sell overseas are now more expensive for people to buy.
Put simply, something that we used to sell into Europe for 500 euros now cost 750 euros.
So what do we have to do in the face of these economic conditions, knowing that by the standards of the world our economy is strong? 
Unlike nations around the world we have got low unemployment, low inflation, continued growth, triple-A rated strong public finances; but with this ongoing pressure from the Australian dollar, what should we do faced with those economic conditions?
Well, we could simply hope for change and hope that our dollar was going to go down.
Economic orthodoxy tells you that as we move beyond the peak of the investment phase in the mining boom that our dollar should come down.
But our dollar has been stubbornly high now so I don't think we can just rely on that working for us.
We need to have a real plan to deal with a persistently high Australian dollar. 
Some would say to you Well it's all about cost cutting. If we just keep cutting and cutting and cutting, if particularly we cut wages and conditions, then we will be able to compete around the world'
But that ignores the fact just how severely you would have to cut in these conditions. If your currency has gone up more than 50 per cent, if you were looking at your wages cost in your business to try and get back to something that looked like square, with you would have to be cutting wages by 30 per cent.
We would have to see the average wages for a full-time income earner move from $70,000 a year to $50,000 a year.
Well Australian working people don't want to see that and I don't want to see that for them. 
Which is why the plan that I outline today takes a different path.
It recognises the pressures that are on the Australian economy through current economic conditions, but it charts a path to a high wage, high skill future.
And it is particularly pitched at making sure we get the opportunities from what is going to change in our region of the world during the economic times in which we live.
For much of my life, the place that we wanted to sell things to were places that we were far away from.
We wanted to sell things to Europe, we wanted to sell things to the UK, we wanted to sell things to America.
Now, in this economic time, whilst we still want to sell to those economies, we have actually got a geographic advantage.
We are in the right place of the world to sell things to the booming Asian region and by 2030 there will be more than 3 billion middle class consumers in the world in which we live.
More than three billion people in our region of the world where we are geographically near, who want the kind of things in their lives that we are able to make and sell, whether it's manufactured goods like getting a ride on a tremendous plane, whether it's food, wine, whether it's services like health and education.
So I want to see us with a plan that makes sure we seize the benefits of these opportunities.
So that brings us to the focus today, and the focus today is on making sure we get high skill, high wage jobs in the future by focusing on innovation.
When people hear the word innovation,' many would think about a person in a lab wearing a white coat who is coming up with something that that's never been invented before and then taking it out into the business community.
And that is one source of innovation and we want to see more of that kind of invocation.
But innovation too is what is happening in this factory behind me where a different way, a different material for the building of the flaps on planes is going to change those planes forever and that work can be done here because the intellectual work to make it happen, happened in Australia.
Innovation can be coming up with new ways of combining old things.
We are all used to opening a tin and getting fruit out to have for dessert. But, of course, it was innovation that put that fruit in a plastic cup with a lid you could peel back so that you could take it with you to work to have at lunch time or you could put it in the kids' school pack for lunch at school.
Those things are all innovation, and if we can focus on innovation, that will drive productivity growth and new jobs.
In developed economies like our own, half of productivity growth comes from innovation.
So today I announce a plan for Australian jobs; a plan that focuses on innovation; a plan that means we will be seizing the opportunity in our region as well as the opportunities at home.
It's a plan for blue collar jobs. It's a plan to make sure that we are a manufacturing nation and we have many diverse sources of strength in our economy.
The plan has three essential component parts.
First, it's about making sure we win business here in Australia. Australia is home to many big projects in the resources sector and beyond.
The plan I announce today means that when there are projects worth more than $500 million, they will need to have an Australian Industry Participation Plan.
They will need to look to how they can involve Australian businesses and create Australian jobs in what they do.
Many of our big businesses, whether it's resource companies or other forms of big business, are integrated into global supply chains.
That means that they can often look to suppliers that they deal with overseas for things that could be made here.
Through our Australian Innovation Plans, we will be getting the focus on those big businesses creating jobs and opportunities in our country.
We will bring to the parliament the Australian Jobs Act to put this focus on Australian industry participation in businesses worth more than $500 million, projects more than $500 million. This is all about getting work at home.
The second component of the plan is making sure that we are supporting businesses to win work overseas. We are living in a region of huge growth and change.
We need to be supporting our businesses as they seize those exports and seek to grow.
So we will be investing in up to 10 industry precincts which will begin together researchers, innovators, sources of new knowledge with businesses so we can get the move from the creation of that new knowledge into new products, new ways of doing things, so we can seize that innovation and we can be the best at what we do and sell it into the region and sell it into the world.
We have the 13th-largest economy in the world, but when we look at how well we do at innovation, unfortunately we tend to lag behind.
And many Australians would know that intuitively, that Aussies have invented great things but we haven't been the nation that has got the benefits of that great invention.
These industry precincts will be focused on making sure we capture that benefit.
There will be a manufacturing precinct located in Melbourne and in Adelaide.
These precincts will be networked together, and there will be a precinct which focuses on food too, because supplying food into our region and making sure we get to process that food is a big part of our future as well.
Third, we will ensure that we are working with small businesses to help them grow.
Australia is actually a nation of many small businesses, micro-businesses who have fewer than five employees.
Indeed, when you look at that percentage penetration into our economy, we are right up there in the world for numbers of small businesses. 
But it can be hard for those small businesses to grow, to upscale, to get to a bigger size, to employ more people. And one of the constraints on their growth has been lack of access to finance.
And so we will be making sure that there are new ways of businesses that have got a great idea getting access to the finance they need in order to grow Australian jobs and opportunities.
All in all, this is a $1 billion plan for Australian jobs. It's a $1 billion plan for our opportunities in the future.
In the world in which we live, we do not want to be adding to the budget bottom line, not one cent.
We, as a government, want to make sure that when we come up with good new ideas like this plan for Australian jobs, we do not add to the bottom line.
And so we have identified a saving which means bigger businesses currently benefiting from a special research and development tax advantage will be foregoing that tax advantage in order to fund the rest of this package.
We, as a nation, have seen government revenues written down by $160 billion as a result of the global financial crisis.
Now there was no way of cutting government expenditure to match that $160 billion write-down.
If you had chosen to do that, you would have had to do something as big as cut out all payment to aged pensioners, cut out the pension for older Australians.
That, of course, would have driven our economy into recession, put people out of work, destroyed our skills base and thrown Australians into poverty.
So we have seen a big write-down in government revenues, but the right focus now is to make sure that new expenditure is offset with savings and that's what we are going to do today.
What does this all mean for the nation's future? How will we know that we have succeeded?
Well, I think we will know we have succeeded when we see Australians working in the kind of opportunities that we can see here today; that we can see Australians in good blue collar jobs for the future.
We will know we've succeeded when we can see Australian exports penetrating increasingly into the Asian region.
We will know we've succeeded when we combine all of the things that we are putting forward to create the economy of the future; clean energy, the National Broadband Network, traditional infrastructure, a new approach to schooling and a new approach to schooling and a new approach to skills developments, all combining with businesses to make a difference to opportunity and growth for the future. 
So I'm pleased to be here. It's good to be here in such a wonderfully modern establishment, so proud of its innovation record, to talk about jobs, innovation and prosperity for the future.
So Ian, to you and the team, thank you very much.


Gold Coast
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you very much. Thank you to Paul for that very kind introduction.
Paul, a man of so few words that you really value it when he breaks his silence.
Paul, accused perhaps in the past of being a faceless man, but no one's ever accused him of being a voiceless man.
That is a good thing, that is a good thing for the members of the Australian the Workers Union because what that means is that Paul raises a passionate voice to put your causes, your concerns at the centre of the national debate so I congratulate him on his leadership of this great union.
I congratulate too Bill Ludwig, a legend of this union honoured today with a life membership, appropriate for a man who has been a union member, a member of this union, for more than 60 years.
He's dedicated his life to this union. It is impossible to record the history of this union without talking about Bill Ludwig's role.
It is impossible to write the history of this state without recording Bill Ludwig's role.
He is a great unionist, a passionate Queenslander, a great Australian and he's got our thanks for the contribution he's made to our nation's life.
And every member of the Australian Workers Union gathered in the audience tonight, if William Guthrie Spence was here this evening I think he would look at these members assembled and he would be amazed at how far your union has come.
He would be amazed by the degree of change that has happened in all of those years in between.
But something tells me that if he was able to be here and sit with us tonight and talk to the delegates gathered from all around the countries and listen to their stories and struggles what he would actually be impressed by is the fact that no matter how much has changed in our nation and in this union's life you have always held dear to that passion, his values, they're still the values of the Australian Works Union and you should be so incredibly proud of that.
I want to acknowledge a great friend of the AWU who is here tonight and a great friend of mine, the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Wayne Swan, has joined us this evening.
Wayne has actually flown back from Russia to be here tonight.
Now I don't tell you that so you get in anticipation about seeing vodka drinking and Cossack dancing.
I don't think Wayne had time to pick up those pursuits when he was over in Russia.
He has been attending the G20 Finance Ministers meeting and when he attend that Finance Ministers meeting he is gathered in a room of people who really understood what it was like to be there during the most dangerous moments of the global financial crisis.
And in that room when they look for leadership they look to Wayne Swan, a man honoured as the world's best treasurer, a man so honoured because of his passionate commitment to jobs.
Wayne, thank you for everything you've done and continue to do for the working people of this country and for their jobs and opportunity.
Can I acknowledge too, Simon Crean here tonight, Joe Ludwig here tonight and so many members of my Labor team that it is impossible to mention them all.
But thank you for coming from all corners of the nation to be here on this special occasion and to be here and say to the Australian Workers Union and we understand your determination and we share it with you.
We understand the values that have brought you here tonight and we share those with you as well.
Friends, as Labor leader it is a great privilege to be here tonight.
A great privilege to be amongst a room of people who truly understand in every way, in every dimension that what enables a person to build a life for them and their families, what enables them to have a decent life and to aspire to a better life is access to work, access to a job.
Not just any job, but a job that offers them fairness and decency at work and the opportunity to have their voice heard through their trade union.
A job is an incredibly precious thing.
We are in a world shaped by the global financial crisis where literally tens of millions of working people have been thrown out of jobs  -  on the scrap heap, in their countries, with all the misery that that implies for them, their families, their children, the prospects for the rest of their life.
Work is a precious thing.
You understand that and you feel it when any union member loses a job.
We understand that and we feel it when any working person loses a job.
Which is why, having work, the importance of work, in national economic debate it is front and centre this year, because of the importance of work.
We come to that national economic debate having protected jobs during the global financial crisis when the going was really tough, when the other side of politics simply slept through a global financial crisis they now seek to deny ever happened, we didn't rest.
We didn't rest, we worked with you, we worked with the employers to protect jobs in this country  -  such a precious thing.
What that means is we have come out of the global financial crisis unlike other nations around the world, unlike other nations around the world that have seen millions of people thrown out of work, their skill base destroyed, we have come through the global financial crisis with economic strength, unlike the rest of the world.
But you know that doesn't mean that our future is assured.
You know that we still have to plan and think and work to shape our future.
We can't simply drift into the future thinking, well, it doesn't matter, everything will be all right.
We can't adopt the politics embraced by the other side of the national debate in Australia, by the conservative side of politics.
We cannot embrace and I agenda of cost cutting and wage reduction as our future.
They would call on us, as we've seen on the video tonight, to increase our country's competitiveness by decreasing the wages of working people.
Well, we won't do that, we will never do that.
We understand that the strong persistent strength of the Aussie dollar is putting a lot of pressure on, a lot of pressure in many of the industries that you represent.
The strong dollar that has resulted because so much of the world's economy is weak.
The strong dollar which has resulted because of the resources boom and the big capital inflow that we have seen.
The strong dollar that his persisted even when the price for resources has gone down.
The strong dollar that has continued even as our interest rates have gone down.
The strong dollar which will continue to be a feature of our economy for quite some time to come.
Those who say the answer to the challenge of the strong dollar is cost cutting are asking working people to forego a third of their wages.
That is what you'd need to do - cut the average wage for a full-time working people from $70,000 to $50,000, to try and offset the effect of the dollar's rise.
That is not a future for our country and we won't embrace it.
We will choose a different path.
It is the path that I outlined yesterday, a plan for Australian jobs, a plan for our future.
You would have recognised many elements of the plan because they are things your union has been calling for and the union movement in total has been calling for.
We embraced your ideas through a process that included you and the plan that we announced yesterday is a comprehensive plan to make sure that we are a country that makes things; proud to have this union making things as part of our national economy and national life.
We will make sure through that plan that we win work here at home, that the proponents of the biggest projects in our country don't simply look at their global supply chain, don't do business here the way that they would do it in any other country on earth.
No, instead they will have to think.
Who in Australia can do this work?
Who in Australia could benefit from these jobs and these opportunities?
At the end of the day we want to make sure that prosperity is shared through the Australian economy by giving Aussie companies and Aussie workers a fair go at the work that is generated here at home.
Projects in Australia, employing Australians  -  that is the way it should be.
That's part of our plan for Australian jobs, for blue collar jobs, for secure job, for jobs that help people build a life and feed their families and give their families a future.
We want to focus on making sure that we get to seize the opportunities that will come due to the spectacular growth in our region of the world.
For much of my life, for much of the life of many people in this room we looked to markets in the US and Europe, we looked over Asia and we looked over it because we identified it as a place of poverty or a place of competition.
Now in the age in which we live as the European economies still face so much stress and strain from the global financial crisis and its aftermath, as the US economy still faces challenges with 12 million people unemployed, the same number of people as our total labour force, here we are in this region of the world, the growing region of the world, the region of the world that will soon become home to the biggest middle class on earth.
That middle class will want to buy the things that we've got to sell provided we get the plans right now.
So our product is there: high quality, available, desired in the region in which we live.
That's why we are investing in industry precinct and innovation precincts to bring together researchers and businesses to make sure the great ideas are spread and adopted, to give us that comparative advantage that will help us sell our exports into Asia and create Australian jobs.
The third part of our plan is to make sure our small businesses grow.
We have a vibrant small business economy but often they hit a constraint and can't get any bigger.
Access to finance is a bit thing that keeps small businesses small even though they've got good ideas and good products to sell.
We will be helping those businesses grow and to grow Australian jobs.
A plan for Australian jobs, a plan for the future.
A plan that will work with everything else we are doing to modernise the Australian economy.
To get it ready for the age in which we live and the prosperity we want to see for Australians.
It will join with our plan for a clean energy future.
Our role out of the National Broadband Network.
Our investments in infrastructure, in road, in rail and ports.
Our investments skills, more apprenticeships and traineeships than ever before.
More university places too.
These are the ingredients of the vibrant, modern economy with many sources of strength.
Not all of our eggs in the resources boom, not all of our eggs in any one basket but a vibrant economy with many sources of strength including manufacturing as an ongoing source of strength for our nation.
That is our plan and I am determined that we realise that vision of our country's future  -  high skill, high wage jobs, a country that makes things.
Friends, as part of that future, a country that is offering jobs and prosperity to its people, it can only be the Australia we want if it is a country offering jobs with decent working conditions and fairness and respect at work.
We got rid of the hated WorkChoices because it wasn't the Australian way to have that kind of exploitation at work.
Let's never forget WorkChoices particularly pressed on the young, pressed on women workers, on workers who don't come to the labour force, don't come to the labour force, necessarily able to demand for themselves.
WorkChoices wasn't the Australian way and we got rid of it with the Fair Work.
Friends, when it comes to fairness and decency at work we have more to do.
We announced some new measures last week that will make a difference to all of our modern families around the country trying to balance work and family life.
Which will make a difference to people who face bullying in their workplace, particularly the young, particularly the apprentices who can face that bullying at work.
These are important measures but they are not the end of our workplace relations agenda.
We will keep making announcements for change in workplace relations because the Fair Work Act is good but for me good is never good enough.
We will keep improving to give Australians the fairness, the decency, the respect at work they deserve and you want to see for them.
We're not done yet when it comes to health and safety at work.
I know your union is still mourning the loss of two firefighters in Victoria, Katie Peters and Stephen Cader.
We know that whenever anyone loses their life at work it is a dreadful tragedy for them, for their family but we feel it too.
We've always got more to do to make sure that people not only go to work but they come back home safe and well and we will keep working with you to achieve that too.
Friends, it's always been in us as a nation, as a generation, as a people to aspire not only to change our life's conditions, to do better hopefully for ourselves, but to change our nation so it offers better opportunities to our nation's children.
Every generation of Australians has worked so that the next generation can live a better life than them.
More opportunities for their children.
This generation is not going to let Australia's kids down.
We've got work to do to make sure that every Australian child, no matter the circumstances of their birth, goes to a great school and gets a real chance at a great life a real chance at a great life as a result.
That they aren't written off as a 7-year-old, a 10-year-old, a 12-year-old, a 15-year-old, that they aren't denied the things that will give them the power, the options, the choices to structure a life for themselves.
We've worked hard and I've been very passionate about making sure we are improving the nation's schools for our nation's children.
But we've got more to do to ensure that we can say to each other that we can say to each other that every school is a great school.
That every school's got the resources it needs.
That a great education isn't something that comes with a life of privilege, that it comes to every Australian child.
We will be working hard on that this year and I know you will be working alongside us as we do it.
Friends, this year too will see us start a transformation for Australians who live with disabilities and their families.
At the end of the day any Australian - any Australian's family member - would end up with a disability that changes their life forever.
Getting that disability shouldn't put that person on the scrap heap.
It shouldn't put that family into a life of ongoing strain  -  help should be at hand.
Which is why I'm particularly proud that on 1 July this year we will launch the National Disability Insurance Scheme to make a difference.
The watch-words of this year; the watch-words of our Labor cause; the watch-words of this nation's future: jobs, opportunity, fairness, being stronger, being smarter.
Making sure that the next generation enjoys a better life than we do.
Getting work pumping through the work troughs and the factories and the offices now.
Creating the economy that will give back prosperity to the next generation of Australians and beyond.
That is our mission, that is our cause in 2013 and beyond 2013.
I come here to this union's gathering as a Labor leader.
I'm not the leader of a party called the progressive party.
I'm not the leader of a party called the moderate party.
I'm not the leader of a party even called the social democratic party.
I'm a leader of the party called the Labor Party deliberately because that is what we come from.
That is what we believe in and that is who we are.
As the leader I can say to you 2013 will be about fighter for the Labor cause each and every day.
Fighting each and every day as we govern and then each and every day of the election campaign.
I am very confident that as we fight that campaign Australians will see that we have the plan for the nation's future that is right for their families and for their children and for the nation beyond that  -  I am very confident about that.
Friends, I know we'll be working together.
We'll be fighting together as we govern and then campaign across 2013.
But enjoy the night.
It's a night to be enjoyed and on with the fight tomorrow.
Thank you very much.


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
As a proud graduate of public education, I'm delighted to be with you today.
As a proud trade unionist, I'm delighted to be with you today.
You know the respect I have for you and all that you do.
I wanted to become a teacher myself.
I ended up becoming a politician.
But I trust that means I can make as a big a difference for our children as you strive to do.
I know the abiding commitment you have for education.
Believe me, I feel it too - because the future of our nation depends on it.
And every waking moment I have is dedicated to Australia's future.
I want every school to be a great school.
All 9,500 of them.
City and country.
Public and private.
Large and small.
I've called it a crusade, and it is.
It's a crusade because 3.5 million young lives are at stake.
If we fail them during 13 years of schooling, you don't get those years back.
If education counts, then teachers count.
Each teacher is an agent of change.
In some cases, the only figure who can bring aspiration and inspiration into a young life.
So much is asked of you.
Yet many of you feel you work with so little.
You chafe at the lack of resources.
You yearn to restore the standing that your profession once had in our national life.
Some of you also resent the heavy hand of bureaucracy in your state.
And, yes, some of you are concerned that graduates joining your ranks don't always have the skills they need.
Our National Plan for School Improvement is a plan to fix these things and much more besides.
It's a plan for great schools.
And so it's a plan for great teachers as well.
Education is a keystone of Australian citizenship.
Of realising the human potential of every student.
And as the Asian Century unfolds, it is vital to our economic success.
We cannot win the economic race without winning the educational race.
But at the moment, we're behind.
The average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai.
89 per cent of children from the poorest quarter of Australian homes are reading below average by Year 3.
So our most fundamental conversation in education has to be about results.
What are we doing right.
What are we doing wrong.
How can we do better.
That's why we need a comprehensive National Plan for School Improvement.
Yes, dollars matter.
But they are only ever a means.
The end  -  the goal  -  is achievement by students.
That means better schools.
Great schools.
Each and every one.
Our first and biggest challenge is to hold a mirror up to ourselves.
How are we going?
Well today, we have the data and the transparency to know how we are going.
We have put in place the reforms that mean we can do better. 
A world class national curriculum, creating an entitlement to learning for every student.
A focus on literacy and numeracy for those falling behind.
Empowering principals to focus on teaching and learning and work together with parents and the local community.
A relentless focus on quality teaching, underpinned now by rigorous, national professional standards.
Only then does it make sense to talk about money.
With these reforms defined and being delivered, we can focus on funding reform.
I've spoken often of the opportunity denied to my father.
But that was 70 years ago and in another country.
I've spoken of the opportunity denied to some of my own classmates at Unley High. But that was almost 40 years ago.
Since then, Australian education has improved.
Overall, our schools are better equipped and better resourced than ever before.
Since 2008, funding has doubled, driven by the National Partnerships I was proud to introduce while Minister for Education.
But still children are being left behind  -  one in 12 are not meeting minimum standards in reading, writing and maths
In the dramatic growth of school funding since 1974, we became so focused on the competing claims of public and private, federal versus state, that our formulas stopped working.
Too many schools and students fell through the cracks.
Some in non-government schools.
Many in our public schools.
Our nation's generosity was passing them by.
Friends, it's time to fix a broken school funding system for the century ahead.
For the first time, every school will be supported by a Resource Standard based on evidence of what it costs to educate a student at the schools we know already get strong results.
On top of that, extra needs will be met through a system of needs loadings.
That's extra funding, per student, to help students from low SES backgrounds, indigenous students, students with disability and students with limited English skills, as well as to help with extra costs for small and remote schools, the very areas where public schools carry the heaviest load.
Our kids need a plan for change in their schools.
Every school will see their funding continue to rise.
No school will lose a dollar.
Because it's not about systems, it's about students.
We won't do school funding based on assertion or tradition or ideology.
We will do it based on need, informed by fact.
That's a great progressive outcome for all who care about schools in Australia.
But it comes with a responsibility.
When these reforms are delivered, teachers will finally be assured of the resources they need to do their job properly.
That's only ever what you've asked for.
The chance to give your best.
In his appeal for American help in 1941, Churchill famously said:
Give us the tools, and we will finish the job.
With the National Plan for School Improvement, you will get the tools.
And with those tools, I know you will finish the job.
Education is the defining passion of my political life. 
That's why I commissioned the Gonski report back in 2010 and launched it one year ago.
So like you, I want this thing done.
But like the NDIS, it must be done properly.
This isn't just tinkering around the edges.
It is the biggest reform to schools policy in 40 years.
It's a long-term funding plan for all our schools, and all our students. 
I can say we are much closer to the end than the beginning.
In fact, we're at the pointy end.
A great deal of analysis and modelling has been done.
Peter Garrett has led fruitful dialogue with his State and Territory colleagues.
And there's been a huge amount of work at officials' level.
There are still gaps to fill.
But one simple understanding is enough to bridge them: we can't afford not to reform our schools.
I don't just mean in a moral sense.
I mean financially.
We are the twelfth-biggest economy on earth.
While the model proposed by Gonski has been costed in the order of $6.5 billion a year, this sum represents less than 0.4 per cent of our annual GDP.
Our nation spends twice that amount each year on tobacco.
We spend twice that amount again on alcohol.
We can afford school reform.
I'm not asking the Premiers to put money on the table today.
The full school improvement plan will come into force gradually between 2014 and full completion in 2019.
At the moment, most states are engaged in fiscal consolidation, just like the Commonwealth.
Admittedly, many of the Premiers' particular funding cuts are ones I oppose.
Federal Labor is showing how you can make responsible savings if you have the right priorities.
It's time for all State and Territory First Ministers to share the leadership on schools.
The big test will come at COAG in April.
I hope the Premiers will rise to the challenge.
Australia's children are counting on them.
The job isn't up to them alone.
It's up to me and Wayne Swan and Penny Wong as well.
As leaders of the national government, we have to find our share of funds for the School Improvement plan.
We will get this thing done.
Since NDIS and Gonski are huge reforms, our savings will be correspondingly ambitious.
They won't be a nip and tuck.
They will be a statement of where our priorities lie.
That in times of fiscal stringency, when dollars are scarce, we save from where it needed least and invest where it is needed most.
Without fear  -  without favour.
It's time to think big in this nation.
Big solutions.
Big ideas.
2013 will be a memorable year.
The year we launch the NDIS.
The year we begin the National Plan for School Improvement.
It's also the year in which we, the nation's elected representatives, return to face the people.
So if you value my National Plan for School Improvement, it's not enough to just nod in agreement or hit like' on a Facebook page.
The Government I lead will deliver Gonski.
If this Government goes, Gonski goes with it.
Mr Abbott's Liberals will always stand in the way of this reform.
As their time in government proved they have never shown any care or concern for disadvantaged children.
Now Mr Abbott's Liberals are being joined by the Greens Party.  
Senator Milne will tell you today that it is all about the mining tax.
It isn't.
It's all about your commitment to Australia's children.
If this moment is missed - frittered away in petty politicking by the Greens Party - then it will never come again.
The only way this major change can be delivered for this nation is by this Labor government this year and by this Labor government in the years beyond.
So you as teachers and unionists need to be part of the fight.
We have a vision worth fighting for.
An Australia that is not just prosperous but smarter, fairer and stronger.
An Australia where every school is a great school and every child receives a great education.
In the weeks and months ahead, I will govern to that end - working with the Premiers for the school improvement plan our kids need and deserve.
And I ask you to join with me in the fight for the future of our nation.
Remember I walked with you in that sea of Gonski' hands on the lawns of Parliament House.
I planted one myself.
I know the passion and impatience you feel.
The sense of injustice.
The sense of unfinished business.
The sense that our schools  -  and our nation  -  can do better.
I feel these things myself.
I feel them very deeply.
And so I say:
Don't lose heart.
We're nearly there.
The goal is in sight.
United in purpose, and joined in respect, we will get this done.
And we will get it done together.
For our kids.
For our nation.
For the future.


Geelong
Thank you very much and what an exciting day getting to walk for the first time on this new stretch of road.
And I'm very pleased so many people have come out to enjoy the experience, coming as it does with face-painting, fairy floss, heavens above there's a lot to do. So it's good to see everyone here.
I'd like to particularly acknowledge the State Minister, Terry Mulder, and also my federal parliamentary colleagues, Darren Cheeseman, the Member for Corangamite and Richard Marles, the Member for Corio.
This journey creating this bit of road all started in the lead up to the 2007 federal election when the Federal Labor Opposition as it then was committed to building this section of the Ring Road, Section 4B.
And that commitment was quickly matched  we decided to do it in partnership  and the then Bracks-led Labor Government said yes, the Ring Road should be brought into operation.
So the commitment made then. A very important commitment for the community in this part of the world, a very important commitment for the nation given the nation looks to this region for so much.
It's one thing to make the commitment; it's another thing to get to actually walk on it after the years in between.
And that has happened because of a lot of hard work from all of the people who have been involved in the design, all of the people who have been involved in the construction, and I'd like to thank VicRoads, all the employees, all the staff, all the contractors for their care and dedication in getting this job done.
This has actually meant a major economic injection into this region, into this part of the world.
I'm told that 1,320 jobs were created directly and indirectly through this construction: so, important to the economy.
It's also going to be important to the economy and amenity of this place for a very long period of time to come.
What it means is that we will see about 9,400 vehicles, 15 per cent of which are freight vehicles, travel this section of the Princes Highway instead of being on other roads, roads where they would be competition with local traffic. They will be using this section of the Geelong Ring Road, Section 4B.
So, it's good news if you live in Geelong, if this is your part of the world and you want to keep that extra traffic and those vehicles off your road.
It's good news if you live in the broader region because it's going to make your journey from place to place easier.
It's good news for those who love to come to this part of the world because of its physical beauty and tourist attractions. It means that your journey will be a shorter one, an easier one, and you won't need to worry about too many traffic lights along the way.
Indeed as a result of all of this you can now travel from Melbourne to the surf coast without stopping for a single traffic light  a great achievement.
So, it's with a really great sense of pleasure that I join the local community in celebrating this achievement today.
It's part of what we are trying to achieve in Victoria for infrastructure. We have been investing in Victorian infrastructure in record amounts.
We've more than doubled the annual Federal Government investment into roads and rail in the great state of Victoria from an average of $89 a head per Victorian, now to $201 a head.
A recognition that infrastructure had been neglected before our Federal Labor Government.
A recognition that the growth in Victoria means new infrastructure is needed.
A recognition that we want to plan and make a difference for the long term.
So, it's all good news and really tremendous to be here to join everyone for it.
I'd like to thank everybody who has been involved. I'm pleased and proud that we were able to make our contribution to this being achieved, and we were able to partner with the State Government in order to get it done.
So, a genuine partnership, one that is making a difference and will continue to make a difference.
So enjoy your opportunity to saunter back and forth. This will be the only time you get to do that  the sauntering will be over, the vehicles will be on it, the road will be in full operation.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
PM: I want to thank the Attorney-General, Mark Dreyfus, for that introduction.
It was just my enthusiasm to get up that was cutting it short, and I'm joined too by Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Families and Community Services, and also by your local federal member, Andrew Leigh, who is the Member for Fraser.
I get to go to a lot of schools as Prime Minister, in fact I deliberately organise my time so that I do go to a lot of schools, and I do that because the most important thing that is happening in our country today is happening in Australia's schools and that's because young people are our future. 
The future of our nation can't be better than you are.
You're the people who are going to make it, you're the people who are going to shape it, and so our future can't be better than you are.
Which is why Australia's young people are so precious to us and across all of the aspects of their lives we want to make sure that young people are safe, that they're healthy, that they get a great opportunity at education, that they get to feel inclusion as an Australian, truly feel part of the nation, and that with all of that grounding and all of that background they then go on to be great Australians.
As the adults in the system, we've got a responsibility to you, a responsibility to make sure that we build that healthy, safe environment for you, a responsibility to make sure every school is a great school, a responsibility to make sure that when you leave school you've got great options and choices, whether that's being an apprentice, whether that's going to university, whether that's going straight into the world of work.
So it's a big responsibility but it's our responsibility as the adults to help create that Australia for you.
It's one that I take very seriously, which is why I focus so much of the time on what's happening in Australia's schools and why particularly in the last few days we've been talking very passionately about making sure every young person gets the chance to become a really good reader because if you don't learn to read at school then unfortunately it can be very, very hard to pick up those reading skills in later life and it can make a big difference to your life.
So there's a lot of things to do to improve schools, a lot of things to do to make sure that our young people enjoy the best environment to grow up in. 
We've been thinking about what's a way of ensuring that the voice of children is always heard as government goes about making decisions and what's the best way of making sure that as we make decisions across the really big array of things that government does, that we are taking into account the needs and perspectives of Australian children.
And actually young people, including in this room, were consulted about what was the best way forward and what we should do and we've listened to you and we've come up with having a National Children's Commissioner and we've consulted with you about what that person should do to make sure that government is responsive to the needs of young people. 
Now we're going to take the next big step in creating the National Children's Commissioner and that's announcing the very special person who's got the job.
That person is with me today, it's Megan Mitchell and congratulations to her. 
And so this is really her first big thing as National Children's Commissioner and I know she's going to always remember coming to your school as the start of a very important job in the life of the Australian nation. 
So thanks very much for having us here this morning. Thank you.


Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I want to share you with a story David Bradbury relayed to me just last week.
Denis Mars is the co-founder of Meetings.io a start-up based in San Francisco which develops technology for online video conversations and conferences.
David and Denis met at a convention in Silicon Valley and because Denis is Australian they got to talking.
It turned out that while Denis is finishing his graduate degree at Stanford in California, his first degree, like David's, was from Sydney University.
He and his wife, Renee, are both from the western suburbs.
In fact, Denis grew up right around the corner from David, in the next street, not so far from here in Fairfield West. 
Here's a young man from these streets, who's founding firms on the other side of the world, who's making new ideas pay, who's making his living building new technologies.
His is a genuine local success story we can admire. A story of aspiration and achievement.
But no one person's story is the story of this entire region, home to 1.6 million people, including 350 000 children  -  and the third biggest economy in Australia.
Indeed, no one community's story is the story of this region.  Penrith isn't the same as Parramatta; Campbelltown isn't the same as Castle Hill.
But there are some things we do want for this region as a whole and for every person in Sydney's west.
First, the recognition and respect that should flow to people who work hard and do the right thing by their family, community and country  -  each and every day. 
I understand first hand, in my role as a Member of Parliament in Melbourne's west, a region's yearning for recognition and respect.
For far too long the community I made my home, the communities I represent, have been the kind of places people hurried through  -  not places where you stopped to stay.
Being from the west should never be viewed as being second-rate. 
In this region, your fierce sense of pride in your home and its achievements should engender recognition and respect.
Second, what I want for this region as a whole is that as you live your life and strive to create a better one for your children and grandchildren, you feel government working with you. 
I love it when I hear the stories of what has actually helped.
The way the new school hall at St Patrick's Primary School here in Parramatta has transformed teaching and learning  -  one insight into the 650 schools we've improved in this region with $1.3 billion in extra funding here. 
The fact the pay cheques kept coming in 160 000 western suburbs businesses, because we stimulated the economy to protect jobs during the global financial crisis and came through strong, unlike the rest of the world.
The jobs saved, the 850 000 new jobs created, with 135 000 of them in this city.
The help the School Kids' Bonus has provided to over 115 000 families in this region.
The women I meet who get to keep more of their pay to support their family  -  because they don't pay tax anymore and Government pays more of their childcare costs  -  they're among the 565 000 taxpayers who live here who received a tax cut last year and the 60 000 families who received extra help with child care.
The fact the upgraded Nepean Hospital is now seeing patients in facilities we funded with $130 million  -  the GP clinics at Blacktown and Liverpool  -  the millions of people here who can bulk-bill because of Medicare  -  through the hundreds of millions of dollars in extra health funding now flowing here.
I take delight in these improvements because I want to make sure that areas like Sydney's West  -  and the people who live and work here  -  get a fairer share of what you create. 
You deserve it because of your work and your endeavour  -  your care for your kids, families and communities  -  your determination to knuckle down and do the right thing.
This is what drives us as a Federal Government today and every day.
Put simply, we don't accept that other suburbs come first and you come second.
We don't accept that other suburbs need broadband before these suburbs.
We don't accept that hospitals in other suburbs should be better class than the hospitals here.
We don't accept that other schools need libraries, trade training centres and great teachers and that you don't.
We don't accept that you should feel less safe, or have less opportunity, or worse infrastructure than other parts of this city or our nation.
Look around at this institution itself, where we meet tonight built here in the West by one of the greatest Labor Governments, the Government of Neville Wran.
There is no greater example of our Labor faith, of the substance of the things Labor hopes for in Sydney's West, than this place itself.
This is more than a home of higher learning; it is a factory for suburban opportunity the University of Western Sydney.
Look around you and what you see is your dreams for a better life, most of all for your children, fulfilled by a practical, yet visionary, Labor plan for change. 
Your future, our purpose then.
Your future, our purpose now.
We won't promise the sun, the moon and the stars  -  we won't fill every pothole or catch every crook.
But I am determined to deliver five things to make your life easier and improve your future.
We will support your job and put Aussie workers first.
We will bring high speed broadband to your business and home.
We will get your children a world-leading education.
We will insure you against disability and keep improving health.
And we will help you manage the pressures of modern family life and modern society.
Let's talk frankly about how we are going to do these five things.
First, jobs.
You rightly want to know how our country will prosper, how we will have jobs beyond the mining boom.
You worry no more mining boom means Australia is bust.
So first, the good news.  The mining boom isn't going away any time soon. 
We haven't even reached the peak of the investment phase yet, the peak of new money coming on stream to build new projects.  Even when we pass that peak, the projects built will be extracting minerals, ore, oil and gas for decades to come.
But, not all the news is good.
Because of the mining boom, unlike the rest of the developed world we came out of the global financial crisis strong  -  with low inflation, low unemployment, low interest rates, triple-A rated and growing  -  our Australian dollar is strong and it's going to stay that way.
That's good news if you are going overseas or you are buying goods imported from overseas  -  our strong dollar makes it cheaper, it helps keep inflation down.
But it is bad news if you are manufacturing or trying to export services. 
Our strong dollar literally means our customers overseas need to spend fifty per cent more than they used to, to buy Australian.
Common sense tells you that if people are going to pay half as much again for something than they paid before, it had better be unique or incredibly good.
So that's our future. Being the innovators, being the ones smart enough to come up with the new goods and services the world wants and can only get from us.
Or being so incredibly good at what we do that our goods and services are such high quality they're worth the premium price.
This is the story across the nation  -  but the businesses and exporters of Sydney's west feel this pressure of the high Aussie dollar more than most.
This is a manufacturing region. 
Sydney's west represents about a third of the city's economy  -  and about a half of the city's manufacturing output.
This is also an exporting region  -  the west is a strategic hub for goods produced around Australia and transport and logistics is the third largest industry in the region.
So this is the region, you are the people, who are going to be charting the way, showing us how to innovate, to be unique, showing us how to deliver superb quality.
If we can do this together, then our opportunities beyond mining are huge.
By 2030, our region of the world will be home to 3.2 billion middle-class consumers, the world's biggest middle-class. 
They are exactly the kind of people prepared to buy the best  -  and with the money to do it.
They are exactly the people who we want to buy Australian.
I want Australia to win the benefits of this growth. 
I want Sydney's west to come up a winner and you have the natural advantages to do so.
This is the most socially and ethnically diverse region in the nation, in a century when we must know the languages and cultures of our customers and competitors like never before.
So let's go and get that work, seize that opportunity, create those jobs.
I have a plan to make sure we do, a plan for Australian jobs that will deliver benefits which will be felt here every day.
A plan to support your industries to increase exports and win new business overseas  -  especially by helping them innovate.
A plan to back your firms to win more work at home  -  to take the opportunity that comes from big mining projects to create blue-collar jobs, especially in manufacturing, right here.
A plan to help your small businesses grow  -  to support home businesses, contractors and the self-employed  -  because we know being your own boss is the dream of so many working people.
Of course, there is another path. 
That's cutting wages so hard you counteract the effect of the high dollar  -  that would mean cutting wages by almost a third. 
Doing that would require Work Choices to be back or something worse. 
I'll always fight anyone and everyone who wants to take us down that path.
And I'll work with you to deliver my plan to create the high skill, high wage jobs of the future.
It is obvious we can't be the innovators, we can't be the best, if we are trapped with yesterday's infrastructure. 
Imagine trying to compete in today's world if half our houses and businesses didn't have electricity.
To be economic winners we have to have the best of infrastructure and that means the National Broadband Network, right here in the west: in Blacktown, Prospect, Penrith.
To be economic winners also requires having the best skills.
That's why we have created more apprenticeships and university places here and around the nation than ever before.
It is why I am so determined that our children get a world-leading education. 
It's not right that children in Shanghai and Singapore get a better education than our kids. 
It's not right that our schools lack resources, that so many of our children never learn to read and write, that not every child has a great teacher and that principals chafe against being tied down by bureaucracy.
We will deliver, from the first day of school next year, the improvements your school needs  -  in Sydney's west and right around the nation  -  so every child gets a great education.
Jobs, world-leading infrastructure like the NBN, world-leading schools  -  a plan for opportunity, a plan to seize the benefits of the growing wealth in our region for our nation.
A plan to be stronger and smarter.
A plan to be fairer too. 
We will give those with disabilities a better life today and we will for all time give you the peace of mind that comes with knowing that if life delivers you or your family a cruel blow, then you will not be left behind.
In seventeen weeks' time we are launching the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
At the same time we are improving Medicare and bringing more doctors, nurses, hospital funding and local control to your hospitals than ever before.
Last, we want to help the modern families of this region as you go about the hard work of making a good life. 
The hard work of raising children, holding down a job, helping your ageing relatives. 
The grind of long daily commutes, on infrastructure that's barely coping, on roads that need co-operation between Governments  -  and we'll have more to say about that in coming days.
That's why here, in Sydney's West, we're helping with the household budget. 
We've made sure that Mum and Dad on the old age pension are $182 better off a fortnight than when we came to Government.
That Mums and Dads can get paid parental leave with their new baby.
That you'll see $15,000 in School Kids Bonus if you have two kids in school and more family benefits when your children are teenagers.
Payments on an average mortgage are down by $5 000 a year, saving almost $100 every week  -  that's real help with the cost of living  -  and we are forcing the States to implement changes to stop your electricity bills continuing to skyrocket.
Modern challenges demand modern responses.
Whether it has been protecting jobs during the GFC or creating a clean energy future by pricing carbon, your Government has been prepared to stand up and act.
Government can never stand still or be flat footed when new challenges confront us.
One of those new challenges is the increasing sophistication of gangs and organised crime.
The hardened criminals with the guns. 
The people who might take aim at each other in one of your streets today and be over the border in to another State tomorrow  -  or have sold or sent their weapon interstate to make it harder to trace. 
I make no apology for saying this is vital business: not when a nine-year-old boy in Bankstown can find bullet casings fired into the bedroom he shares with his mother and three other children.
Not when the industrial estates of my own community in Melbourne's west become bikie battlegrounds.
The number of drive-by shootings in this State rose from 73 in 2010 up to 88 in 2011, with around 7 incidents per month  -  and last year, more than 130 shootings took place in this city. 
The threat is not isolated to Sydney: Victorian police recorded a ten per cent rise in the use of firearms in robberies through 2012  -  and there were 14 shootings in South Australia in just the first five weeks of this year.
This Government has been working to meet the evolving threat.
In 2012 we introduced legislation with tough new penalties for firearms trafficking across state and national borders, with a maximum penalty of life in jail for people who traffic firearms.
In 2010 we introduced new unexplained wealth provisions into the Proceeds of Crime Act  -  so that if a person can't prove their wealth came from lawful means, the court can seize their assets.
We also established Taskforce Polaris, targeting organised crime in the cargo system in Sydney, bringing together officers from five State and Federal authorities.
All this has made a difference: today, our agencies are seizing more than double the amount of drugs, weapons and cash and more than triple the amount of criminal assets that they were seizing before we came to office.
The States are playing their part  -  in Sydney, the NSW Police Force has been fighting this threat  -  but they should not have to do this on their own.
Organised crime, including the activities of outlaw bikie gangs, is estimated to cost Australia $15 billion a year. 
Combating all this needs a new, nationally-led approach.
Based on current intelligence, the Australian Crime Commission estimates that 72 known organised crime targets have each generated $10 million or more in illicit funds or profits over a two-year period. 
Six of these had an estimated value of illicit funds or profits of over $100 million.
While on our streets, we are seeing violent conflict between crime syndicates with national and international connections  -  financed by the trafficking of drugs, guns and money into and out of Australia, and across state borders  -  with connections to tax avoidance, bank fraud and criminal activity overseas.
This is why earlier today with Commissioner Negus and Minister Clare, I announced that the Government will contribute an additional $64 million over the next four years to establish a new National Anti-Gang Taskforce and National Gangs Intelligence Centre.
These will lead the effort to identify and then dismantle national and transnational crime networks.
We will also establish a National Border Targeting Centre, to target high-risk international passengers and cargo.  The Centre will deploy an intelligence-led, risk-based approach to seize drugs and other contraband at the border.
Tackling gangs and guns  -  this is part of my plan for the nation and for Sydney's west.
Jobs, infrastructure including the NBN, a world-leading education for our children, insurance for disability and better health care, challenges for modern families and modern society understood and acted on.
This is my plan for you.
This is my plan for the nation.
Jobs and opportunity.
Stronger, smarter, fairer.
I have a plan to deliver.  We all have a fight to win. 
A fight to stop the broadband roll-out being brought to an end.
To stop foreign workers being put at the front of the queue with Australian workers at the back.
To stop your cost of living being hit by cuts to benefits for families and pensioners, increased tax and less super.
To stop your rights at work being threatened again.
To stop cutbacks to your hospitals and schools.
A fight to win for the people of Sydney's West.
I didn't grow up here.
I didn't grow up on the North Shore or in the East either.
I grew up a lot further West and a lot further South.
In Adelaide, in a family where I was taught to believe deeply in the human importance of opportunity, of social mobility, of a chance to make your own life better, of the responsibility to make a better life for your kids.
These are my values, these are my beliefs. 
This is my plan for the nation, this is my plan for Sydney's west.


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
On this day of sadness and farewell, we hear many stories and many voices.
We've heard from Peter, supported by Andrew, Geoff, Gary and Roger - the five sons who Joan brought up on her own with such love and determination.
We've heard from Robert Ray, a giant of the modern Labor Party who saw in Joan a colleague to be respected.
And now, I share these words with you as one of the women who walked through the door that Joan so brilliantly opened.
Female representation in federal politics came late for our Party  -  1974.
Well into the 20thcentury, Labor embodied the Australian legend of shearers and dockworkers bonded in a spirit of male mateship.
It took a remarkable woman to break the mould  -  and Joan Child was that woman.
For Joan, the Labor ethos was etched deep in her soul.
She didn't need to be told of it or read it in a book.
Everything about her life and experience spoke of this belief.
She'd worked in a factory. She'd worked as cleaner.
She'd raised these five boys alone.
And when she came to public life as candidate in 1972, she'd already lived a full life, so when electoral success came her way eighteen months later, she was ready.
At the outset, Joan Child began her political journey as she meant to continue it  -  on her terms.
When the news photographers came to her house, Joan refused to adopt the domestic poses that previous female MPs had adopted  -  baking a cake, holding the vacuum cleaner.
Joan saw the danger and put it astutely to one side.
Instead she raised a glass of champagne to Gough's remarkable re-election, and that was the photo that beamed out from the pages of the press.
Bold, defiant, and just a little bit cheeky.
That is not to say Joan wasn't proud of her accomplishments as a mother or of her lovely home and garden, or wasn't careful as to her presentation and dress  -  she was.
Joan had understated style and class in all these things.
But she never let them define her.
This was a woman determined to be judged on her character, not on her gender.
And always, always  -  Joan was a proud daughter of the Labor movement.
She was an activist.
She understood that Australian politics is essentially and fundamentally a contest of values.
Joan was faithful to those values in the good times and the bad.
And no days we were worse than 11 November 1975 and the election to follow when Joan, like Bill Morrison who we also mourn at this time, lost her seat.
Yet like Bill, Joan returned to the arena.
She finally made it back in 1980, and this decade was Joan's finest time.
The time of her Speakership.
The time when Joan's face and voice became familiar to Australians.
The time when our belief that women can do anything finally began to be realised in our nation's institutions.
The women like Joan didn't have a guide book.
Instead they wrote it.
That is why we can say today that Joan left us many gifts:
Her spirit of service to the Parliament and the people.
Her faith in the Labor cause.
Her ambition for her electorate and the nation, especially in terms of how we care for the disadvantaged and people with disabilities.
But most importantly of all, Joan gave us her example.
The example of a smart, confident woman succeeding in the public sphere.
Not only succeeding against the odds but resetting those odds for those who came in her footsteps.
Through it all, Joan seamlessly blended toughness and kindness, and with her beloved Hawks, her Elvis recordings, her books and her garden, Joan remained - resolutely, calmly, refreshingly - normal.
Today we bear witness as the Labor tribe, we gather to mourn one of our own - one of our best.
And as Australians, we acknowledge a woman who believed that our nation's creed or fairness and opportunity must also have space for women, must also have space for her too.
By any measure, Joan Child had a remarkable life.
In its balance of struggle and achievement, it was a life we could recognise as a fortunate life.
A life of meaning and purpose.
A life long in years but short in regret.
After 91 summers, that life is now over.
Joan's body, weakened by frailty and age, has found its rest.
But this proud Labor matriarch, this model and mentor, will long live on in our hearts and hold an honoured place in our nation's story forever.


We are particularly pleased to be joined by our Chinese friends today: His Excellency Ambassador Chen Yuming, Chinese Ambassador to Australia along with representatives and special guests from the Academy of Agricultural Sciences China and the Nanjing Agricultural University.
We can learn a great deal together and we can learn a great deal from each other.
China is Australia's most valuable destination for exports of agricultural products and two way trade is growing, with Chinese sales to Australia growing at more than eight per cent a year.
We appreciate the significant recent increases in access for a number of products including beef, Tasmanian cherries and dairy products.
And I am absolutely delighted that this Centre will work so closely with the Academy and the University.
The understandings and agreements which will see shared endeavour in teaching and learning, research and innovation here and at your institutions in China are exactly the kind of positive human connections which bind Australia and China together more closely every year.
The great themes of the Australian future  -  the great themes of change and progress in our century  -  are all contained in the work of the Centre which we are here to launch today.
Asian partnerships, Asian growth, food security, clean energy, education.
The work of this Centre is exactly the kind of work I envisaged in our White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
The White Paper, plan which guides Australia's efforts to be among the winners in the Asian Century, specifically identified the food and agricultural sector as a major priority for work.
Currently Australia produces twice as much food as we consume  -  we export as much as we eat.
For decades, we have been well served by our reputation as a safe supplier of high quality food and fibre.
The work we do now in research and innovation to seize the opportunities our clean energy future will create for our food and fibre industries will be a key in coming decades  -  and the shifting centre of economic gravity, from west to east, creates vast new opportunities for us in our region.
This is why, following the release of Asian Century White Paper, Feeding the Future: A Joint Australia-China Report on Strengthening Investment and Technological Cooperation in Agriculture to Enhance Food Security' was released by Minister Emerson and Minister Ludwig in December last year.
China's Minister for Commerce and Minister for Agriculture are co-signatories to the report.
Feeding the Future identified new grounds for future collaborations between agricultural producers and agribusinesses in both countries: developing water and soil resources in northern Australia; commercialising new technology, particularly new plant varieties and making improvements in food processing and logistics.
These are all areas where the nexus between carbon reduction and food and fibre production  -  and these are all areas of cooperation which are strongly reflected in the work of this Centre and the collaborative arrangements that you have struck.
While the high quality tertiary courses in the agri-food sector which will be offered here and with your partners are vital to the future prospects of farmers around the country  -  and  in turn, vital to the future prosperity of Australia's regional communities. 
So the launch of this Centre drives partnerships in our region, in a century of growth, it supports food security, it finds economic opportunity in clean energy and carbon reduction.
All this is done, ultimately, through research  -  through education.
Nothing matters more to me personally, nothing matters more to the nation I lead or to the nations we work with in the world, than improving the education of our peoples.
As Prime Minister I take particular pleasure in seeing the work we are doing to prepare our nation for the future take shape in such practical ways in an outer urban community.
Here, at the University of Sydney's campus at Camden, I can see all our hopes and plans for our nation becoming very substantial and real.
I am very pleased to be back at the University of Sydney and to see the results of the Australian Government's contribution of $4.6 million to this Centre.
I commend the hard work of all the institutions who have been involved in the delivery of this centre and the cooperative arrangements we are celebrating today.
I look forward to seeing the results of your work in coming years.
Congratulations  -  and thank you.


Female Orphan School, Parramatta
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I've had quite a week. It started here and it's finishing here, so what could be more appropriate than having started at the University of Western Sydney and finishing here at the University of Western Sydney.
It started when I came on Sunday evening to address friends of the Labor Party  -  Labor members and friends  -  about our vision for the country and our vision for this part of the country, for western Sydney.
And when I spoke in the Turbott Auditorium I made the point that this university is a factory of suburban opportunity.
It speaks to us about the things that we are trying to achieve for Australians around the nation, including particularly women. Because when we trace our life as a nation, for too long it was women who were locked out of the doors of universities.
For too long it was women who didn't get an equal opportunity for higher education  -  indeed for education at all.
And we are changing that. This university is changing it. Our policies are changing it.
Moving to a time when universities can grow  -  and this one is  -  there need be no false debate about standards dropping because of growth. Janice and I had a discussion about that on Sunday evening.
A university of high standards still able to offer more in opportunity and to offer that opportunity to people who traditionally haven't got a go at a university education, and who in great numbers are the first to come from their family to a university.
So I'm very proud to be here, and nothing really lifts up my heart more than hearing these stories of opportunity and achievement.
I spent a great deal of time out in western Sydney in the community this week. But I did go to Melbourne for one occasion  -  and I do want to just mention it because it was an occasion at which we honoured a great woman.
I went to the state funeral of Joan Child, the first Labor woman ever elected to the House of Representatives, and that happened in 1974.
Now there are probably some young women in the audience who are going 1974, before the dawn of time'. Actually for most of us, 1974 doesn't nearly seem that long ago that we could be talking about the first ever Labor woman to serve in the House of Representatives.
But serve she did, she was a formidable woman, a formidable campaigner.
For those of you who know something about the political scene there is always a scramble come elections to get out in front on the postal votes; to make sure that those people who are getting to vote by post actually get your ticket and they know how to vote for you if they are so-minded to vote for you.
Joan Child is famous for having when necessary climbed through a bathroom window into a suburban home to ensure that someone marking their postal vote did get a Labor ticket.
I'm sure the person in question did want a Labor ticket and somehow had managed to lock themselves in the house, but undeterred, she got through that bathroom window to make sure that they ended up with a how to vote card.
So she was a formidable woman!
But when we farewelled her, the first Labor woman in the House of Representatives, the first woman to serve as Speaker in the House of Representatives, a colleague of mine in saying farewell used these words:
She lived a life of strength, so others could live alife of opportunity.
A life of strength because she was the first woman to be elected  -  Labor woman to be elected to the Parliament.
A life of strength because she was effectively a single mother to five sons.
A life of strength because she lived to such a great age and made sure she continued to be active and supported her community.
But all of it was dedicated so others could live a life of opportunity.
And I think those very simple but powerful words actually catch the spirit of what International Women's Day is about in the modern age and why we do want to have occasions like this and honour women in our community; in this case, women in the west.
Because there are so many women from various walks of life who live lives of strength so others can have lives of opportunity.
And I know many of the women here this evening well and truly fit into that category and I'm looking forward to being able to meet people during the course of this evening's event and talk to them about the way in which they are harnessing opportunity for others in their community.
As a Government we strive to do that to. But we can only be as good as the local community efforts that work with us.
We can only be as good at bringing early childhood education to children, as the people  -  predominantly women  -  working in those child care centres and working as early educators.
We can only be as good at creating opportunity for kids in primary school as the teachers  -  predominantly women are  -  as they go about transforming lives for those young children.
We can only be as good as the teachers in secondary school, as the people in university, as the people who guide young apprentices are.
So in trying to create a life of opportunity for the nation, we know we've always got a lot of big and sometimes difficult decisions to make, but we know the carrying of our work into reality in communities rest on the shoulders of citizens of goodwill who want to work with us.
Fortunately right around the nation I find those citizens of goodwill and I've certainly found them in large numbers here in Sydney's west during the course of the last week.
From the people I've met who are spending their lives creating opportunity for Australians with disability and who are anxiously awaiting the start of the National Disability Insurance Scheme, to the teachers and principals I've met who are transforming lives of the young people in their care.
To the New South Wales Young Australian of the Year, Corey Payne, and the work he is doing to inspire others to live a life of opportunity.
To the people I've met at suburban libraries, in small businesses, just walking down the street, all of whom have a story about how they are trying to enrich this community, their community in their place.
So it has been a great week, and no better way to end it than right here celebrating some women of achievement. So it's a delight to join you.
We gather in this building, and this building I think too is a tremendously significant place. I'm glad we were able to help with that renovation, which is still going on.
But it says something about Australia that when we look at our universities  -  our great institutions of learning  -  that the oldest surviving building is this building. And it was a school for orphaned girls.
Now I suspect in its day it was making a difference  -  of course we would never conceptualise an institution like this in the modern age, we would never seek to recreate it  -  but you do have to admire the spirit that did create it.
And did create it so early in the life of our nation.
And did create it to make a difference for girls who otherwise would have lived lives of absolute disadvantage.
Did create it for those girls to give them some opportunity and some access to a life and learning so this place, something we wouldn't create now but created with the best of intentions.
And if we can take from what is in some ways a beautiful and other ways a very austere building, take with us from this evening tonight some of that spirit of endeavour that the creators of this building had  -  Anna King, Elizabeth Paterson and others  -  when they first decided that their fledgling colony did need to make a difference for the life of orphaned girls, if we can take some of that spirit with us then I think it will be a better place.
So it's truly a great pleasure to join you here this evening and I'm looking forward to hearing the individual stories of the women who are being honoured in this place.
Thank you.


Penrith, NSW
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I am here to say to you that the future belongs to the people who step up and shape it. You can drift into your future and see what comes, or you can actively shape your future and make sure that you prepare and get the best of opportunities; that you get ready.
And what is true in the life of an individual is true in the life of a nation. We will have the best of opportunities in the future if we take the right decisions today to shape that future.
Your future is never assured in a competitive world  -  no one owes our nation a living  -  you have got to get up and work for it, and you've got to make the right decisions so that you do have that strong future.
And we've been very focused on that as a Government, and I've been very focused on that this week as my visit in and around has caused so much media attention  -  including this visit today to Penrith.
The simple message that we've been taking to people is that we need to actively plan and shape a future that gives people in this region of the world, and more broadly, the benefit of jobs. Good jobs, long-term jobs, jobs for the future.
Jobs that involve the highest of skill and consequently draw the highest of rewards; the highest of pay.
And that just doesn't happen automatically. It particularly doesn't happen automatically when the world has been through a global financial crisis and when the Australian dollar is so strong and likely to be sustained so strong for a long period of time, and that puts pressure on businesses like manufacturing, puts pressure through the economy.
We've got to take the right decisions now in this environment to shape a prosperous future.
Part of taking those right decisions is to make sure that the traditional infrastructure we've all known and relied on  -  roads and rail and ports  -  is fit for purpose.
Which is why one of my clear messages when I've been in greater western Sydney this week has been that we do need a road that takes you all the way into the city.
That it is not good enough for this community to be denied that kind of access, to be asked to endorse a plan that takes you further into the city, but not all of the way to the city.
And it's also not good for this community  -  or not good enough for this community  -  to be asked to pay tolls on roads that you currently travel on for nothing.
That's an important thing for jobs and mobility in this community.
Because so many people have to make the long commute in the morning and the long commute home, and the longer that commute takes them, the less time they get with family and friends at each end of the day.
The leaving before the kids have got up, the getting home after the kids have gone to bed.
So a very important announcement from us which is about this community and its future.
But getting people to where they need to go more quickly and easily is one strategy for this community's future. Another strategy is the one referred to by the mayor, and that is to better distribute jobs so people don't have to always embark on long travel to get jobs and to get to the high-skill, high-wage jobs that they want.
One thing that we want to do to ensure jobs are present locally in communities like this one is to create innovation precincts  -  job precincts in those communities that bring together researchers and businesses so that our great researchers can transmit the innovations of the future to business, we can seize those business opportunities and create jobs.
One thing that really frustrates Australians I think is when they hear about a great Aussie invention that ends up getting commercialised somewhere overseas and people overseas get the benefit of that work.
So I have announced today we will be investing $1.5 million to bring people together; researchers, businesses across the greater western Sydney area so that you can put up the best possible pitch for at least one of our innovation precincts.
New precincts, new ways of working together, researchers and business creating new jobs and jobs you don't have to travel to town for.
So I think that's good news. But the even better news is the rollout of the National Broadband Network, because there is nothing that will work more effectively to distribute jobs and job opportunities across this part of the world than the rollout of the NBN.
It closes that sense of distance  -  any sense of distance. It means that you can pursue right here locally a business that is not only connected to the CBD of Sydney; it is connected to the world.
It means that you can do that if you're running a business from home and it's just you, or you're deciding as a major company to locate one of your workplaces here.
It means that work can be distributed far more easily than it is now because you can engage in real time in a real way with people right around the world.
That's the employment benefit of the National Broadband Network.
The benefit is not just limited to employment, it's about new services as well.
The things that can mean that an older person gets to stay at home. The new health services which mean things that you used to have to go to the GP for, you can monitor yourself and send the GP the results in real time.
That you can have medical consultations without ever leaving your lounge room. That you can access the best of education from around the world, and our young people can access the best of education from around the world.
These are incredible benefits for the community unlocked by the power of the National Broadband Network.
As we bring that power to communities we are very conscious that people come to this new world of digital technology with different skill levels and different abilities to seize the moment.
I think we all know that if right now if we ended up having some catastrophic failure with our phone or something happened with our iPad we didn't understand, the best thing we could do in this room is ask one of these school children to sort it out for us.
So, we all know that there are people who because they are young they instinctively take to this world, and have all of the skills and aptitudes that they need to immerse themselves in it.
Then you've got older people  -  my father was a good example  -  he didn't trust the automatic teller machine. He never used the automatic teller, he didn't think it was right that you put your card in a slot in the wall and that money came out of it, and he was going to go into the bank and he was going to have a conversation with the man or woman behind the counter.
So, some older Australians who actually need some help to adapt to this new world so that they can get the benefits of it.
And then there is all of us in between who manage to adopt some of the skills along the way but perhaps don't intuitively see the full power of this technology the way some younger people do.
So, having local strategies to help people understand and get the skills they need is pivotally important. If we just roll out the NBN then the uptake will be amongst some who instinctively take to this world, but not amongst all.
We can make sure in partnership with you that everyone  -  young and old, the digital natives, the people who first pick up an iPad with a sense of wonderment  -  that everyone gets the benefits of this new technology.
Which is why I am so impressed at the work going on here at your local council, and it is a great tribute to you and to the team, and I know many of them are in the room today, that you have thought your way through this digital economy strategy.
That you are taking active decisions to shape the future of the people that you serve, and we've seen some of those active decisions and their power as we've gone to the digital hub.
Had the ability to cut the ribbon, but also seen people learning there about the digital world  -  including one woman who said to me as I walked out, now I've met you I'll be able to like' you on Facebook.
Obviously getting into the digital world and starting to understand it and presumably not that long ago before she started taking those classes even the language of that sentence would have been entirely alien to her, let alone being on Facebook herself and understanding the use of it.
So these things are really important and they get driven by local leadership, they get driven by a partnership with the federal government, and I'm very pleased that our partnership with you has enabled the digital hub to be here, has enabled you to engage in the digital enterprise strategy, and that you have the overarching digital economy strategy for your part of the world.
So I get the special delight of saying that the strategy and that work is formally launched. I'm the one who got the benefit of the very ornate scissors to cut the ribbon with, but really it's not about me cutting the ribbon, it's about the work each and every one of you has done and will continue to do to make this meaningful in your local community.
So congratulations to you. I always love it when I get to come to a part of the world that's got a real sense of energy and achievement and aspiration, and possibly most important of all, a very clear plan for your future.
I'm very pleased to be here today, thank you very much for the invitation.


Sydney Convention and Exhibition Centre
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I acknowledge each of you  -  the women drawn here by the power of this day.
You are women of achievement.
Women who reach out to shape the future.
This is a day of celebration, and rightly so.
Even if the women's movement had changed just one life, it would be worth it.
Yet over the past century, it has changed millions of lives, including my own.
But today our celebration must be tempered by realism.
The first International Women's Day was 102 years ago.
This is an old struggle.
Yet the level of assault and abuse is still too high.
The gender pay gap is still too wide.
The number of women in senior roles is still too few.
We should be impatient.
It's time to get a move on.
And friends, let's never forget that women's rights are indivisible.
If women are marginalised or oppressed anywhere, it's as though it happened to one of us.
This year America has been celebrating 150 years since President Lincoln ended slavery.
We imagine slavery as something from the pages of history.
But it's not.
It's hard to imagine from the safety and comfort we know, yet slavery still exists in our world and in our land.
The setting is different than it once was.
Today the people forced into slavery work in factories, in domestic servitude, in brothels  -  often in big cities like this.
But the violence and coercion they face is exactly the same.
In February this year I had the opportunity to meet with two women who were victims of human trafficking.
They had been brought to Australia by their employers under false pretences.
They had their passports taken from them.
They weren't allowed to leave the house without supervision.
One of them wasn't paid properly; the other wasn't paid at all.
When they challenged their employers, they were abused and threatened.
That occurred here, in Australia.
Not 150 years ago but in the last three years.
I was introduced to those women by Andrew Twiggy Forrest and his wife Nicola, who were talking to me about their role in establishing Walk Free'  -  a global movement that aims to eradicate modern slavery.
There are many things on which Mr Forrest and I do not agree but ending modern slavery isn't one of them.
Twiggy and Nicola Forrest have shown amazing leadership on this issue.
Not only that.
The Forrests have pledged to donate the vast majority of their wealth to this and other causes.
A gesture that will change lives in the most basic possible way  -  restoring people to freedom.
Friends, remember these women are among 16 million women who have been enslaved and trafficked over the past decade and this is their Day too.
Those women don't have a voice so we must speak for them.
Not just to speak but to act.
That's why since 2004, Australia has invested over $150 million in anti-people trafficking measures, in our region and here at home  -  including $50 million I pledged last year.
Already we've been able to help around 200 women and their dependents in Australia, and today I pay tribute to the special role the Salvation Army has played in this.
But as Australia's first female Prime Minister, I've wanted us to do even more.
That's why we passed the Slavery, Slavery-like Conditions and People Trafficking Act which our Governor-General signed into law yesterday.
This Act creates new offences of forced marriage and harbouring a victim.
It enables accomplices to be charged as well as the main perpetrators.
It raises the penalties for existing debt bondage offences, and also increases payments to victims.
Alongside these new laws, we are updating Australia's National Action Plan to combat trafficking, slavery and forced marriage  -  which will come into force next year.
And today I'm proud to announce a new whole-of-government strategy to reinforce ethical behaviour in procurement so that no firm providing goods or services to the Commonwealth is tainted by slavery or people-trafficking anywhere in the supply chain.
While there's no evidence this is the case at the moment, we know slavery or people-trafficking are becoming a greater issue as the global economy becomes more interlinked.
I'd hate to see a single cent of public money go to any entity involved in this vile trade.
Friends, this is one of the many ways that Australia is saying no'.
No to people trafficking.
No to slavery.
No to treating women like objects or chattels.
That is not a world we will accept.
That is not a life we want for any woman or any girl.
Not here.
Not overseas.
Not anywhere.
Not ever.
Instead, we seek a different future and a different world.
Where every girl is born with freedom in her heart and has the chance to grow old with that freedom.
And so, on International Women's Day, we affirm this simple but enduring truth: change is always possible, and the hope we share can never be in vain.


Federation Mall, Canberra
Today we gather to celebrate this city ordained by our Constitution to be the heart of our nation's democracy.
At a time when Britain was still Home, the federal generation' was astute enough to give this place an Aboriginal name,a wise and evocative choice.
Though Canberra has several meanings, the one we settle upon is meeting place  -  as if the meeting place of the new Australia could only recognise and rest upon the old.
So it was on this hill one hundred years ago that Lady Denman drew a card from her gold cigarette case and named this city Canberra, the world's newest capital on the world's oldest continent.
The naming of Canberra completed a remarkable quartet of events: the idea, the site, the plan, the name.
The idea owed its debt to Washington DC  -  and so this is a day to honour our abiding friendship with the United States.
Like its elder sister, Canberra was a neat solution to a federal dilemma, placing the capital outside any one state and thus belonging to every state.
The site was chosen in a process that was complex, yet the result was sublime.
Nestled within a bowl of hills.
The Brindabellas majestic in the west.
The Molonglo valley forming a natural amphitheatre for the great institutions to come.
And the plan  -  this was a work of rare and timely genius.
Walter Burley Griffin perhaps saw us better than we saw ourselves, seeing this landscape with fresh and open eyes from half a world away.
His vision was superbly realised by his partner in life and work, Marion Mahony Griffin, whose drawings form a national treasure in their own right.
It was a plan created by two Americans and yet so distinctively Australian.
A plan that honoured and embossed this landscape, embracing its contours, working along its ancient grain.
But friends, the process of selecting and naming this city was only a beginning.
From the start of Canberra's construction to the opening of new Parliament House took three-quarters of a century.
At every stage, it was the work of human hands.
Hands that graded the roads and laid the bricks and planted the trees.
We honour also those who now govern this city and tend it.
We honour those who give their best to our national institutions and to the ideal of an impartial public service.
And we honour those who have come here through the years to make a life in Canberra's suburbs and in the hamlets beyond.
So for the nation, Canberra is our enduring capital.
For the world, it is a model of urban design.
And for locals, it is simply our much-loved home.
Canberra is all these things.
A city whose promise was a long time in gestation and which, at its hundredth birthday, has finally attained a mature grace.
Yet it is a capital whose history has barely begun.
Because today we do more than mark the centenary of Canberra's founding.
Today we mark the beginning of Canberra's second century, and so dedicate ourselves to all the future achievements of city and nation.
Across these ten decades, we have made here a fine and decent city  -  a city invested with a certain grandeur.
A city that has become a place of learning and culture  -  the memory-house of a new nation slowly growing old.
A city that is a focal point for national pride and sentiment.
A capital which truly merits our affection and esteem.


Old Parliament House, Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
The topic you are here to discuss, creating secure jobs, has moved to the centre of national debate this week.
For Labor people, that's a development we welcome.
We want more jobs and more secure jobs for all Australians.
We want more skills, more apprenticeships, more training for young Australians.
We want more Australian workers to fill the skilled jobs our economy creates.
This is exactly what the Australian people expect the Australian Government to stand for.  It is exactly what I will fight for.
For this Labor Government, it's a debate we are ready to have.
Here, we are particularly discussing the two million Australians whose jobs are not secure today.
Who don't know how many hours they'll work next week or next month  -  who can't save or plan to get ahead  -  whose opportunities in life are restricted and whose family's future is constrained, simply by the conditions of their employment.
Cleaners, drivers, labourers, bar staff, wait staff.
People who earn around 85 per cent of the average wage of Australians for the hours they work  -  $4 to $5 an hour less than most people.
Who as your own inquiry found, have fewer entitlements, are more likely to have poor English skills, who find it harder to get a home loan or a car loan and have less super for retirement.
Of course, it's obvious that many Australians benefit from casual work and that many businesses create wealth and opportunity through its use.
Hardly anyone hasn't had a casual job in his or her youth.
Of the million women who go out to work every week with flexible rosters, a good number do so knowing that they can pass up a shift if they need to and that they can work a few extra hours when they want.
And there are people on contracts who are succeeding in a dynamic economy and very glad to be their own boss.
Yet for all that, the evidence is clear: that is not the whole picture and indeed it is only half of the picture.
It is a plain fact that most of the two million working Australians with insecure jobs deserve a greater opportunity to get ahead in life  -  and this Government has a plan to give them that chance.
All our work to keep our economy strong benefits the insecure millions very directly.
Making sure their employer can offer more hours, making sure they have the qualifications to get a better job, making sure they can keep more of their take home pay, protecting their rights at work.
We will also continue to take specific steps to improve the job security and working conditions of people who remain in insecure work.
That is why today I can announce a new policy to improve the living standards and the working conditions of the insecure millions.
We will insert a new modern awards objective in the Fair Work Act to protect penalty rates.
We will ensure that penalty rates, overtime, shift work loading and public holiday pay are definite, formal considerations for the Fair Work Commission when it sets award rates and conditions.
We will make it clear in law that there needs to be additional remuneration for employees who work shift work, unsocial, irregular, unpredictable hours or on weekends and public holidays.
It is particularly good to see that some of the hard working people who will benefit from these changes are with us today.
Australian Labor is politically, organisationally, spiritually, even literally, the party of work.
We always govern for jobs: we govern to create jobs and to support jobs, we govern to make jobs better paid and more secure, we govern to spread the opportunity for a job to every Australian who is willing to take their chance.
This Labor Government has been defined above all by what we have achieved for Australians who work.
Since we came to office at the end of 2007, through the worst global economic circumstances in over eighty years, we have created 850,000 new Australian jobs.
When almost every other developed country went down the opposite path, we secured the financial system, stimulated the economy, invested in infrastructure, protected our skills base and we have grown the economy and grown employment.
This is so important for the Australian people.
We tore up Work Choices and I wrote the Fair Work Act and today we are taking more steps to improve the working conditions of Australians.
More flexibility for families dealing with modern pressures, more protection for penalty rates, plus lower taxes and higher take-home pay. 
When working people around the world have lost so much and when austerity measures overseas have hit so many so hard, Australians have more rights at work than before.
We have given more people skills than ever before and preserved the skilled base of our economy in tough times.
Economic downturns can destroy skill formation for years, leading to skills shortages during the recovery and long-term joblessness even during periods of sustained growth.
In the early 1990s recession, apprenticeship starts in Australia fell by one third in two years  -  and they took thirteen years to recover to pre-recession levels.  In Government, we learned this lesson.
When the GFC hit, we had a drop in training starts  -  down nearly one fifth in 2008-2009.  This time though, it took just two years for us to bounce back.
In fact by 2011, 146,000 more students undertook vocational educational training and studies than in 2007.
There were 100,000 more apprentices and trainees  -  and around 35,000 more people with university degrees added a vocational qualification to their skills.
By doing all this we have spread opportunity to more Australians than ever before.
Because of these decisions, more people got their first job or got a higher paying job; more people have been the first person in their family to get a trade or to go to university; more people have become their own boss.
Now none of this was an accident.
This Labor Government has made the decisions and delivered the plans to create jobs, improve working conditions, give more people more skills and spread opportunity.
There were other paths our nation could go down and those were paths many other nations followed.
That was true of the work of the past five and a half years and it will be true of the years to come.  No one owes us a living and nothing is guaranteed.
Especially when our economy is entering a complex period  -  and when the opportunities of the Asian Century are so great.
The immediate economic context is demanding.
The peak of the investment phase of the mining boom over the next year or two will see growth in mining and resource jobs slow down.
The weakness of the global economy, close-to-zero interest rates in other developed nations, all this is holding our dollar high, making our exports more expensive and making it harder for our exporters to employ Australians.
The long-term economic outlook is exhilarating.
The centre of gravity of global consumption moves East by over 100 miles every year; by 2025 it will reach central India.
That's also the year when Asia becomes home to most of the world's middle class  -  a new market of around two and a half billion middle class consumers on our doorstop.
The world economy is coming our way, fast.
But there is no law, no promise, that Australia will remain strong, fair and smart.
The intersection of these pressures on our economy today with these possibilities for our economy in coming years is the point at which the real choice confronts us.
Our nation has a choice  -  a choice between two quite different futures.
The Asian markets will grow, with or without Australia being ready to sell the goods and services they want. 
Some would let a few Australian firms prosper while many fall behind.
They'd be content to see a few highly competitive or specialised sectors hang on while big employers in manufacturing and services, education and tourism are all hollowed out by currency and cost pressures.
The Asian producers will need our minerals and resources, and some big extraction projects will long continue. 
Some will argue against getting a good return on them for all Australians and argue against making sure the projects deliver training and jobs for young Australians, for indigenous Australians, for Australians in the regions and towns where too few jobs are created today.
Some would cut training to our young people and let the standards of our schools fall behind, then allow employers to import more temporary workers to fill the gaps.
And they'd ask the great bulk of working Australians who don't compete on skills to compete on wages and conditions, as they did in the past, under Work Choices.
They'd argue work should just be more flexible  -  in other words, less secure  -  making it simpler to cut people's hours or to lay them off and allowing their wages to fall to compete on price if the dollar stays high.
Big business and government could agree it's easier and cheaper  -  no doubt they'd say, more efficient  -  to share the new opportunities with a few Australians and let the rest take care of themselves.
That is one way  -  but it's not my way, it's not Labor's way and I don't believe it's Australia's way either.
The things we have done together have built a remarkable nation: 51st in global population  -  12th in global wealth  -  one of the most equal economies and mobile societies in the world. 
With that strength, we stand ready to seize unprecedented national opportunities in the decades to come.
I see a very different future for our country.
In the coming century, we can be one of the winners in Asia. 
But Australia can only truly be among the winners if all our people, especially our young people, get to be among the winners too.
If we get that right  -  if we keep good jobs growing and if we keep the economy strong  -  then the rewards are rich for us.
In the coming decade, Australia can have new infrastructure including the NBN, a world-leading education for our children, insurance for disability and better health care; we can be a nation where challenges for modern families and modern society are acted on and understood.
By 2025, our school system can be in the top five in the world, our innovation system can be in the top ten in the world, ten of our universities can be in the world's top 100, our economy can reach the world's top ten for income per person.
In the coming century, we can still be a nation where people are confident their children will have more opportunities than they did, as a result of their hard work.
That is the vision  -  that is the goal.
That is also the heart of the public debate about the abuse of section 457 visas for temporary workers from overseas.
I offer absolutely no apology for putting the opportunities of Australian working people first, front and centre, wherever they were born.
I have absolutely no doubt our policy approach to temporary foreign work is good economics and good social policy.
The purpose of the 457 program speaks for itself  -  subclass 457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) Visa  -  that is the policy objective, that's what it says on the packet.
Or as Innes Willox, the Chief Executive of the Australian Industry Group itself, said just last week: 457s are a gap-filler for our skills-poor economy at times and places of highest need.
Yet that is simply not what is happening today and that is why we must fix it.
The widely held assumption that the typical person on a 457 visa is performing urgently needed work for economic expansion in remote Australia  -  on a project where a tough combination of specialist skills and extreme conditions make labour impossible to come by  -  is just not supported by the facts.
107,000 people work in Australia as temporary overseas workers. Indeed of those 107,000 people, barely one-sixth is employed in mining and resources.
In fact, while the overall program has rapidly grown, new applications for temporary overseas work in mining have fallen nearly 17 per cent compared to the same period last year.
And increasingly there is a shift in these workers from those with higher skills, degrees and advanced trades, to lower skills.
So, let the facts speak for themselves.
Fact: temporary overseas work is growing much faster than employment is growing.
Temporary overseas worker numbers are up 20 per cent compared with the same time last year. Employment growth in the same period is around 1 per cent.
That in itself is evidence of a problem: the number of people coming here to fill short-term gaps should not be growing twenty times faster than employment overall.
Fact: there is clear evidence that in some growing sectors, importing workers on 457 visas is a substitute for spreading important economic opportunity to Australian working people.
Outside the resource states of Queensland and Western Australia, the single largest sector for temporary overseas work isn't mining  -  or even construction  -  it is information technology. One in twenty temporary overseas workers in Australia is doing IT work in New South Wales alone.
It is just not acceptable that information technology jobs, the quintessential jobs of the future, the very opportunities being created by the digital economy, precisely where the big picture is for our kids, should be such a big area of imported skills.
An occupation where we have brought in 5,800 temporary workers in just seven months  -  compared to just 4,500 Australian IT undergraduate student completions in 2011.
Fact: the areas where temporary work from overseas is growing show that this is work for which we can and should train young Australians.
The number of applications in Accommodation and Food Services has almost doubled compared to the same period last year, now exceeding five thousand. Applications in Retail were up 80 per cent to just under two and a half thousand.
These are plainly areas where the two million Australians in insecure work or the 660,000 Australians who are unemployed could be trained and could find secure, skilled work.
Most striking of all is the widespread use of temporary skilled labour in hospitals and health. 
There are nearly as many visas in the health sector today as there are in construction: fully twelve thousand seven hundred temporary workers from overseas have ongoing employment in the health and social care industry in Australia.
This in a stable, steadily-growing, predominantly public-sector industry which every advanced society has to staff as part of a balanced workforce.
If nursing or medicine is a gap to be filled  -  if health is an area of skill shortage today  -  the responsibility is no one's but the previous Federal Government and their Ministers for Education and for Health.
It is absurd to rely on temporary overseas labour to fill ongoing skilled work in public hospitals while contracted local labour cleans those same hospitals in the middle of the night for around twenty dollars an hour.
That is an absolutely damning failure of long-term national economic policy.
We don't want to be a nation which can't care for its own sick and can't provide jobs for its own kids.
Just as it is deeply dangerous for conservative State Governments to cut hundreds of millions of dollars from their training systems, for thousands of young people to be locked out of training, while a conservative Federal opposition offers business the solution of more temporary workers from overseas to fill the hole this creates.
I will fight to keep Australia from going down that path.
That is not the future we want for Australia.
That's why this Labor Government is putting in place a package of reforms to ensure that temporary skilled workers only come from overseas when there is genuinely no local worker who can fill the job.
I want temporary overseas skilled work to be dealt with as a policy issue about jobs, wages and working conditions  -  not just immigration management.
So the measures announced by Minister O'Connor in recent days are all designed to ensure that temporary skilled work from overseas serves its proper purpose in our economy.
Employers must demonstrate that they are not nominating positions where a genuine shortage does not exist.
The English language requirements for certain positions have been raised.
The enforceability of existing training requirements for businesses that use the program will be strengthened.
The market salary exemption will rise from $180,000 to $250,000.
On-hire arrangements of 457 visa workers will be restricted.
Compliance and enforcement powers will be beefed up to stop employers who have routinely abused the 457 system.
Stakeholders will be consulted to ensure market rate provisions more effectively protect local employment.
Naturally we will work with business to make sure genuine skill shortages can be addressed, but we will not allow Australian workers to be denied the opportunity to fill Australian jobs.
Labor's policy on Australian jobs is to put Australian workers first.
If there are local workers  -  Australians in insecure work, unemployed Australians, young Australians  -  who can do these jobs then they should get that chance.
The Australian people expect this to be our approach and they are right.
Our vision is for our nation to be one of the winners in Asia. 
We can only do that if we stick to a plan for jobs.
We can only do that if we stay strong, fair and smart.
We can only do that if all our people, especially our young people, get to be among the winners too.


Melbourne
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We meet today on the traditional country of the Kulin Nation and I offer my respects to their elders past and present.
Up in Sydney when I've been at St Patrick's day events, the St Pat's Day lunch is hosted by a financial journalist, Michael Pascoe, who does a great job keeping the mob in line. 
In Melbourne of course, we've got a champion footballer instead.
It's tempting to reflect on what this says about our two great cities, but as I'm sure St Patrick himself would counsel me: resist temptation. So I will.
So let's just talk about Melbourne for the moment. Truly it is impossible to imagine Melbourne without the Irish influence.
We're just down the road from St Patrick's Cathedral, that work of centuries crowded into years, a triumph of Gothic Revival and of Gaelic pride.
I'm sure some of you have come straight from confession to here.
We're a stone's throw away from that legendary Young and Jackson's, named for two Dubliners.
Perhaps some of you a little bit later in the day will pop over for a pint of cappuccino following lunch.
Even the river running past us now through the middle of Melbourne bears a resemblance to Anna Liffey. 
Iris Murdoch had one of her characters say:
No man who has faced the Liffey can be
appalled by the dirt of another river.
And she didn't know the Yarra when that character uttered those words.
So on such an Irish day in such an Irish town it's very fitting that I can announce a special series of measures which will be in effect in this state this weekend to celebrate St Patrick.
This weekend, Phillip Island will be renamed Old Ireland'.
Every bar and cafe will substitute Vic Bitter with Guinness.
Seal Rock will be renamed Selkie Rock. The Nobbies will be re-named the O'Nobbies.
The traffic lights on the way through town won't be red orange and green  they'll be green, orange and white.
I m contemplating name myself Taoiseach Gillard for a day too, I reckon that'd be fun too.
And Laura Smyth is heading straight from here: she'll be up all night dressing the fairy penguins up as leprechauns.
Now, as you know, it is certainly true, I'm not Irish: I was born in Barry, in Wales.
And I was raised in the Baptist tradition: we weren't really allowed to believe in Saints.
Or in drinking.
Or in dancing now that I come to think of it.
And the kind of songs I first heard the O'Connor brothers sing at uni would have gotten the Gillards expelled from chapel for life  that's certainly true!
So coning from that background the basic rituals of this day are something I still find a delightful novelty.
But as I'm sure most of you know, my Welsh blood is actually why I have some authority on the subject of St Patrick.
Never forget that St Paddy's Day is actually all about a Taff  someone from Wales.
I'm always struck that while it took pirates to bring young Patrick into Ireland and they took him there as a slave, once he gained his freedom, the first thing he did was to swear to go back.
After all, he had met the Irish people.
That was the great good fortune in St Patrick's life and it's one of the great good fortunes of life of Australia.
We've been so blessed by the contributions of great Irish individuals who've made names for themselves and their people.
We've been even more blessed by all the millions who've come  their millions of descendants  and the tens of thousands of Irish-born Australians who live with us today: the countless, nameless nation-builders of Irish Australia.
You've come a long way, we've come a long way, and we've achieved so much together.
Today is the perfect day to celebrate it all.
Because the story of St Patrick, at its human core, is the story of a man who breaks the chains, who works and learns, who dedicates himself to others and who changes a nation.
And that, friends, is the story of the Irish in Australia.
So enjoy the holy-day.
Slinte!


Melbourne
It's humbling to be among people who have got such a strong personal connection to the fight against bullying and I really can't imagine how many of you bear the losses that you have, the bravery, the courage, it just takes my breath away.
But what is so inspirational is that you've brought part of that, part of that sense of loss, that bravery, that courage and you've challenged it into this urgent and inspiring national initiative.
It's a great tribute to all of you that that energy has been brought to this place.
And we need that energy because in Australia in 2013 there are still too many children whose school days are filled with fear and dread instead of laughter and play and I think that and the images of that were brought very powerfully through to us as we listened to the song and saw those images.
As well as too many children spending their days with that fear and dread, there are too many apprentices who really just can't face another day of humiliation at the workplace, too many employees who come home from work feeling worthless and feeling defeated and worst of all, there are those who never come home.
Those for whom suicide seems like the only way out, the only escape from physical and psychological torment  -  from the physical and psychological torment that is bullying.
Last year more than 2,500 Australians committed suicide, more than 450 were children.
Bullying was identified as a factor in 80 per cent of these deaths.
Now the death of any Australian, particularly any young Australian is a tragedy and we're here today because we know that this should no longer stand; that we have to do something about it.
I'm here to tell you that as a Government we're very determined to join with you in the fight against bullying and I'm very delighted that we will be working together with the Bully Free Foundation as part of the dedicated and passionate fight against bullying.
We need the kind of cooperation that the Bully Free Australia Foundation represents, the kind of cooperation that brings people together across sectors, states and agencies  -  a mix, and a powerful one, of families, of politicians, of police officers, of lawyers and other professionals all working for the common goal of ending bullying.
In recognition of the power of bringing people together in 2012 we held the first ever national anti-bullying forum.
That brought teachers, parents and young people together to discuss what needed to be done.
We've channelled that and we've introduced a national safe school framework that requires every school in Australia to have an anti-bullying strategy.
But, we've got to keep working together to find the new and creative solutions because bullies and bullying has evolved.
The spread of texting and social media means that for so many people it feels like there's no safe space anymore.
Gone are the days when you could leave the playground or leave work, go to your home, shut the door and fell like safety was there around you.
Instead, because of the penetration of social media the fact that a jibe can now be instantly seen by so many, victims can feel harassed 24 hours a day.
Les Twentyman put it very powerfully when he said in the hands of a bully an ordinary smart phone can be a weapon of mass destruction.
Two years ago I said the major problem we face was the technology had run ahead of the existing systems, rules and ethics required to combat bullying.
Today, as Bully Free Australia officially opens its doors, I'm pleased to say that we are catching up.
Yesterday the Minister for Schools, Peter Garrett, launched the Safe Schools Hub, a central site to support a suite of dynamic online resources for school leaders, teachers, specialist staff, parents and students and this will help all of them enabling their student community to be a safer place.
In January this year I launched Be Cyberwise, an online learning program; a program that will teach more than 600,000 children all around the nation how to deal with the risks of the digital age.
This, together with the protocol the Government has negotiated with Facebook, Google, YouTube, Yahoo! and Microsoft, makes a new cooperative approach a reality to the problem of online bullying.
There's more to do but at least I feel now like we are meeting cyber bullying on its ground.
We are also tackling bullying in the workplace as Minister Shorten has outlined.
The costs of this is truly amazing  -  gobsmacking.
The Productivity Commission estimates that workplace bullying costs the Australian economy each year between $6 billion and $36 billion  -  an amazing cost.
And those costs of lost productivity are only eclipsed by the enormous personal costs of workplace bullying.
Over 300 individuals and organisations gave evidence to the inquiry we had about the devastating effects of workplace bullying on victims, their families, their colleagues and their employers.
That means, as Minister Shorten has said, that next week we will act.
We will introduce into the House of Representatives a new provision which means that from 1 July this year an individual who has been bullied at work will be able to go to the Fair Work Commission and have that conduct stopped.
This new pathway will allow people to have their concerns addressed quickly and affordably with the focus on restoring relationships and preventing bullying  -  simply stopping the problem so that it doesn't go so far and doesn't hurt people in the way that we've heard the stories today.
Friends, there's always more to do.
There's action now in schools, there's action now for workplaces, we actually had our school children yesterday out for the National Day of Action Against Bullying and Violence and we had school kids around the nation rallying to the catch cry, bullying, no way.
Well that's a simple message and it's a heartfelt one and if we can ask our school kids around the country to march through the day saying bullying, no way, then I think we can ask ourselves to do the same.
And that's what we are doing today, gathering to say as a nation bullying, no way.
And when I look out at this gathering I know I'm looking out at the proof that we are going to succeed in this struggle.
Because it's your courage and your determination  -  your determination to keep working and to not rest until success is assured that it's going to get us there.
So it truly is a very great honour for me to be here and to declare the headquarters of the Bully Free Australia Foundation officially open and I know we are all going to be truly amazed by the results of the work that happens from this place.
Thank you very much.


Canberra
My Government looks forward to working in partnership with the Migration Council on this important plan.
Work like that matters because one in every four Australians was born somewhere else.
We are a nation of migrants.
I know  -  because I'm one myself.
My family made that journey of hope and courage to a new land.
A land where we found welcome.
A land where we found opportunity.
And long before we got our certificates of citizenship, we were already Australians deep in our hearts.
In this most multicultural of nations, our social fabric has never been measured by the fineness of its thread.
It's a fabric we have embroidered and embellished, and when necessary, patched and darned  -  but it is not something fragile or easily torn.
My family has been fortunate enough to be able to stitch its initials into this social fabric.
Two adults and two small girls, among the seven million who have sought to make new homes here since World War Two.
Great waves of us.
First, from the UK and northern Europe.
Then from the Mediterranean and the Middle East.
Later from South-East Asia, India, China, Africa.
And of course these post-war waves were not the first.
From the earliest colonial times this land has exerted a pull on the hearts and imaginations of dreamers.
Matching and tracking the world's great events.
From the Irish fleeing the potato famine in the 1840s to the Ten-Pound Poms leaving behind the bombed-out cities of Britain.
From Jewish people seeking a safe haven after the horrors of the Holocaust to the Vietnamese fleeing in the aftermath of a terrible war.
The Australian story is the world's story also.
And I suspect that the things that led my own parents to emigrate in the 1960s were not so very different from the hopes and dreams of all who have made the journey.
Packed away in acid-free paper in the vaults of the National Archives are some remarkable records: records that tell of thousands upon thousands of these hopes and dreams.
The faces of our migrant nation, photographed by Department of Immigration staff between 1946 and 1999.
Expectant faces looking down from passenger vessels docking at our ports.
Faces bent over books at migrant English classes.
Labourers hard at work on the Snowy Scheme.
Faces under sunhats, picking fruit, or looking out from beneath hairnets on the factory floor.
Now, all 22,000 of these photographs have been digitised and are online.
The Destination: Australia website lets people search for photos, share stories, add descriptions, even upload their own photographic memories.
These memories will feed into a major National Archives exhibition on post-Wold War II migration, planned for 2014.
The exhibition will be entitled A Ticket to Paradise?
Complete, as is our Australian way, with an upward inflection, a final question mark.
For many millions of migrant Australians, I suspect, there is no question mark.
The decision to come here was right  -  full stop.
Just as Chifley's decision to open our doors was right.
Of course, there are challenges, sorrows, moments of doubt.
No nation is built without these.
But overwhelmingly this is a place where dreams are fulfilled.
Where a form of paradise can be found  -  at least as much as is possible on this earth.
Towards the end of Anna Funder's award-winning novel All That I Am, the character of Ruth is spending her last days in reflection, recalling her flight from Hitler's Germany, the losses wrought by war and finally her new life in Australia.
After the war, she says, I came to this sunstruck place. It is a glorious country, which aspires to no kind of glory.
Its people aim for something both more basic and more difficult: decency.
Together we have built a nation that strives to be classless, confident and compassionate.
But above all, a country which is decent.
A country that has been enriched by the hand of welcome each generation holds out to those who come after us.
The gesture of inclusion and belonging that enlarges us all.
These qualities are found in abundance among the finalists in the inaugural Migration and Settlement Awards.
Individuals and organisations who are there for migrants and refugees in those first bewildering months, offering good counsel and local know-how, and bringing paradise a few steps closer.
So congratulations to all the finalists and category winners.
Thank you for proving, by your example, that we are a nation of welcome and a place of opportunity.
Australia has given us everything, so we give everything in return.
That means no matter how far we've come, our best days still always lie ahead.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
In just over an hour's time, the following words of apology will be moved in the Senate and the House of Representatives:
Today, this Parliament, on behalf of the Australian people, takes responsibility and apologises for the policies and practices that forced the separation of mothers from their babies, which created a lifelong legacy of pain and suffering. 
2. We acknowledge the profound effects of these policies and practices on fathers.
3. And we recognise the hurt these actions caused to brothers and sisters, grandparents, partners and extended family members.
4. We deplore the shameful practices that denied you, the mothers, your fundamental rights and responsibilities to love and care for your children. You were not legally or socially acknowledged as their mothers. And you were yourselves deprived of care and support.
5. To you, the mothers who were betrayed by a system that gave you no choice and subjected you to manipulation, mistreatment and malpractice, we apologise. 
6. We say sorry to you, the mothers who were denied knowledge of your rights, which meant you could not provide informed consent. You were given false assurances. You were forced to endure the coercion and brutality of practices that were unethical, dishonest and in many cases illegal. 
7. We know you have suffered enduring effects from these practices forced upon you by others. For the loss, the grief, the disempowerment, the stigmatisation and the guilt, we say sorry.
8. To each of you who were adopted or removed, who were led to believe your mother had rejected you and who were denied the opportunity to grow up with your family and community of origin and to connect with your culture, we say sorry.
9. We apologise to the sons and daughters who grew up not knowing how much you were wanted and loved. 
10. We acknowledge that many of you still experience a constant struggle with identity, uncertainty and loss, and feel a persistent tension between loyalty to one family and yearning for another. 
11. To you, the fathers, who were excluded from the lives of your children and deprived of the dignity of recognition on your children's birth records, we say sorry. We acknowledge your loss and grief.
12. We recognise that the consequences of forced adoption practices continue to resonate through many, many lives. To you, the siblings, grandparents, partners and other family members who have shared in the pain and suffering of your loved ones or who were unable to share their lives, we say sorry.
13. Many are still grieving. Some families will be lost to one another forever. To those of you who face the difficulties of reconnecting with family and establishing on-going relationships, we say sorry.
14. We offer this apology in the hope that it will assist your healing and in order to shine a light on a dark period of our nation's history.
15. To those who have fought for the truth to be heard, we hear you now. We acknowledge that many of you have suffered in silence for far too long. 
16. We are saddened that many others are no longer here to share this moment.  In particular, we remember those affected by these practices who took their own lives. Our profound sympathies go to their families.  
17. To redress the shameful mistakes of the past, we are committed to ensuring that all those affected get the help they need, including access to specialist counselling services and support, the ability to find the truth in freely available records and assistance in reconnecting with lost family.
18. We resolve, as a nation, to do all in our power to make sure these practices are never repeated. In facing future challenges, we will remember the lessons of family separation. Our focus will be on protecting the fundamental rights of children and on the importance of the child's right to know and be cared for by his or her parents.
19. With profound sadness and remorse, we offer you all our unreserved apology.
This Apology is extended in good faith and deep humility.
It will be a profound act of moral insight by a nation searching its conscience.
It will stand in the name of all Australians as a sign of our willingness to right an old wrong and face a hard truth.
As Australians, we are used to celebrating past glories and triumphs, and so we should.
We are a great nation.
But we must also be a good nation.
Therefore we must face the negative features of our past without hesitation or reserve.
That is why the period since 2008 has been so distinctive  -  because it has been a moment of healing and accountability in the life of our nation.
For a country, just as for a person, it takes a lot of courage to say we are sorry.
We don't like to admit we were mistaken or misguided.
Yet this is part of the process of a nation growing up:
Holding the mirror to ourselves and our past, and not flinching from what we see.
What we see in that mirror is deeply shameful and distressing.
A story of suffering and unbearable loss.
But ultimately a story of strength, as those affected by forced adoptions found their voice.
Organised and shared their experiences.
And, by speaking truth to power, brought about the Apology we offer today.
This story had its beginnings in a wrongful belief that women could be separated from their babies and it would all be for the best.
Instead these churches and charities, families, medical staff and bureaucrats struck at the most primal and sacred bond there is:
 * 	the bond between a mother and her baby.
Those affected by forced adoption came from all walks of life.
From the city or the country.
People who were born here or migrated here and people who are Indigenous Australians.
From different faiths and social classes.
For the most part, the women who lost their babies were young and vulnerable.
They were often pressurised and sometimes even drugged.
They faced so many voices telling them to surrender, even though their own lonely voice shouted from the depths of their being to hold on to the new life they had created.
Too often they did not see their baby's face.
They couldn't sooth his first cries.
Never felt her warmth or smelt her skin.
They could not give their own baby a name.
Those babies grew up with other names and in other homes.
Creating a sense of abandonment and loss that sometimes could never be made whole.
Today we will hear the motion moved in the Parliament and many other words spoken by those of us who lead.
But today we also listen to the words and stories of those who have waited so long to be heard.
Like the members of the Reference Group personally affected by forced adoption who I met earlier today.
Lizzy Brew, Katherine Rendell and Christine Cole told me how their children were wrenched away so soon after birth. 
How they were denied basic support and advice.
How the removal of their children led to a lifetime of anguish and pain. 
Their experiences echo the stories told in the Senate report.
Stories that speak to us with startling power and moral force.
Like Linda Bryant who testified of the devastating moment her baby was taken away:
When I had my child she was removed. All I saw was the top of her head  -  I knew she had black hair. 
So often that brief glimpse was the final time those mothers would ever see their child.
In institutions around Australia, women were made to perform menial labour in kitchens and laundries until their baby arrived.
As Margaret Bishop said:
It felt like a kind of penance. 
In recent years, I have occasionally passed what then was the Medindi Maternity Hospital and it generates a deep sadness in me and an odd feeling that it was a Dickensian tale about somebody else.
Margaret McGrath described being confined within the Holy Cross home where life was harsh, punitive and impersonal'.
Yet this was sunny postwar Australia when we were going to the beach and driving our new Holdens and listening to Johnny O'Keefe.
As the time for birth came, their babies would be snatched away before they had even held them in their arms. 
Sometimes consent was achieved by forgery or fraud.
Sometimes women signed adoption papers while under the influence of medication.
Most common of all was the bullying arrogance of a society that presumed to know what was best.
Margaret Nonas was told she was selfish.
Linda Ngata was told she was too young and would be a bad mother.
Some mothers returned home to be ostracised and judged.
And despite all the coercion, many mothers were haunted by guilt for having given away' their child.
Guilt because, in the words of Louise Greenup, they did not buck the system or fight'.
The hurt did not simply last for a few days or weeks.
This was a wound that would not heal.   
Kim Lawrence told the Senate Committee:
The pain never goes away, that we all gave away our babies.  We were told to forget what had happened, but we cannot. It will be with us all our lives.
Carolyn Brown never forgot her son:
I was always looking and wondering if he was alive or dead.  ...
From then on every time I saw a baby, a little boy and even a grown up in the street, I would look to see if I could recognise him.
For decades, young mothers grew old haunted by loss.
Silently grieving in our suburbs and towns.
And somewhere, perhaps even close by, their children grew up denied the bond that was their birth-right.
Instead they lived with self-doubt and an uncertain identity.
The feeling, as one child of forced adoption put it, that part of me is missing'.
Some suffered sexual abuse at the hands of their adoptive parents or in state institutions.
Many more endured the cruelty that only children can inflict on their peers:
Your mum's not your real mum, your real mum didn'twant you.
Your parents aren't your real parents, they don't love you.
Taunts vividly remembered decades later.
For so many children of forced adoption, the scars remain in adult life.
Phil Evans described his life as a:
rollercoaster ride of emotional trauma; indescribable fear; uncertainty; anxiety and self-sabotage in so many ways.
Many others identified the paralysing effect of self-doubt and a fear of abandonment:
It has held me back, stopped me growing and ensured that I have lived a life frozen.
I heard similar stories of disconnection and loss from Leigh Hubbard and Paul Howes today.
The challenges of reconnecting with family.
The struggles with self-identity and self-esteem.
The difficulties with accessing records.
Challenges that even the highest levels of professional success have not been able to assuage or heal.
Neither should we forget the fathers, brothers and sisters, grandparents and other relatives who were also affected as the impact of forced adoption cascaded through each family.
Gary Coles, a father, told me today of the lack of acknowledgment that many fathers have experienced.
How often fathers were ignored at the time of the birth.
How their names were not included on birth certificates.
How the veil of shame and forgetting was cast over their lives too.
My fellow Australians,
No collection of words alone can undo all this damage.
Or make whole the lives and families fractured by forced adoption.
Or give back childhoods that were robbed of joy and laughter.
Or make amends for the Birthdays and Christmases and Mother's or Father's Days that only brought a fresh wave of grief and loss.
But by saying sorry we can correct the historical record.
We can declare that these mothers did nothing wrong.
That you loved your children and you always will.
And to the children of forced adoption, we can say that you deserved so much better.
You deserved the chance to know, and love, your mother and father.  
We can promise you all that no generation of Australians will suffer the same pain and trauma that you did.
The cruel, immoral practice of forced adoption will have no place in this land any more.
We also pledge resources to match today's words with actions.
We will provide $5 million to improve access to specialist support and records tracing for those affected by forced adoptions. 
And we will work with the states and territories to improve these services.
The Government will also deliver $5 million so that mental health professionals can better assist in caring for those affected by forced adoption.
We will also provide $1.5 million for the National Archives to record the experiences of those affected by forced adoption through a special exhibition.
That way, this chapter in our nation's history will never again be marginalised or forgotten again.
Today's historic moment has only been made possible by the bravery of those who came forward to make submissions to the Senate Committee and also of those who couldn't come forward but who nurtured hope silently in their hearts.
Because of your courage, Australia now knows the truth.
The report prepared so brilliantly by Senator Siewert and the Senate Committee records that truth for all to see.
This was further reinforced by the national consultations that Professor Nahum Mushin and his reference group undertook to draft the national apology.
Their guidance and advice to government on the drafting of the apology have been invaluable.
Any Australian who reads the Senate report or listens to your stories as I have today will be appalled by what was done to you.
They will be shocked by your suffering.
They will be saddened by your loss.
But most of all, they will marvel at your determination to fight for the respect of history.
They will draw strength from your example.
And they will be inspired by the generous spirit in which you receive this Apology.
Because saying Sorry' is only ever complete when those who are wronged accept it.
Through your courage and grace, the time of neglect is over, and the work of healing can begin.


The Domain, Sydney
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great honour to join you for Greek Independence Day.
The Greek struggle for independence which began in 1821 not only freed a nation  -  it inspired the world.
When the Greek people fought for the rights and liberties graven ... in the hearts of all men you won the admiration of all free people and it is an admiration you have never forfeited since.
This is a day of seriousness and also of enjoyment: a day to commemorate great patriots and a day to celebrate what they won and what their descendants have built around the world.
It's strange to think that at the time of independence, most Greeks had not even heard of Australia. 
Back in 1832 a Greek geography textbook advised that very little is known about [Australia] ... And scarcely anything is worth mentioning.
Fortunately for us, your ancestors didn't believe that!
Instead, you've come here, throughout our history, stayed here, raised families and built a proud community.
This Government works with you: we support Greek language in the national curriculum, our National Culture Policy is accessible to your community, our aged care programs are culturally and linguistically sensitive.
It's also no surprise that the people who invented the very idea of citizenship are among the most enthusiastic of all our migrant communities to become citizens of this country.
Let mecongratulate the local Greek community and Government of Greece for revivingour joint military heritage  -  especially rememberingthe island of Lemnos as the base for the Gallipoli campaign, as well as remembering the Greek campaign and the Battle of Crete in the Second World War.
This has quite a personal aspect for me, as some of you know.
During World War One, my mother's father, Alexander MacKenzie, fought alongside the Greeks in the Salonika Front in northern Greece.
When my grandfather left Barry in Wales in 1915 he left as a very young man ready to fight for freedom  -  when he returned home after three years of war he brought home with him the wounds he earned in service.
He also brought home a great privilege  -  the memory that he had fought for freedom alongside the Greeks, the knowledge that he had fought for freedom in freedom's home.
He witnessed your people's great courage and sacrifice and I was proud to commemorate that with you today.
My grandfather also witnessed the great generosity of people who know how to celebrate, and I am very glad to see this hasn't changed!
In what is now Thessaloniki it would have been the first time he tasted feta cheese and olive. 
BeingWelsh he certainlyenjoyed Greek hospitality with local wines, beer and the tsipouro. 
So enjoy that too!
I know many families are focused on economic issues in Greece and Cyprus. We wish them well.And we wish peace and justice for Cyprus.
My congratulations on today's magnificent occasion.
It's a marvellous day to commemorate and celebrate! 
A great day to remember  -  and to have fun.
Enjoy.


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
2013 is a decisive year for our nation.
So today, I want to speak about two things  -  the facts and the future.
Where we are  -  and where we need to be.
First, the facts.
We have more jobs and stronger growth than any of our peers in any of the major developed nations.
Over 900,000 jobs created since we came to office, while millions have been added to jobless queues around the world.
Unemployment at 5.4 per cent, less than half the rate in Europe at 12per cent.
We have lower interest rates than we've had since 1996.
They're much lower than when Labor came to Government, saving $100 a week for the average family.
We have the highest median wealth in the world.
That is, we're not just good at creating wealth  -  we're also good at sharing it.
We have low inflation.
Annual underlying inflation has been at or under 2.4 per cent for the whole of the last year, the first time this has happened since 1999.
We have a triple, triple-A credit rating.
By that I mean we are for the first time ever triple-A rated with a stable outlook by all three major ratings agencies.
We have joined a very exclusive club with only 7 other countries as members.
The fact the club is so exclusive proves the difficulty of being triple, triple-A rated.
We have a strong record of economic growth.
We're now the 12th biggest economy in the world, up from 15th when we came to office.
Over the same period, our economy has grown more than five times faster than Germany and the United States.
And even on productivity and industrial disputation, which has seen more barrels of ink spilled and trees felled than any other economic topic, the facts tell their own story.
Labour productivity growth for the market sector through the year to December 2012 is significantly above its 10-year average annual growth rate.
Industrial disputations are, on average, about a third of rate under the previous Government -  which included the draconian Work Choices regime.
Enterprise bargaining is doing its job and, as a result, there hasn't been even a whiff of a wages breakout from the mining sector into the wider economy  -  like there was in the last mining boom of the early 1980s.
It's hard to reconcile this Australia with either the economic cringe which discounts our national economic achievements  -  or the political negativity which denies them.
I know foreign correspondents and your home bureaus aren't strangers to this conundrum.
It seems hardly a week passes when a respected overseas journal or international organisation doesn't point out Australia's good fortune and puzzle over our fractious politics.
The UN Human Development Index puts Australia in second place; the OECD Better Life index puts us first.
The Economist recently ranked countries according to the best place to be born, and Australia came second after Switzerland, up from 18th place in 1988.
The UK Guardian recently noted that as the world lurches from crisis to economic crisis, the land of Oz is powering ahead.
And even the stern conservatives at the Heritage Foundation have praised our impressive economic resilience.
I don't mean that our nation should be boastful.
Things can always be improved  -  and improving them is my mission, my driving purpose.
But all Australians are entitled to be quietly proud of what we have achieved together.
In a loud and clamorous political marketplace where bad news sells and crazy fear campaigns abound, the facts don't always get to speak for themselves.
In the nature of politics, no one has entirely clean hands, and we can all do more to lift the standard of debate.
But make no mistake; ignoring the facts is not just an insult to the quality of political debate.
It is an insult to the Australian people because those facts are the result of hard work and unremitting reform by the Australian community.
So my first point today is to urge everyone involved in the political process  -  elected leaders, commentators, business and civil society  -  to argue on the facts.
Anything less is a disservice to our people and our democracy.
A consideration of the facts then takes us to the future.
The future that will, in so many ways, be decided on September 14.
One thing this will not be is a contest about some lost golden age.
This is not a time for cosy bed-time stories.
There should be no false nostalgia for the days that preceded the global financial crisis: the days when our household savings ratio hit zero, when easy credit and rapidly rising terms of trade created a sugar hit that could never be sustained.
Even then, with rivers of gold flowing into federal coffers, a priceless opportunity was squandered.
Taxation receipts as a share of GDP were higher in the entire period between 2002-03 to 2007-08 than in every year since and every year before bar one.
Had the Howard Government collected the same amount of revenue as a unit of GDP as we currently do, the last seven years of the Howard Government would have been in deficit.
But rather than invest it in the future, this revenue was spent on quick fixes, at the same time bequeathing a legacy of declining productivity, rising inflation and skills shortages.
Not days we want to bring back.
We can only become a stronger nation, a nation of prosperity for all, if we correctly diagnose today's challenges and enable our nation to seize tomorrow's opportunities.
This means we must document and explain our plans for the future at a level of detail and financial costing which honours the intelligence of the Australian voters.
Bluff and bravado may have served our opponents well to date, but they are no answer now.
No answer this close to an election.
No answer now the carbon pricing fear campaign has been exposed as nonsense.
No answer now my own side of politics has resolved its leadership debate.
Now, the times demand better.
The times require deeper thought about the nature of our economic growth today and our economic opportunity tomorrow.
Our economic growth today is creating jobs. 
But that growth has not been generating government revenue in the way in which it has in the past.
Most federal taxes are aligned with nominal GDP, the actual dollar price we receive for our exports and our economic production.
But, unusually, nominal GDP is growing more slowly than real GDP simply because while production volumes have continued to grow, the prices they command have moderated.
This unusual divergence between nominal and real GDP growth has happened only a handful of times in the half century since the Bureau of Statistics began producing quarterly national accounts.
It means government revenues are lower than our experts reasonably predicted them to be.
This revenue challenge puts an even greater focus on the need to ensure that future Budget expenditure is matched with responsible and targeted savings.
This is the discipline with which we all must live  -  every politician, every commentator, every advocacy group.
This discipline should not be obscured by a false debate about debt and deficit.
Our net debt is at ten per cent of GDP, the equivalent of a person earning $100,000 a year having a mortgage of $10,000. 
To keep this in perspective, our net debt as a percentage of GDP is around one tenth of the expected peak across major advanced economies.
This net debt is obviously manageable and exists, not because of ongoing expenditure decisions, but because of the huge revenue hit we've seen due to the GFC and the unusual global economic conditions we've seen since.
Anyone who pretends this debt should not exist is effectively denying the GFC happened.
Anyone who pretends the GFC didn't happen should be treated as the same kind of amusing curiosity as those who believe the earth is flat.
Certainly, it is impossible for such a person to play any role in the hard decision-making necessary in our nation's life.
Similarly, it is impossible for any person of reason to deny the revenue effects associated with today's particular economic circumstances.
As a government, we will show through our May Budget our continued focus on fiscal discipline.
As a government, we will also continue to describe and prepare for what we have called the Asian Century.
The economic order of the world is changing, in turn the strategic order of the world is changing, and we are on the frontline of the challenges and the opportunities that those changes bring.
By 2030 there will be more than 3 billion middle class consumers in the region to our north.
Thanks to the relationships and capabilities we've built over four decades, Australia is pushing on an open door as we enter the Asian Century.
But once we enter, everything that follows depends on our skill and ingenuity.
Nothing is guaranteed to us  -  success is not pre-ordained.
Asia has the wealth and the demand.
Whether we meet that demand is entirely up to us.
And let's not imagine we have the field to ourselves.
Europe and the Americas are eyeing the same opportunities as we are.
As are Asian countries  -  they are selling more goods and services to each other than ever before.
The Asian Century will also involve difficult adjustments, and the high dollar is a clear example of this.
It's painful to many sectors.
But like Germany under the towering deutschmark in the days before the Euro, a high currency need not be a barrier to making products and services of such quality that our partners still want to buy them.
The sustained strength of our dollar is now a feature of the economic landscape - on a trade weighted basis, it recently rose to its highest level since 1985.
And it may persist for some time given Australia's status increasingly as something of a safe haven currency  -  Australian dollar to US dollar exchanges are now estimated to be the fifth highest traded currencies in the world.
While the high dollar has put significant competitive pressure on many industries, the answer to this is not low wages; in a high-skill advanced economy, it should never be.
It takes a more sophisticated approach  -  policy-rich, detailed, comprehensive.
That's why my Government has a plan for Australian jobs which has just those features.
A plan that means we will be seizing the opportunity in our region as well as the opportunities at home.
It's a plan to make sure that we have many diverse sources of strength in our economy.
The next election must be a referendum on policy.
It must be a test of who has a blueprint for our nation's future in the Asian Century.
And it is only Labor that has that plan.
A plan for the future that rests upon five pillars which I've described many times:
Skills and education:
It's not only about uplifting the horizons of every individual.
Independent modelling in 2010 showed that our reforms could provide an overall benefit to the national economy of around $4,000 per person per year.
We cannot win prosperity or create opportunity in this Asian Century if these reforms are stopped.
High speed broadband for all Australians:
Each 10 percentage point increase in broadband penetration is estimated to add around $20 billion to Australia's GDP.
Without fibre to the premises, a vision only Labor will realise, we will be left in the horse and buggy lane while other nations zoom past us in formula one cars.
Clean energy and innovation:
In the first six months since our carbon price was implemented, electricity emissions went down by 8.6 per cent compared to the same six month period the previous year.
And the volume of energy from renewable sources increased by almost 30 per cent, creating new jobs, and helping to save the planet along the way.
Our nation can't afford the costs of trying to repeal carbon pricing.
Competition and deregulation:
A Productivity Commission analysis of 17 of our Seamless National Economy reforms estimated that business costs would be cut by $4 billion a year.
Our energy market reforms announced last December will alleviate the burden of future household electricity bills by around $250 a year.
This major reform cannot be delivered if the problem the reform is directed at is denied.
Tax reform:
We've increased by six and a half times the tax write-off that small businesses get on new asset purchases  -  an investment injection of nearly $1 billion into the job-creating sector of our economy.
We've delivered three rounds of tax cuts. And we've tripled the tax free threshold so that 1 million people no longer lodge any tax return at all.
This means that a worker on $50,000 is paying $2,000 less in tax than they did in 2007.
Small businesses and families can't afford the tax hikes being promised by the other side of politics.
These are the five pillars this Government has identified as key to increasing jobs, prosperity and productivity.
These support our plan for Australian jobs.
A plan to back Australian firms to win more work at home so that large projects will need to engage in Australian Industry Participation Plans, creating new local jobs on existing projects.
A plan to support Australian industry to increase exports and win new business abroad.
A plan to invest in up to 10 Industry Innovation Precincts which will bring together researchers, innovators, sources of new knowledge and link them with businesses.
Transforming this new knowledge into new products, new ways of doing things, seizing innovation, creating the jobs of the future.
A plan to grow small businesses, creating new mid-sized businesses and helping them to access and prosper on world markets.
This is a serious plan for our nation; a serious plan for our future.
That's what I meant when I said at the Press Club back in January that we needed to put policies and plans back at the centre of our national discourse.
That time is here.
This is how Labor always governs  -  this is the modern Labor model.
Doing the things needed for a mature, high wage economy to succeed in a dynamic, emerging region like Asia.
Competing on skills and quality.
Playing to our strengths.
Diversifying our economic base.
Building a culture of innovation.
And perhaps most importantly, leveraging our relationships with Asia as the region grows and rises.
It's no accident that tomorrow I will leave for a visit to China  -  a visit long planned and prepared for.
It's my second visit to China and follows my many visits to the key nations in our region - India, Japan, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Vietnam, Singapore.
Appropriately, 2013 is the 40th anniversary year of the first visit by an Australian Prime Minister to the People's Republic.
I'll be leading the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit China.
I will be among the first Western leaders to meet the new leadership.
I'll be promoting our trade and economic interests and sharing perspectives on global and regional economic and security challenges.
But I'm not just going to celebrate our existing strong relationship and its underpinnings.
But to look ahead to how we can build the comprehensive relationship envisioned in our Asian Century White Paper, including how leaders can help deliver a relationship of greater depth and durability in a more complex future.
The timing of this visit so soon after the new leadership has entered into office is deliberate and reflects the importance of our rapidly evolving relationship with China and our high-level political oversight of that relationship.
And more broadly, it reflects the centrality of Asia in the story of our nation for the 21st century.
Nothing in our destiny as a nation is certain.
We saw that a decade ago when the mining boom hit and the then-Government had no plan for skills, no plan for infrastructure, and no plan for broadband.
I won't leave our nation similarly unprepared.
As a result, we will win in the Asian Century.



The evolution of this Bo'ao Forum for Asia is a striking symbol of the evolution of our region itself: both of the successes and challenges which have endured and of the new challenges and opportunities which have emerged.
Here two great enduring responsibilities are discussed: continuing Asia's economic growth while achieving human development  -  and maintaining Asia's peaceful regional order while growth changes the strategic balance.
Growth in the region must continue and must strengthen.
The national economies of the region vary widely today, both in their overall degrees of development and in their immediate economic circumstances and prospects for growth. 
This Forum reflects just this variety: from developed, knowledge-based economies needing to restart long-term growth  -  to emerging economies managing the challenges of urbanisation  -  and incorporating the firms and international organisations which operate across the whole of Asia.
Through all these varying national contexts, the enduring challenge of economic growth merits an enduring response.
Unlocking the power of well-designed markets to create wealth  -  while harnessing the power of investment in the skills and knowledge of people to spread the benefits to all.
Well-designed markets and well-targeted investment in human capital remain the key to Asia's economic success.We must also understand that continued and strengthened economic growth will keep changing the strategic order of our region.
Militaries are modernizing.  Economic growth will put more pressure on energy, water and food resources. 
This does not make major power conflict inevitable  -  all countries in the region share a deep interest in strategic stability  -  but the consequences of conflict are ever more severe for us all.
This is nowhere more clear than on the Korean Peninsula.
There, any aggression is a threat to the interests of every country in the region.
For this reason, I do welcome the growing co-operation of all regional Governments to prevent conflict on the Korean Peninsula and to counter North Korean aggression.
That co-operation is also a sign of what will be needed in future as we face other security challenges.
Asia must be a region of sustainable security in which habits of co-operation are the norm.Peace and prosperity are challenges which endure  -  but since this Forum's inception, new challenges have emerged.
While the climate change debate was a live one in Asia fifteen years ago, then it was a debate about the region's future. 
Today, it is a debate about the region's present.
We are living through the effects of carbon pollution and climate change now and we are moving to clean energy sources now.
Today, Australia has a comprehensive approach including record investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency, a price on carbon and emissions trading from 1 July 2015.
Australia has deliberately pursued a market-based response to this pressing environmental challenge.  Many Asian nations are doing the same.
More than one third of the world's clean energy investment in 2012 was in Asia.
Last year Japan introduced its carbon tax. 
South Korea's national emissions trading scheme begins in 2015.
Over the three years to 2015, pilot emissions trading schemes will commence in seven Chinese cities and provinces covering 255 million people.
Beijing's emissions trading scheme, which will cover a population of twenty million people, will launch shortly.
That will be a great day for Asia's clean energy future.
So will the commencement of China's national scheme following 2015.
The climate is already changing.  Asia is already acting.
All this will be important to your discussions this weekend.
This Forum reflects change in the region  -  as it reflects the enduring significance of growth and security as matters for us all.
I want to conclude by observing that for Australians, Bo'ao is also a particularly significant symbol of the role we seek to play in the region.
The statesmen of 1998 who presented the idea of this Forum to the Chinese Government were of course, President Ramos and Prime Minister Hosokawa  -  and my friend and predecessor Prime Minister Hawke.
In this, our former Prime Minister took precisely the kind of role Australia seeks to play  -  co-operative and supportive, but more  -  accepting our share in the responsibility of collective leadership which falls to all regional leaders and nations.
This was Australia's approach to our engagement in the region as long ago as 1973: when my predecessor Gough Whitlam became the first Australian Prime Minister to visit China.
This was Australia's role in the origin of this Bo'ao Forum. 
This was Australia's role in the founding of APEC and the expansion of the East Asia Summit.
This is Australia's role this week, when I lead the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit China.
Bo'ao is a vital forum for Asian conversations  -  and we have more to talk about than ever before.
I look forward to the insights which emerge from your discussions. 


Shanghai, People's Republic of China
It is a pleasure to visit CELAP for the first time today  -  on my second visit to China as Prime Minister.
Since my last visit in 2011, we have celebrated the important milestone of 40 years of our diplomatic relations.
As Vice Premier Liu Yandong and I discussed in Canberra last December, in the Great Hall of Australia's Parliament House, it was an important time not only to reflect on how far we have come, but to plan for the future.
It is remarkable to think that in the past forty years, bilateral trade has grown one thousand fold.  This reflects not only China's great rise but also the greatly complementary nature of our two economies.Today, China is Australia's largest trading partner  -  and Australia is China's seventh largest trading partner.
Chinese investors prosper in Australia's open and transparent economy and Chinese exporters find open markets and willing customers.
Earlier today we took a significant new step in the relationship when I welcomed a new agreement between our financial authorities.
The Australian and Chinese currencies will be directly traded on the Chinese mainland for the first time.
The Australian dollar will be only the 3rd major currency directly traded in China's mainland foreign exchange market, after the US Dollar and the Japanese Yen.
This reflects the rapid growth of our bilateral trade and the value of two-way investment  -  and it also creates opportunities for new financial integration. 
The important Chinese Government policy objective of greater internationalisation of the Chinese currency will be significantly advanced by these decisions.
Australia's banks, superannuation funds and financial houses will be even better placed to help in the growth of China's service economy.
This is good news for the Chinese economy and good news for the Australian economy.
Our economic ties are greatly enhanced by people to people links.
Chinese nationals made more than 620 000 visits to Australia last year while 380 000 Australian tourists travelled here  -  many beyond the first-tier and coastal cities.
There are around 120 000 Chinese students in Australia's world-leading education institutions. 
The proportion of Australian undergraduates studying some part of their degree overseas has doubled in the past five years  -  one third in Asia.
Mandarin is the second most commonly spoken language in Australia, second only to English. Cantonese is fifth.
The Chinese Australian community now numbers almost 900 000 strong.
Today, the economic reality of our complementary strengths is the core of what we each gain from our broad, enduring ties.
This will remain strong in coming years  -  and will only be reinforced by these diverse human and social connections our peoples are forging today.China's rise is the remarkable global fact of the past thirty five years.
Yours is a vast and vibrant society  -  a modernising nation confident of success.
I see this confidence in the state of the art network of high speed rail interconnecting your biggest cities and pushing out into your fast growing central and western regions.
I saw it in the showcase of Chinese talent that was the 2008 Beijing Olympics and Paralympics and the 2010 Shanghai Expo.
I saw it in the Shenzhou 9  -  China's first docking with a manned spaceship in orbit  -  and the first flight of a Chinese female astronaut.
This is the China which I believe can embrace and manage future change.Today, after decades of export-led and investment-driven expansion, I know China looks ahead to secure a new era of economically balanced, socially and environmentally sustainable growth.
This presents immense challenges  -  challenges I know your leaders fully recognise.On Sunday I met President Xi Jinping in Bo'ao.
I came away in no doubt that your new leadership is determined to succeed  -  that China will remain on the reform path.
President Xi has spoken often of the Chinese dream, the great renewal of the Chinese nation.
He has also made clear this national dream depends on bringing benefits to the Chinese people themselves.
In his words, so that the Chinese people can see their dreams come true and benefit together from the country's development.
This is a substantial challenge for you.
Enabling all Chinese to realise their dreams through better education and employment, affordable housing, and stronger health care and social security.
Boosting social services and social security, in turn enabling people to be more confident about spending the money they earn and assisting theprocess of rebalancing.
Reducing disparities in wealth and income.
Meeting the expectations, shared by all people, for the rule of law and fair and honest administration  -  and, I would add, for the personal freedoms which give human dignity.In this respect, all of you as leaders in China are living through a considerable transition in the purposes and methods of your national policy.
In recent decades, your economic growth has been the key factor driving social change  -  and the key policy challenge has been to drive growth fast enough to meet existing social pressures.
In coming decades, continuing social change will be the key factor required to sustain economic growth  -  and the policy challenge will be addressing new social pressures fast enough to ensure the expansion of the economy is balanced.This transition in policy reflects a historic transition in the nation: large scale urbanisation, which has seen almost 85 million rural residents move to the cities in the past five years alone.
Your work now also reflects all the social and environmental demands this creates.
These new demands are key challenges for China's progress  -  progress which matters not just to you, but to the region and to the world.
We see that the task for China's leadership  -  to govern history's largest nation-state through one of history's greatest periods of change  -  is formidable indeed.
In the words of Premier Li Keqiang, reform demands courage, wisdom and tenacity.
For nations pursuing growth and change, bold and creative thinking  -  and hard choices  -  lie ahead. 
Thirty years ago, Australia's national circumstances were very different to China's, just as they are today.
There is no one model, no single recipe for reform, but some common lessons can be shared and some common principles can be understood.In the years after Deng Xiaoping launched the market-oriented reforms which have remade China, Australia was also taking difficult but necessary steps to modernise our own economy.
Those reforms  -  like floating our currency, cutting tariffs, opening our financial sector to foreign competition  -  positioned us for growth in the decades of globalisation that followed.
Australia is a stronger, fairer, smarter nation as a result today.
We are now the 12th largest economy in the world. 
We have enjoyed 21 consecutive years of economic growth. 
Few nations emerged stronger from the global financial crisis.As it has been for you in China, one key to opening up our success has been greater integration into the global economy. 
In our experience, one key to sustaining economic success has been continued domestic and social reform  -  and we know this is something you are grappling with today.
Alongside those economic changes, we have designed and implemented sophisticated social safety nets, to ensure the benefits of growth are felt by all our people. 
Above all, universal health care and universal superannuation  -  and now we are extending these to provide national disability insurance as well.
Alongside those sophisticated social safety nets, we have also worked to ensure that the opportunities created by economic reform are available to all our people. 
Especially through reform to Australia's systems of education and training and through investment in the skills and knowledge of our people.
These reform and investments play their role in strengthening our economy as a whole. 
They also create substantial economic sectors in their own right  -  and substantial export industries in time.
Education has long been a key export for Australia, as you here well know. 
Health and aged care holds great promise for Australia as our region grows wealthier and its people live longer.All this bears a connection to your work in this Academy.
The growing importance of China's domestic and social reforms  -  like strengthening health care and expanding social security  -  will denote a growing importance for local and provincial leadership.
This has long been vital to your social and human development.
In coming decades, it will be vital to balancing and sustaining national economic growth  -  vital to national success.
Australia wishes you very well in this endeavour and we are ready to play the role of a partner and friend in this great work: Australia has a keen interest in your success.
Each of our nations understands the need for long term plans for national progress.
Your own national roadmaps, like your 12th Five Year Plan, reflect this long perspective.  Our Australia in the Asian Century White Paper outlines national objectives, pathways to get there, across five key areas for action in the years to 2025.
So let me outline the key elements of our plan: these areas of work which create such opportunity for our Chinese friends. The White Paper commits Australia to build a productive and resilient economy.
Our 2025 goal is to be in the world's top 5 for ease of doing business and the world's top 10 innovation systems.
This economic strength will offer great benefits to China.
Australia will remain a reliable long-term supplier of the resources your economy needs: a complementary strength with which we are all familiar.
Our diversifying economy will also be well placed to meet the demands of your expanding consumer markets.
Financial services is just one example of the new complementary strengths of our economies.
Direct currency trading was identified as a priority in the White Paper  -  something we are now delivering.
Further liberalisation in China's financial services sector, essential for your rebalancing, will benefit from experienced, capable and credentialed firms  -  and Australian financial houses have a long track record of successful operations here.Our White Paper sets out a plan for education and skills.
We know how much emphasis Asia's growing economies place on education.
Our 2025 goal is that our school system is in the top 5 in the world and 10 of our universities are in the world's top 100.
Already, five of Australia's thirty nine universities achieve this in the Shanghai Jiaotong world university rankings.
Over time, all Australian students will have the opportunity to undertake a continuous course of study throughout their years of schooling in an Asian language, including Mandarin.
I welcome CELAP's contribution to deepening ties through your relationships with Australian universities like the Australian National University, Latrobe University and the Queensland University of Technology.
Partnerships of this kind are helping Australia build Asia-capable institutions and people, an area where we have ambitious plans and goals.
These capabilities are the fundamental skills which will make Australians effective partners with China in this century of growth and change.
Our third key action area is to expand and integrate regional markets and build the presence of Australian firms in those markets.
Our 2025 goal: for Australia's trade links with Asia to be at least one-third of GDP, up from one-quarter in 2011.
To do this, Australian businesses must become fully part of the region:  adjusting their strategies, linking with regional value chains and developing long term relations.
Above all  -  becoming more effective and efficient, more clever and quick, at meeting the needs of their partners  -  and here, the relevance for our Chinese friends will be very directly felt.The fourth area Australia identifies in our White Paper is deep and broad relationships with the region at all levels.
Our 2025 goal is to ensure that one third of the board members of Australia's top 200 companies and one third of the senior leadership of the Australian Public Service have deep experience in and knowledge of Asia.
Australia's engagement in the region is far more than a mercantile connection.
To take just one example, from the world of sport: it was only eight years ago that Australia joined the Asian Football Confederation.  In 2015 we host the AFC Asian Cup.
In coming years we will seek to deepen all the personal connections between us, born of decades of links in education, tourism and culture.
And we will broaden our engagement in China  -  with a wider diplomatic footprint across your central and western regions.The fifth and final area for action is sustaining the security of our diverse region.
Our 2025 goal is for Asia to be a region of sustainable security in which habits of cooperation are the norm.
As our region changes, some strategic competition between its major powers is inevitable.
The task for us all is to ensure that competition is minimised, co-operation is maximised and disputes are managed peacefully, without the threat or use of force or coercion.
This can't be left to chance.
It will require conscious steps towards co-operation and trust-building by the region's leaders, bilaterally and through institutions like the East Asia Summit.
We will continue to work closely together at the UN and in the region.Australia's White Paper, like China's long-term plans, is necessarily broad.
Yet we each retain a clear focus on the prosperity of our peoples  -  and this remains the core of our work together.
The economic reality of our complementary strengths is the core of our relationship now  -  and these plans to build our respective economic strengths will be the core of our relationship in future.
There is much we share  -  together there is much we can do.
This city of Shanghai itself is a mighty symbol of all that you have achieved and all that lies ahead for us both.
From the design triumphs that are the towers of your financial district  -  to the engineering marvels that are the tunnels linking Pudong and Puxi beneath the Huangpu  -  and the civic heritage miracle we see in the revitalised Bund itself.
Shanghai's renaissance is also a dramatic proof that the engagement between Australia and China is a human, cultural and social connection.The quarter of a million Australians who live in Asia today are here as neighbours and friends.
Perhaps above all, the modern success of Shanghai is a symbol of Chinese challenges met by Chinese leadership.
I know that these challenges of change and growth stretch thousands of kilometres west and north of here.
I know too that the challenges you are grappling with in governing this vast nation dwarf even those you have overcome before.
As you meet these challenges, you have a friend and partner in Australia. 
The century of growth and change that lies ahead is truly one we share. 


Shanghai, People's Republic of China
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
PM: It's a really very great pleasure to be here this morning, in Shanghai, China's financial capital and a home away from home for so many Australians and so many of our most go-ahead companies.
To those who are already here in this market, in China, let me take this opportunity to commend your vision and your commitment, and for all of you who are looking to advance Australia's important business links with China, more strength to your arm, we want to work with you.
In particular, let me acknowledge the contribution of the Australian Chamber of Commerce under the leadership of Peter Arkell here in Shanghai.
Thank you for all of that hard work.
Your support, your practical support, your day-by-day support for the initiatives set out in the Australia in the Asian Century white paper is much appreciated, and I look forward to your active participation in the Asian Century Business Engagement Program.
For all of us here, we are looking at ways of boosting our trade and exchange with China, and I trust that my visit helps play that role.
Can I say across this room that the importance of this commercial relationship, the economic and trade relationship with China, doesn't need much explanation by me in this audience.
You are living it. You understand very deeply that China is our largest trading partner, and our largest source of overseas students.
And increasingly, an important source of investment, tourism and migration.
Our challenge today, as we set out in the white paper, the national plan for our nation's future, is to maximise all of the opportunities of engagement with Asia.
This has been a journey that has taken place over time, from Gough Whitlam laying the foundations 40 years ago to the work that we are doing today.
Certainly my government takes our relationship with China very seriously, and we are committed to taking it to a new level, to engage with China in building a stronger and more comprehensive relationship and to work with China in our region and in the world.
Yesterday I had the opportunity to meet China's new president, and tomorrow in Beijing I will meet China's new premier.
As you know, working here in China, personal relationships matter and I was very keen to make this trip early in the terms of the new leadership.
I made the point to President Xi when I met him yesterday and I will make the same point to Premier Li when I meet him tomorrow, that Australia sees great potential in all areas of our relationship.
There is much more that we can do together, much more that we can achieve together, and it's about focusing together on the opportunities of the future.
But whilst I have those discussions, I am very well aware that success in this Asian century requires work by government, but it requires effort too by business and the community working with us towards a common purpose.
That's a purpose of bringing people together today to stress that sense of common purpose.
Now I can't help but be impressed by the breadth and diversity of what the Australian business community does here in Shanghai.
We've got people across the board, the resources sector, agribusiness, tourism, education services, architectural services, legal services and of course our banks, who are represented today.
Our banks are at different stages of expanding their presence in China, but all of them are working hard towards having a presence here and recognising the excellent opportunities in this market.
Australia's banking sector rightly has a good reputation here in China and globally.
That reputation is well-deserved as our banks outperformed most of the developed world's banks through the GFC and subsequently.
That's something that we should be proud of.
China now faces important challenges as it continues the process of reform in its financial sector.
We know what reforming the financial sector feels like, we went through our own reform process in the 1980s and 1990s.
And whilst of course China's economy is different in so many ways  -  scale vastly different, vastly larger than our own  -  many of the reform principles are the same and there are many lessons from our experience in Australia that can be shared here in China.
There are also many lessons that can be shared from the development of our superannuation sector, from the development of our superannuation pool of savings, and from the expertise that therefore comes in Australia in managing those funds.
As China continues to open its financial services sector to global markets, and as China's middle class continues to grow, China will hunger for a more diverse range of financial products and Australia's expertise in providing them is well-positioned to come to the fore.
So we look forward to working with China as it expands its funds management sector and seeks to expand the range of financial products available to its people.
In my meeting tomorrow with Premier Li, I will be stressing the point that Australian companies have the expertise and the desire to make a significant contribution to the further development of China's financial services sector.
So our banks are already here and so many Australian companies are poised to join them.
Today I will be making an announcement about direct trading of our currency  -  the Australian Dollar  -  into RMB here in China.
This is an important announcement for the future, an important announcement for our currency and its exchange with China.
As you know in this room at the moment, in order to exchange between the two currencies you need a two-step process, normally through American dollars.
So RMB into American dollars into Australian dollars, or back the other way.
The announcement we will make today is that we will be able to see a direct trade between Australian dollars into RMB here on China's mainland.
We have been working on this announcement for some period of time.
It actually follows on work done by the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer Wayne Swan when he visited China in the middle of last year.
It's an important foundation stone for what we can achieve in the future, a future of huge opportunities and potential.
I'm looking out on a room of people who will make those opportunities and that potential real.
I thank you for your work, and your commitment, and it's been a very great pleasure to be able to join you here for breakfast this morning.
Thank you very much.


Beijing, People's Republic of China
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Today let me pay tribute to the work of the Australian Chamber of Commerce in Beijing  -  AustCham. 
With your wide membership, AustCham plays a critical role in cultivating strong business links between Australia and China.
This is one of the world's most important markets for Australian companies.
Your steps to consolidate the chambers into AustCham Greater China  -  bringing together the Beijing, Shanghai, Southern China and the new West China chapters  -  will help you serve your members even better.
I also want to take this opportunity to highlight the work of the Australia China Business Council, established in 1973 and now celebrating your 40th anniversary.
The leadership of the ACBC and the Chinese Investment Promotion Agency, with the support of AustCham, is why this morning's 3rd Australia China Economic and Trade
Co-operation Forum achieved its goal of being one of the leading large-scale bilateral business conversations.
I'm confident this will not only be true of this year's Forum but of those beyond.
The practical, commercial reality of the complementary strengths of the Australian and Chinese economies gives a firm basis to our national ties.
However, our relationship is broader than ever  -  and we are building diverse people-to-people links.
We have a positive political and diplomatic engagement built on mutual interest and mutual respect.
I am committed to a relationship which goes well beyond the economy.
But the extraordinary growth and success of trade and investment which you have all built is the platform on which Australian leaders stand when we meet Chinese leaders today.
Thank you for all your work.
I have come here this week leading the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit this country.
These first days of the new leadership here are defining days for the country's coming decade.
So we have come to China with a very clear goal.
To ensure a clear focus on the Australia-China relationship early in the life of China's new leadership.
On Sunday I met President Xi Jinping.
We discussed some of the key issues for the long-term.
How to strengthen the overall strategic direction of the relationship.
How to grow and diversify our trade and investment ties including through a free trade agreement.
How to develop other core elements of our relationship, like our education and people-to-people links.
How to expand co-operation in the region and the world, including in the G20 and the United Nations.
This was a moment to establish the face-to-face contact which is so important to relationships in China  -  and a moment to set the direction for the new leadership's view of Australia, now and in coming years.
On Monday, I welcomed a very important announcement for financial integration.
The Australian and Chinese currencies will now be directly traded on the Chinese mainland for the first time.
Ours will be only the third major currency directly traded in China's mainland foreign exchange market.
This will make an important contribution to the internationalisation of the Chinese currency, a key policy objective of the Chinese Government.
Australia's banks, superannuation funds and financial houses will now be even better placed to help in the growth of China's service economy.
So part of our task this week is building relationships.
Part is taking advantage of the impetus which a high-level visit creates to deliver some specific practical results.
We have also been building the relationship's long-term future.
The bold step to establish diplomatic relations between Australia and China was taken forty years ago.
Our success has surely exceeded the most ambitious imaginings of anyone present in those dramatic days.
We must actively shape the Australia-China relationship  -  we can never simply rely on old structures or past success.
Predicting the future is always a risk  -  but the greater risk is failing to plan for it.
The continuing growth and change in the Australia-China relationship demands new measures to keep it strong.
Leaders on both sides must be confident we have the right structures to guide the decisions we need to make in coming years. 
Right now, I don't believe we do.
There is a wealth of senior dialogue and discussion; last year alone, nine Australian ministers visited China.
But the modern relationship has outgrown the mechanisms we have relied on in previous years.
We should address this now in order to shape our relationship's future.
Later today, I'll conclude my visit with a meeting with Premier Li Keqiang.
The Premier and I have previously discussed the idea of a new strategic partnership between our nations  -  and a lasting new framework for engagement between our leaders.
The long-standing elements of our relationship continue to grow and new elements in our relationship continue to emerge.
Our bilateral contacts are rapidly growing, in scale and complexity.
Even while we manage change between us, our external environment evolves dramatically and this will only continue.
As the Premier has said, our relationship is already comprehensive, constructive and co-operative.
It is now ready to take a very concrete form.
Naturally, new architecture will not do the work for us or make hard problems in our relationship easy.
What it will do is elevate our existing habits of dialogue and co-operation  -  and contribute to the trust and co-operation which we need whenever we confront difficult issues together.
New architecture can also provide the forum for leadership and decision-making: giving our leaders the necessary regular opportunity to set new objectives, make new decisions and direct new work.
We should set an ambitious goal: a level and structure of dialogue which Australia shares with only a handful of countries and one which China also shares with only very few nations.
I have no doubt it is an ambition which is justified by the times  -  and I am delighted that my Chinese counterparts share this view.
I am looking forward to the formal announcement of our plans with Premier Li this afternoon.
Given all this: given the opportunity created by our strong relationship built over decades  -  and the opportunity we are seeking to create through new structures for dialogue  -  I want to cast forward now, to outline what I think we can achieve in the relationship in the coming decade.
This is what I see ahead.
First, we must have a far more broadly-based economic relationship with rich people-to-people links.
Indeed the growing breadth in the economic relationship should drive diversity in all the connections between our nations.
We know a rapidly urbanising nation like China finds a welcome friend in a nation like Australia rich in coal and iron ore. 
Yet urbanisation isn't just an economic or technological change, it's a vast social transformation: a nation building cities is also a nation living in cities.
So in the decade ahead, I want China to find in Australia a welcome friend rich in the skills and knowledge which underpin civic life: from regulatory and legal standards for urban planning and construction, to health and welfare services, to complex infrastructure like water management and sanitation.
Chinese firms are seeing huge new opportunities in Australia's own strong, growing, diverse economy. 
In the past five financial years, the Australian Government has approved $81 billion in proposed Chinese investment in Australian business and real estate.
More than 380 business proposals were approved  -  all but seven with no conditions at all  -  and in that time, no Chinese investment has been rejected.
There is clear potential for expanded Chinese investment in Australia and I am confident this will continue to grow.
The plans both nations have to diversify our economies also mean that their complementary nature will not only remain, it will extend into new industries and sectors.
Evolving patterns of consumption and production in both Australia and China show that in the decade to come each of our nations will remain a natural market for many of the things the other is best at making and selling.
Take China's growing demand for the highest food standards and reliable trading relationships.  This is one driver of the dramatic increase in Australia's beef trade here.
A similar trend is seen in the barley trade: the majority of Australia's malting barley is traded to China, to a beer market which has grown 30 per cent in volume in five years.
The diversifying relationship between our two economies and the growing connection between our two peoples go hand in hand.
When western Sydneysiders celebrated the Wanderers winning the Premier's plate in A-league football the weekend before last, they were also celebrating the club's qualification for the Asian Football Confederation's Champions League in 2014.
There is every chance the campaign will bring them to China and bring Chinese fans to Parramatta too it's distinctly possible the fans will share some of that Aussie beef and Chinese beer when they do.
This is a key point to understand.
Both nations want our trade and investment links to diversify.
Both nations want our people-to-people links to grow.
Building a more broadly based economic connection and more diverse people-to-people links are in essence one and the same task.
In many respects, the new economic connections and the new social connections are the same transactions understood in different ways.
So the economic relationship will continue to grow and change.
Second, our relationship as a whole can be far stronger and more comprehensive, delivering greater regional and global benefits, in the decade ahead.
Defence co-operation, which is already far broader and more effective than I think is generally understood, will grow.
Only one other country in the world has an annual senior level dialogue with China and ours has been in place for sixteen years.
It's almost three years ago now that our Navies joined in live fire exercises, the first such combined exercises between the PLA-Navy and a Western Navy.
We share interests in aid and development in the Pacific, growing naval co-operation and skills and experience in disaster relief and recovery. 
These will be a major asset to the region.
In the coming decade, our co-operation will continue to grow  -  over time we would like to see this extend to tri-lateral exercises, including with the United States.
Our work together in clean energy will also expand.
Our co-operation in designing emissions trading is already invaluable. 
Our trade in gas is of huge long-term significance  -  this is a clean energy trade which is literally fuelling growth.
Over the coming decade, our co-operation on carbon market design will support national emissions trading schemes in Asia  -  and progress towards regional carbon trading.
Our links in education, science and training should become a true joint venture in human capital in the coming decade.
The flourishing partnerships between our post-school educational institutions will spread to our school sectors.
All Australian students will have access to at least one priority Asian language including Mandarin.
As part of Australia's National Plan for School Improvement, all our schools will engage with at least one school in Asia, taking advantage of our National Broadband Network.
Australian and Chinese schools will be closer than ever before.
These are all big opportunities for our relationship which we can deliver through steady progress every day.
Ours will remain a relationship characterised by a firm mutual understanding of our distinctive history and traditions, culture and society, political and economic ideas.
Australia's alliance with the United States will continue to contribute to regional stability.
Australia will continue to welcome space for China's growing global role  -  just as we know China will continue to recognise Australia's enormous stake in strategic stability in Asia.
Our different national conditions will inevitably lead to differences from time to time, including over human rights.
As partners, we engage each other with deep respect.
We will acknowledge our differences and manage them constructively. 
We have done this for years.
Four decades of progress lie behind us: they have created a new opportunity for our two nations.
This is what we can achieve in the decade ahead:
Richer links in education and training.
Deeper co-operation on issues like climate change.
A broadly-based economic relationship with growing people-to-people links.
A stronger Australian diplomatic footprint in China.
Closer work together on regional and global challenges.
New structures of political dialogue delivering new levels of confidence.
That's the vision  -  and we will get it done.
With the same pragmatic outlook  -  and through the same steady progress  -  which has worked to develop our relationship since 1972.
I have no doubt that in these years we will seize this opportunity  -  and build a partnership of real benefit to our own peoples, to the region and the world.


Beijing, People's Republic of China
Tonight we celebrate forty years of education and science exchanges between Australia and China.
In turn, tonight we celebrate the work of all of you.
You have given our countries a new vision of each other.
So Expanding our Horizons is a most fitting title for the commemorative volume launched this evening.
It is a fine way to document what our countries have gained from your enterprising spirit.
I've come from my first meeting with Premier Li earlier today, where I took the opportunity to congratulate him personally on his new role.
We also discussed my Government's White Paper on Australia in the Asian Century.
The White Paper is an ambitious document: a blueprint for a deeper, broader engagement and a declaration of intent.
Yet its core principle  -  that Australia's security and prosperity depend upon engagement with Asia  -  is not a new one.
In 1948, the fourth session of what was then the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East was held in Australia, in the Blue Mountains of New South Wales.
In his opening address there, Australia's Governor-General William McKell declared that for Australians, the Far East' should be thought of as the Near North'.
He said that the post-war world needed to recognise the economic and political importance of Asia.
He went on to describe the global benefits that would come from cooperating in Asia's development.
McKell was a visionary Australian and a great man.
We meet 65 years later and 11 000 kilometres north.
Yet the truth of his message stands unaltered  -  and the responsibility to understand it falls more widely than ever.
Our engagement today must be much more than the words of diplomats or the actions of political leaders.
Education and science, artistic and sporting links, perhaps human friendships above all, these are ultimately as powerful as summits and statecraft. 
Through our exchanges in education and science, the people of both our nations combine the transforming human experiences of learning and travel.
These life-changing individual experiences also combine in nation-building partnerships.
Consider the China Advanced Leadership Program, exposing China's future leaders to critical strategic issues and forging links to Australia's public sectors.
This is an innovative collaboration between the Australian and New Zealand School of Government and the Organisation Department of the Chinese Communist Party.
I know ANZSOG is working closely with the Chinese Government on a reciprocal program for senior Australian and New Zealand officials.
Or consider the Australian Government's new AsiaBound program.
This will give three thousand six hundred Australian students the chance to do part of their academic program in Asia.
China  -  the most popular destination in Asia for Australians studying abroad last year  -  is likely to account for one thousand of these places.
Or consider the way our two countries are joining a number of other governments in building the Square Kilometre Array  -  the SKA.  
You can see beside me here a photo of the Murchison site in Australia: Chinese-made dishes are part of the landscape.
I welcome representatives of our Chinese partners who are here with us this evening.
Through this collaboration, scientists and researchers around the world will share access to the world's largest telescope.
They will look back to the very beginning of the universe and map the cosmic forces at work.
The Square Kilometre Array is a marvel of collaborative science  -  combining the endeavour of our best minds.
Another very powerful example of scientific collaboration is the work which the late Jian Zhou of Wenzhou Medical College and Ian Frazier from the University of Queensland did together.
Their pioneering research in the early 1990s led to the development of a vaccine  -  Gardasil  -  which targets the virus that causes cervical cancer.
Their work is now saving the lives of more than a quarter of a million women and girls every year.
It is an inspiring example of what can be achieved  by Australian and Chinese researchers together  -  one very close to my heart.
The Australia-China research relationship has now moved into a new stage of cooperation with the establishment of six joint research centres.
These six centres will tackle the big issues of our shared future: like sustainable economic growth in a low carbon future, like water management and food security.
I am very pleased to see so many of the researchers working on these new projects here this evening.
I will be proud to unveil these tonight.
In addition to these centres, I also want to acknowledge the Sino-Australian Joint Laboratory for Eco-agriculture, which has set up in partnership with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences.
I attended the opening of the Australian home for this centre at the University of Sydney only a few weeks ago.
It's an inspiring example of the real substance of our relationship in education and science.
We are here to celebrate what forty years of hard work has won us, but even tonight, our focus is on the future.
So I am very pleased that BHP Billiton will provide $2.2 million over five years for new, reciprocal Australia-China scholarships.
The scholarships will be offered by the Foundation for Australian Studies in China established by the Australia-China Council.
They will work alongside the Government's AsiaBound and Australia Awards programs, to increase the flow of students and professionals between Australia and China.
BHP Billiton's support shows their commitment to cooperative learning in the region.
Their funding of the BHP Billiton Chair of Australian Studies at Peking University shows this too.
I acknowledge the inaugural holder of the Chair, Professor David Walker, who is here with us tonight. 
I also acknowledge the generosity of Cheung Kong Holdings and Mr HL Kam for the Cheung Kong Endeavour Awards. 
I am very pleased a number of the awardees are here this evening to celebrate.
This evening is a particularly fitting occasion to conclude my second visit to China as Prime Minister.
I am so delighted that so many people who built the Australia-China education relationship in the past forty years are here this evening to celebrate all that has been achieved.
Everyone who is here is here for a reason  -  because we know, I know, how much you have done to change our peoples' lives and to build our nations.
I hope tonight, as you swap stories and share a meal with old friends, you will find time to reflect on all you have achieved.
During these forty years our nations have gone from distant strangers to valued friends  -  and many of you have done the same.
Education and science have been at the heart of Asia's renaissance.
Your teaching and learning, innovation and research has been at the heart of our two nations' change and growth.
For your part in all of that, tonight you can raise your glasses with pride.  
Thank you  -  and enjoy.


Sydney
PRIME MINISTER: Can I thank everybody for stepping forward and accepting the invitation to be involved in the B20. I know that this is a room of very busy people with very major responsibilities, and to take on another responsibility is a big thing to ask.
But I did want to say the work will be worthwhile because of the opportunity in front of us; how big that opportunity is.
And it's a big opportunity for us as a nation and for the business community of Australia, and there's a lot we can do working together to shape this opportunity.
To just set the back-drop, of course we are a nation that can say we worked hard together to come out of the global financial crisis well and any time you travel overseas we are reminded of the strength of that achieved.
It is a good time for Australia on the world stage, we have got the endorsement of countries around the globe to be on the UN Security Council; we've got their trust and confidence to take that role.
We have worked to strengthen relationships with so many of our key partners.
If we look around our region of the world, as Prime Minister I've certainly worked to take the next step in our historically deep relationship with the United States as it rebalances towards our region of the world.
I've worked to strengthen our long standing relationship with Japan, and I think we've injected some new warmth into that relationship because I was the first foreign leader to travel there after the tsunami which was very much valued.
I've cleared out of the way some of the difficulties that we had with India and created a strategic partnership there which stands us well for the future.
We continue to strengthen and diversify a good relationship with Indonesia, and now of course, following my visit to China, we have reached a new level in our relationship with China.
Now, all of these things come about because of patient and long-term work.
What we were able to secure in China actually started more than 12 months ago and it's been a day-by-day proposition to shape it, but that work pays dividends.
What is true of those relationships is also true as we shape the G20 being hosted in Australia.
It will take a lot of work but it is a huge opportunity to see the leaders of the world's major economies gather here representing as they do 85 per cent of the global economy, 80 per cent of world trade, two-thirds of the world's population all gathered in Australia.
There's the leader-to-leader dialogue and there are many issues that we need to work through at that level.
The G20 has a strong focus on jobs and growth. It's been a great response mechanism during the depths of the global financial crisis.
It will be part of our responsibility to ensure that there is new impetus in the G20 for jobs and growth as economies around the world move into recovery, some more quickly than others.
And we will have things to do too, like considering difficult questions on protectionism and free trade because the agreed standstill on new protectionist measures comes to an end in 2014, so what agreement we can secure here in 2014 is pivotal for the future of world trade.
So there's a lot to do at the leader level, but I want this to be a genuinely inclusive process that gives the business community a real opportunity to be involved, that the opportunity is also extended to labour, to civil society, to young Australians and particularly young entrepreneurs.
I have participated in a number of multilateral engagements now and bilateral engagements where there are business forums as part of the work.
They can, if they aren't carefully structured, be discussions of platitudes. That's not what I want for the B20.
I don't want it to be a glamorous courtesy call. I want it to be something of real substance.
To achieve that we've got to do the hard thinking now; we've got to be very clear about the priorities of the B20. If we try and put a priority on everything then we may as well have prioritised nothing.
You know that in your day-to-day work where you've got to be very rigorous about the setting of priorities for your businesses  -  that is true of the engagement in the B20.
For it to make a real difference at leader level, it not only has to be sharp on the priorities but sharp on the perspectives for the future.
What is it that you are asking leaders to do and to take away with them after this engagement  -  that message needs crystal clear.
As well as thinking about how we prioritise and get the measure to the assembled leaders, there's of course all of the opportunities that come with business-to-business interface.
We will have some of the best and brightest global business leaders here. This is a good opportunity to expand our business network and our set of business opportunities, and how we best seize that of course falls to us working in partnership with this group.
So, I'm really looking forward to it. I'm very enthusiastic about the task.
I certainly come back from China with a real sense of optimism and confidence about what we can achieve as a nation and in this format.
We worked hard to secure the G20 here. We're going to get to showcase our nation. We're going to get to showcase Queensland.
And what better introduction could there be to the Deputy Prime Minister than that, so I'll hand over to him now.
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER: Thanks very much Prime Minister. It's not only an opportunity to showcase our nation and also a chance to showcase Queensland.
But it's also an opportunity, a really important opportunity for Australia to mould a global agenda through the G20.
Those of us who sat around the table almost five years ago  -  when critical decisions had to be taken, where there was a need for cooperation between the developed world and the developing world  -  knew a lot was a stake.
And what we got from that for period of a couple of years was a common purpose.
Not just a common purpose between developed and developing countries but also between communities, and most particularly I think between business communities.
So I think there's a real opportunity here for the business community in particular, but civil society more broadly, to input into a broader and better G20 agenda.
As the Prime Minister said before, sometimes if we're doing too many things at the G20, the central purpose gets lost.
We've had I think a very good speech by Christine Lagarde overnight which makes this very important point, and this is what we've been arguing right through the last five years at the G20, and it's more important than ever right now that the G20 must concentrate on an agenda which lifts growth. An agenda which creates wealth, lifts growth and therefore supports job creation.
Because if you look around the global economy at the moment we're doing pretty well here, but plenty of other countries are not.
With very high levels of unemployment around the world the G20 needs to refocus on a growth agenda to support jobs in both the developed and developing world.
And of course at the moment with global growth having a three in front of it, we're not making the progress that we need to make to not only create jobs and develop countries but to lift people out of poverty within countries.
So this is a great opportunity for us at every level  -  government-to-government, business-to-business, civil society-to-civil society  -  to try and refocus that agenda back to an agenda of growth.
Growth means jobs and very clearly stating that in a way which people in the street see the benefit of the G20; so much of the discussion gets so technical that it simply gets lost.
But really what's at stake here is jobs through growth and getting that agenda fairly focused through the G20.
So that's what we'll be trying to do and I'm really looking forward to working with each and every one of you in doing that.
There's a big debate, as Christine Lagarde said overnight, about the extent to which fiscal policy, particularly in developed nations, is too tight in the short-term and not tight enough in the long-term.
This has really got to be a debate about lifting growth so we can get jobs, and how we do it in the short-term but as well as the long-term, and all of the structural reforms that drive that, whether it is investments in infrastructure, education, regulatory reform  -  all of those things.
And given our record of reform as a country over 30 years we are ideally placed to lead that debate and to basically make a very significant contribution and I think we can do that together. 


Melbourne
It's great to be home in Melbourne, to be back at this Conference, where my political values have always been tested and shaped.
Here I see so many party and Parliamentary colleagues and friends, people who have served so long in the Labor cause.
Ours is a strong State branch with a lot of work ahead and I know how much you are already doing to prepare for the campaigns to come.
So I want to thank the State Secretary Noah Carroll, our Party officials and staff and just as important, every branch member and union member, every supporter and volunteer  -  all of you.
I want to thank our Party President, a woman of such strength and conviction, who's given her life to the Labor movement, who I know is going to bring Melbourne home for Labor, I'm so grateful for her words this morning, Cath Bowtell.
I want to thank our State Leader too, a man who has revived the Victorian Party, who's seen off one Liberal Premier, and he's certainly got another one in his sights, he gave a great speech today, Daniel Andrews.
Delegates, yesterday was the most important COAG meeting in our five and a half years in Government.
Our Party shares an abiding vision  -  opportunity for all who seek it, care for all who need it  -  yesterday your Labor Government  put that vision before the nation in the most ambitious and practical form.
Opportunity for all  -  through a plan which will properly resource all our classrooms, teachers and kids for generations to come, the biggest changes to school funding in forty years.
Care for all  -  through DisabilityCare, the biggest extension to the social safety net since Medicare, our national disability insurance scheme.
DisabilityCare is vital to so many Australians  -  to hundreds of thousands of people with disability, to their carers, family and friends.
So many of our fellow citizens have worked so hard for so long to make this happen  -  the countless advocates in the community, countless Australians who have all lent their voice  -  I thank you.
People who know that disability can strike any one of us at any time that accident or injury can change a life and remake a family's future in a single moment.
People who already knew in their own lives what the Productivity Commission has now told us all: that care for people with disabilities in our country is underfunded, unfair, fragmented, inefficient, that people with disability have little choice and no certainty of access to care.
It took their campaign to seize the attention of the nation  -  and it took a Federal Labor Government to turn that community campaign into public policy.
First, our Government, your Labor Government, committed to build a national disability insurance scheme  -  and then we got the agreement of every State and Territory to the need for change. 
That was back in 2011.
In 2012, we brought the ACT, Tasmania, South Australia and New South Wales on board for launch sites and a launch date of 1 July this year.
It took some doing, but we even got the Victorian Government to agree to launch  -  and yesterday the Northern Territory signed up to launch from 1 July 2014.
Your Labor Government has kept building.
Hard work led by a very fine Minister known so well to all of us here, Jenny Macklin, our Minister for Disability Reform.
21 March 2013 was a red letter day: the day we put DisabilityCare into law.
Because of all that, in ten weeks' time Australia will launch DisabilityCare Australia  -  on 1 July this year the NDIS begins.
Only a Federal Labor Government could deliver this result but no Federal Government could do this alone.
That was true in 2012 for agreement to launch.
That was still true this week when we signed with South Australia. 
On Thursday, Premier Weatherill and I put pen to paper, signing South Australia up to the full rollout of DisabilityCare by 1 July 2018.
Yesterday, the Australian Capital Territory signed up too.
The support of State and Territory Governments  -  Labor and Liberal is crucial  -  and I know that not every Liberal leader has to be a wrecker.
We saw that back in December last year, when Premier O'Farrell signed up New South Wales  -  committing Australia's biggest State to the full rollout of DisabilityCare over the next five years.
The story in this State is different: the sad reality here is that Victoria has had a change of Liberal leader  -  but not a change of conservative heart.
Yesterday the Government of Victoria missed another chance to put the people of our state first.
My message to Premier Napthine is clear.
This State has already been drifting and directionless for too long.
Make a decision, Denis.  Sign up to DisabilityCare today.
Delegates, the story of DisabilityCare is the story of school improvement.
A long community campaign for change  -  Labor in Government building the policies to get it done  -  an ambitious and practical reform plan on the table now  -  and a chance for every level of government and section of the community to act in the national interest.
So my message to the Premiers and the Chief Ministers is just as clear.
Do the right thing by Australia. Sign up for better schools.
Today, one in 12 Australian kids aren't meeting minimum standards in reading, writing and maths.
Kids from less well-off backgrounds can be up to three years behind their classmates. 
Lifting school standards means opportunity for all of Australia's children.
Our plan will make sure no Australian child is left behind.
Today, four of the top five schooling systems in the world are in our region and we aren't one of them. 
The average 15 year old maths student in Australia is two years behind a 15 year old in Shanghai. 
Improving school results means strength for Australia's economy.
Our plan will make sure the Australian economy isn't left behind either.
Delegates, spreading opportunity through education is the heart of the modern Labor way. You know that as well as anyone.
That is how Labor has governed in Victoria.
John Cain's Government introduced the VCE and reformed TAFE, boosting funding for schools after decades of conservative neglect.
Joan Kirner boosted the most disadvantaged schools and promoted access and equality for all students.
Steve Bracks committed to modernise every school in Victoria  -  planting the seed of Building the Education Revolution.
The Blueprint for School Reform gave us inspiring curriculum, better school management and local flexibility.
The Education Act was rewritten for the first time in a century  -  and the school leaving age raised.
John Brumby pushed through early childhood reforms, strengthened the apprenticeship system, boosted science and maths and built international education into a major growth industry for Victoria.
So much of our agenda in education began here  -  so many ideas I was proud to extend nation-wide as Education Minister and now as Prime Minister.
Fittingly embodied in the goals of the Melbourne Declaration  -  signed back in December of 2008 by every Australian Education Minister  -  a pledge to every parent that your child will have a great education, no matter who you are, what system you attend or where you live.
Goals which can only be delivered with the National Plan for School Improvement.
Delegates, because of the work of this Labor Government, we now know something we have never known in half a century of federal school funding.
We can say what resources are required for a school to get excellent results  -  we can say which schools don't get those resources today.
We can say who needs extra funding and which children need extra help.
We can also show what a fair share is between the Commonwealth and the States  -  and I've offered to put an extra two dollars in for every one extra dollar I ask of them.
The policy work has been done, the discussions have been held, the experts have reported, the advice is in.
This is the big one for Australia's future. 
We will fight to get it done.
Delegates, when you campaign in the Federal election later this year  -  this is the plan for the nation you will carry to the people.
And with it you will carry a very clear choice.
This Labor plan: to save wisely and invest in the nation's future.
The risk of our opponents: who always cut the wrong things and always cut too much.
You've seen it here in Victoria. 
You know you'll see it in Canberra if Government changes this year.
I'll give the Opposition Leader this much credit: when he came to Geelong this week, he finally spat out the truth.
He didn't hide his plan to cut $2bn in co-investment with the auto industry and put a quarter of a million manufacturing jobs on the chopping block.
He didn't pretend to have a plan for jobs or a plan for the future.
This is all Tony Abbott told Victorians on Thursday: We will do some things that will hurt.
You bet they would. 
Threatening to wield the axe on Indigenous affairs is just the latest Liberal plan for a cut which will hurt our people.
They want to cut our tripling of the tax free threshold and hurt 3.6 million working women.
They want to hurt every one of 3.5 million pensioners by cutting pensions.
They want to hurt every one of 1.2 million families by cutting the School Kids Bonus.
They want to hurt every one of 3.6 million low-income Australians saving for retirement by cutting the superannuation co-contribution.
Every one of these cuts is a plan they've boldly announced themselves.
They would take away high speed broadband.
They've said it's a white elephant.
They would take away funding for schools.
They've said they'll rip it up.
They even said DisabilityCare is a cruel hoax.
The Liberals will cut to the bone.
That's what the Liberals do: they are only the latest of the anti-Labor parties in Australia's history, they are just another in the line of succession, the blockers and stoppers of Australian public life.
That is the only reason they exist at all, to try to stop Labor acting and to try to reverse the things we've done.
These Liberal cuts will be bad for services, bad for families  -  and bad for jobs as well.
Liberal cuts will slam the brakes on for the economy at the exact time we need to be picking up speed.
They will throw away wise investments for the nation's future  -  they will throw Australians out of work at the same time.
All our plans and all our achievements, everything we have done for Australia's future, all this is what is at risk, all this is what our opponents want to take away.
We will walk a hard path together in the months ahead but I know you are ready for the campaign to come.
In 2010 and 2007 you fought for a Labor Government  -  and our Labor achievements since then should make you proud.
Our plan for school improvement  -  our plan for DisabilityCare.
Building a clean energy future when so many stood against us for so long.
Beating the global financial crisis and growing jobs when the rest of the world could not.
Tearing up Work Choices and protecting your rights at work.
Apologising to the Stolen Generation who had waited so long for that one precious word.
I so vividly remember this State conference in May 2008.
Our first since taking office in October the previous year.
We all met in hope and expectation for the achievements which still lay ahead.
Today those achievements and these plans are the substance of our governing record.
I know we meet today in a different mood.
Ours is the determination of seasoned soldiers, not the enthusiasm of raw recruits.
The knowledge of our achievements and plans will give us strength as we fight for Government again.
Helping families meet the pressures of modern family life  -  higher living standards for all our people who work so hard.
Creating and supporting jobs  -  for good wages and high skills  -  and giving you new rights at work.
Building the national broadband network  -  the real thing, for everyone.
Properly resourcing all our teachers and kids  -  improving Australia's schools  -  for generations to come.
The new safety net that was a dream before Labor governed  -  DisabilityCare, a national disability insurance scheme.
That is the choice before our nation this year.
The things Labor will do  -  the things the Liberals will take away.
Our Labor plans  -  their Liberal cuts.
Our Party, the great Party of initiative in Australian life  -  always the nation-builder  -  always the reforming force.
Our opponents  -  always fighting to wreck, to stop, to cut.
That is why this is the fight of our lives  -  that is why we must get out there and win.


Melbourne
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's hard to think of a more timely or fitting conversation for the Australian Davos Connection than a conversation about China, so I'm glad of the opportunity tonight presents.
You're all familiar with the expression punching above our weight  -  that word-picture for Australia's ability to make the most of our relationships on the world stage.
It's an expression which nicely captures an important aspect of Australia's diplomatic history and strategic culture.
In this sense it's not surprising we persist with it and it's an expression I use myself from time to time.
At best it's an image of a feisty, activist polity, boxing smart, overachieving in global affairs; but we should never be misled into thinking of ourselves as outclassed in the world or hanging on for the final bell.
Because yes, in a sense we punch above our weight  -  but we must also recognise ours is a nation of genuine strategic and economic weight in our own right.
The facts speak for themselves.
We are a world leader and a success story in economic reform, sustained through rising living standards for all.
We've created almost nine hundred thousand jobs during the worst of global economic times.
We have the twelfth largest economy in the world today.
When we understand these facts of our strength, we can appreciate the opportunities of the coming years.
We can be a leading nation in the world  -  as you saw in our decisive election to the United Nations Security Council  -  as you will see again when we host the G20 in 2014.
We can successfully maintain an alliance with the United States and a partnership with China  -  as you saw in our recent diplomatic successes in Beijing.
This is the approach of my Government: to understand our national strengths and employ them in our national interests.
As you know, I've recently returned from my second visit to China as Prime Minister, where I led the most senior Australian political delegation ever to visit there.
We achieved significant results for Australia during this visit: for trade links and financial integration, for bilateral relations and regional security.
Most significant of all, the commitment to an annual leaders' dialogue between the Australian Prime Minister and the Chinese Premier, accompanied by an annual economic dialogue and an annual foreign and strategic dialogue, each at ministerial-level.
This is a landmark in Australia-China relations: a major foreign-policy achievement for our country with enormously significant results for our relationship with China and for our foreign policy overall.
The idea of a strategic partnership with China has long been discussed.
My own view was that this had to be connected to a new architecture for the relationship, in other words a formal program of regular bilateral meetings, if the true benefits were to be felt by both China and Australia.
The transition in Chinese leadership provided the key opportunity to get this done.
Our discussions with China began in earnest in April last year when I wrote to President Hu outlining a new proposal.
Foreign Minister Senator Carr took direct discussions to a new level during his first visit to China, in May.
Our conclusion when he returned was that the opening was clearly going to be there to get this done.
Two key decisions followed.
I asked the then-Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, now Defence Secretary Denis Richardson, to travel to Beijing as a special envoy to follow up the opening we saw at the leadership level with his official counterparts.
We also decided that I would travel to China this year, as soon as possible following the National People's Congress, to create the opportunity for a discussion with the incoming leadership.
The phone conversation I was able to have with new Premier Li following his assumption of office in March secured in-principle agreement that there be a program of bilateral meetings  -  and that we seek to make this an outcome of our meetings in April.
So the things we achieved in China weren't products of good timing or good chance: these were neither strokes of luck nor strokes of the pen.
Our patient pursuit of a key national objective over the past year meant that by the time we departed for the Bo'ao Forum, we knew it was likely we would have good news for Australia on our return.
Australia has fully earned the diplomatic successes of the past fortnight.
We should celebrate this  -  but we shouldn't be surprised by it.
In truth our success is the logical consequence of our position in the world and the work we have done to make the most of it.
This serves as a valuable example of the strengths of Australia's standing in the world  -  and perhaps it also offers a counsel of moderation to some currents of thinking and debate at home.
Just after the announcement of the leaders' dialogue, I was asked by one Australian what we brought to the table with China, aside from a whole lot of iron ore  -  a telling question and one representative of a strand of opinion at large.
Now, of course a rapidly urbanising nation like China finds mutual interests with a resource-rich country like Australia, so our mineral resources are important to China, that's self-evident.
Many countries have coal and iron ore though; we have more.
We have a rule of law and a growing economy and a track record for economic reform.
We are stable and reliable, we're a safe place to live and work.
We have systems in place to support a corruption-resistant business culture.
Our knowledge-based industries and skilled workforce add value like few in the world.
That is all important to China too.
What's more, the urbanisation being experienced by China isn't just an economic trend.
It's a vast, social transformation.
A nation building cities is also a nation living in cities.
This is another reason Australia is important to China.
China's big challenge in the years ahead will be to rebalance economic growth, to diversify its economy and deliver benefits to a burgeoning middle-class  -  so our skilled people and their expertise are important to China.
Australians bring advice and experience in urban planning and construction.
We are ready to meet the massive demand for skills in areas like water management and sanitation.
And we have public policy expertise in carbon market design, retirement income systems and the provision of health and welfare services.
We're unusually good at these things.
Our world-leading service industries are important to China.
If we just had iron ore and coal, China wouldn't be inviting our banks to trade on the mainland.
If it was all about minerals and gas, China wouldn't be pursuing the trading of our currency.
On April 10  -  the first day of direct currency trading  -  $250 million worth of trade was conducted.
Ten times the value of the indirect trade the day before.
Australia is a leading world economy  -  and we are a leading country in our region.
If it was all about raw materials, our Navy wouldn't be the first Western partner for live firing exercises with the PLA-Navy.
We wouldn't now be preparing for annual ministerial meetings on foreign and strategic issues  -  or for strategic policy exchanges.
Just as Australia has a diverse and resilient economy with a strong future beyond the peak of the mining investment boom  -  so our relationship with China is broader than our resource trade and our importance to China is not simply that of an energy supplier.
Knowing that China is Australia's largest trading partner is an important part of understanding Australia's future  -  that's true.
Knowing that Australia is China's seventh-largest trading partner is also a very important part of understanding Australia's place in the world.
So we are not, indeed we have never been, simply a quarry or a beach; ours is a diverse and sophisticated economy and a valued trading partner with the biggest global economies.
Talking ourselves down doesn't help us achieve our goals and it isn't well grounded in the facts either.
Neither is our nation presented by insoluble strategic challenges or problems we don't understand and can't confront.
Quite the contrary.
We have a strong alliance with the United States and we advocate clearly and in measured terms for the contribution our alliance makes to strategic stability and growing prosperity for every country in Asia.
We have just agreed to a level of dialogue with China enjoyed by a handful of nations: China has just four other such annual bilateral dialogues and we have only a few relationships involving this degree of engagement and commitment.
We actively shape our destiny  -  we do not allow circumstances to dictate our national course.
False modesty at this moment would be just as great a risk as complacency.
Our children would thank us for neither.
What they will thank us for is the self-confidence that allows us to be understand and act on our strengths.
Along with the enlightened knowledge that our present strength does not guarantee us strength in future: all it does is create an opportunity to make the most of this historic moment of change.
The Asian Century has begun.
The return of Asia to economic leadership in the world is the return of an enduring reality in global affairs.
For most of human history, a nation's economic strength essentially reflected its population size.
The nations with the largest populations were the nations with the biggest economies.
The Industrial Revolution changed all that.
For the past two centuries, a few European nations with relatively small populations could boast some of the world's largest economies.
Now, the balance is shifting back: a great renaissance is underway.
The centre of world economic power is shifting to Asia, to nations with immense and growing populations, like China and India.
Population size and economic strength are converging once again.
Measured by purchasing power parity, China is set to become the world's largest economy before 2020  -  perhaps as early as 2017.
India's economy is now larger than those of Japan, Germany, Russia.
Six of the nations in the top 10 for economy size are already in the top 10 for population size: China, India, the United States, Brazil, Russia and Japan.
Projections to 2050 show that more than half of the Top 20 economies by mid-century will also be in the Top 20 for population.
This fundamental realignment is inexorable  -  and it is a challenge to Australia.
Australia has been one of the great beneficiaries of the era that is ending, with our absolute economic size far outranking our relative population.
Yet it's equally obvious the change is a huge opportunity.
The rise of China and India is not only restoring the convergence of population size and economic strength  -  it is bringing the world's economic centre to our own region, our own time zone, or own doorstep.
The centre of gravity of the global economy is shifting in our direction for the first time in our economic history.
We can maintain our strength in this new era if we understand that advantage and if we seize it with wisdom and determination.
Predicting the future is always fraught with risk  -  but the greater risk is in failing to shape it.
This is why we must use the strength we have created to shape our future now, at home and abroad.
At home, above all, by properly resourcing all our teachers, classrooms and kids for generations to come.
We know that we cannot win the economic race if we are losing the education race.
So we must deliver a plan to lift standards, improve funding and engage the world.
Abroad, in all we do to make our nation one of the winners in the Asian Century.
Whether it's getting our banks on the ground in China.
Or opening the uranium trade with India.
Whether it's negotiating a comprehensive economic partnership with Indonesia.
Developing our agriculture and food manufacturing to meet the doubling of Asian demand by mid-century.
Or supporting the contribution the United States makes to the peace and stability of our region.
The specific achievements of our diplomacy in China are the working model for how we can deliver.
They also reflect the mood and temper with which we should approach the times.
The self-confidence to recognise our national strength today.
The wisdom to know this is not guaranteed in future.
The vision of what our nation can gain if we make the most of this moment.
The far-sighted plans and the detailed implementation to get it done.
Shaping our national future, not letting events shape us  -  strong in the world, strong for tomorrow  -  that's what my visit to China was all about.
That's what the Asian Century White Paper is all about.
All our efforts of the future should be devoted to seizing the opportunity while it lasts.
Thank you. 


Sydney
E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
I am here to sign the London Declaration on Combating Anti- Semitism.  And this is why:
A synagogue vandalised in Brussels.
An explosive device detonated at a Jewish community building in Sweden.
A rabbi attacked in Berlin.
Jewish graves desecrated in Prague.
Four Jews shot and killed at a Jewish school in France.
And even in my home city of Melbourne, graffiti was sprayed painted in a shopping centre saying: The best Jew is a dead Jew.
All these events  -  and hundreds more like them  -  occurred in just one year: 2012.
Friends, anti-Semitism did not end with the conclusion of the Second World War and the fall of Nazism.
It did not end with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It did not end with the foundation of the State of Israel.
It pollutes our world right now.
In the face of Anti-Semitism, there can be no bystanders.
As citizens, as leaders and as nations, we must act.
History and justice demand it.
Do not ask who else should act.
It is us.
Do not ask when we should act.
It is now.
That is why since 2009, leading parliamentarians from around the world have signed the London Declaration on Combating Anti-Semitism. 
I am honoured today to be the first Australian parliamentarian to sign this historic document.
I am pleased to sign it in the presence of so many leaders of our Jewish community.
So many of whose families came to this land seeking shelter after the event that cries out to us decades after its horror.
The Holocaust did not begin during the dark days of war.
It began decades and centuries earlier  -  with the hatred, the blood libels, the pogroms and expulsions and, perhaps most significantly, the casual insults and violence that became part of everyday life and society.
The Holocaust began with words.
It culminated in the gas chambers.
It ended with the defeat of Nazi Germany and the liberation of the camps.
That is why through the London Declaration, we say with clear and loud voices.
Never again.
But friends, seven decades on from the war, combatting anti-Semitism is not just a matter of ensuring that we do not forget.
It is about comprehending its full and insidious horrors in the first instance.
And then keeping that knowledge alive.
That's why education is so crucial.
The content of the history we teach in our schools.
The tenor of our public discourse.
The laws by which we regulate our civil interactions.
The tenacity with which, as nations, we stand for what is right.
Friends, I am proud to lead a nation which has done so much to fight discrimination in its laws and in its practices.
Our Parliament debated and passed motions condemning anti-Semitism almost a decade ago.
Our anti-discrimination laws are robust.
Our courts have found that Holocaust denial and vilification of the Jewish people are illegal.
We co-sponsored the UN General Assembly Resolution 60/7, and the creation of the International Day of Commemoration in Memory of Victims of the Holocaust.
And we sponsor regular interfaith dialogue within our own region.
So our record is a good one.
But this Declaration reminds us that combatting anti-Semitism is an active process, not a passive one.
It demands vigilance.
It means remaining alert to new vehicles by which hatred and social poison can be spread, especially through the use of emerging media platforms.
It means exerting ourselves so that future generations understand the importance of civic values like respect and tolerance.
The London Declaration is, above all, a warning and a witness to those who hold offices of public trust.
In the 1930s, another generation of leaders failed the test.
We face the same test  -  and we must not fail it.
Every generation is tested  -  and they must not fail either.
So this statement is a solemn reminder of our responsibilities, and the role Parliaments can play.
A means of reminding ourselves that we too are writing history  -  in our own hands.
I am therefore very proud to be the first Member of the Parliament of Australia to sign the London Declaration.
I do so with great deliberation and profound personal commitment. 
And I trust that before long, the names of every Australian parliamentarian will appear alongside my own.


Morning Service, Townsville
"Australians said goodbye ... and promised never to forget."
ANZAC DAY ADDRESS
MORNING SERVICE, TOWNSVILLE
25 APRIL 2013
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
So often, war means saying goodbye.
This city of Townsville understands that truth so well.
No one better exemplifies the ANZAC story of duty and sacrifice than the uniformed men and women of this garrison city who leave here so often to serve Australia overseas.
We honour you today.
No one better exemplifies the respect, the admiration, the affection, the love, we feel for our people in uniform than the families and citizens of this great Australian community.
Today, we honour your sacrifice too.
Saying goodbye in the hope your loved one will come back.
That is the story of this community today  -  it has been the story of so many Australian communities throughout our history  -  just as it was the story of the families and communities who farewelled the ANZACs in 1914 and 1915.
On docks and at railway stations around our land, mothers, wives, little brothers and sisters bravely suppressed tears.
Fathers extended grim handshakes.
Australians said good bye and promised never to forget.
Those who have been to war  -  you who have been to war  -  never forget its horror.
So many spend a lifetime comprehending the strange miracle of their own survival.The families of 102 000 Australians who died for us never forget war's horror too.
The dreadful sight of a clergyman or telegram boy coming up the driveway.
Or the phone ringing unexpectedly in the cool of night.
The wounded never forget the horror of war, imprinted as it is on their bodies and their minds.
They returned to lives that could never be what they once were.
Their loved ones often facing a different and longer battle behind the walls of the family home.
This is war as our country has known it  -  war as we remember it on this day.
War as the worst of human experience, war with its full dreadful price.
But with its pride and victories as well.
We remember that today, we remember our whole experience.
So if you want to know about Townsville, come here on ANZAC Day.
If you want to understand Australians, watch us on ANZAC Day.
You will see ceremonies as grave and solemn as any in Europe.
A nation which expresses its most eloquent patriotic spirit in the silences we share on this day.
Moments later, joyful laughter, rum and milk, two-up and the telling of stories that get taller by the hour  -  softening perhaps, but never denying, the truths of this day.
So much has been given to our nation by all who served.
And so little is asked in return.
That for a few hours each year, we hush the busy course of our lives and dedicate this day, to remember.
Lest we forget.


Charles Darwin University, Darwin
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great pleasure to be here today for the opening of this magnificent new centre.  
Today we celebrate the hard work that has transformed a bold idea into reality. 
And we mark another important moment in Australia's evolving appreciation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture.
A significant new chapter in a story we can trace back to the man whose name graces this university.
It is 177 years since Charles Darwin visited Australia.
We were just one stop on his five year voyage on the Beagle.
A journey that inspired and informed his theory which changed the way we look at the world forever.
The Origin of Species proved that Darwin saw further and thought deeper than this peers.
But Darwin's description of Australia, published in The Voyage of the Beagle, reveals that he was also a creature of his time. 
So the view of Australia which we see in Darwin's writing  -  and in particular of the First Australians  -  is a narrow one.  
When he encountered the world's oldest living culture, Darwin could not rise above a benign Victorian curiosity  -  or express himself in other than faint praise:
In their own arts', he wrote, they are admirable'.
For Darwin, and for so many of his peers, their assessments were limited by the common prejudices of their time.
For too long, the outsiders who documented Indigenous Australia did so with closed minds.
Where they should have listened, they judged.
Where they could have learned, they sought to instruct. 
When they should have shown interest, they were apathetic.
This ignorance  -  what Stanner so aptly termed this Great Australian Silence'  -  long diminished us all. 
Today is one of those days on which we are reminded of that sad past  -  and reminded of how far we have come.
Australians everywhere now understand the central place that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture occupies in our national story.
We are embracing it with pride.
Just as importantly, we are beginning to realise how much there is to learn from the ways of Indigenous Australia.
New perspectives on the management of our natural resources, new understandings in language, art and music. 
This is the real significance of places like the Centre for Australian Indigenous Knowledges and Education.
This is why today is so exciting.
Such places help us to see Indigenous society as a living guide to the continent and community we all share.
Alongside its cultural function, this Centre will be a home to the next generation of Indigenous leaders.
The specially designed Bachelor's Degrees will give students the opportunity to develop their abilities in governance, advocacy, community leadership and teaching.
The Preparation for Tertiary Success course will give those returning to the education system the skills and confidence to achieve the best possible results at university.
Every course works in partnership with the Learnline program so students in remote communities have access to class materials and discussions.
This Centre is a place filled with natural light and designed for group-learning and discussion, open-air conversations and classes. An ideal demonstration of the idea that the best design is a meeting of function and form.
This is a moment worth celebrating  -  you have created something which is an example for universities across Australia and around the world
I congratulate you all for your vision and courage in realising it.
This Centre is a symbol of all that Indigenous leadership can offer.
It is proof of how far Australia has come, and a marker for the road ahead.
With great pride  -  and in a spirit of Reconciliation and friendship  -  I declare the Australian Centre for Indigenous Knowledges and Education officially open and wish it every success.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It's a great sign of the growing recognition of Per Capita's work that your Executive Director David has been in such good company at the international Policy Network's Progressive Governance and Global Progress conference in Denmark.
Congratulations to you on the fine contribution Per Capita is making in the world of ideas.
With the Federal Budget just fifteen days away, I thank you for this opportunity to share with you the clearest possible picture of the purpose and context of our Budget deliberations.
This year's Budget will be about a national challenge  -  and a national plan.
A challenge for Australia: to respond to the huge reductions in revenue growth over the next four years.
A plan for Australia: to make necessary investments in the nation's future, to ensure that none of our people is left behind.
Tuesday 14 May will be no old-fashioned pre-election Budget night.
What the Treasurer will deliver will not be a political pamphlet  -  he will outline an economic program.
The Budget will outline the fiscal path for the coming four years, one designed both to take account of the nation's current circumstances and to shape the nation's future.
Our key long term objective, the progressive purpose of this Government's fiscal policy is enduring. 
It is:
 * 	to maximise jobs and economic growth;
 * 	to ensure sustainable funding over the long-term for the investments that strengthen our economy and the services our whole community relies on; and
 * 	to keep inflation in check and give the Reserve Bank maximum opportunity to keep interest rates low.
The Government's medium-term fiscal strategy  -  to deliver fiscal surpluses on average over the economic cycle  -  is designed to give effect to this purpose in practice.
It commits us to support jobs and economic growth when private sector demand is weak.
This is what we did so successfully during the Global Financial Crisis and, as a result, we kept around 200 000 more Australians in work.
It commits us to making Budget decisions so that in the good times and the hard times, through the inevitable variations in economic activity and Government revenue from year to year, we can afford the investments and services that make our nation stronger, smarter and fairer.
It also ensures that we don't simply chase revenue down  -  we don't cut to the bone and spurn wise investments, damaging jobs and growth now and in the future.
Instead our fiscal strategy responds to the economic cycle. 
In the language of economists, we allow the Budget's automatic stabilisers to do their work as well as actively controlling spending to reach surplus at the right part of the economic cycle.
That means for the coming Budget, we must fund new initiatives by making savings.
This is a necessary discipline.
This need for balance over the cycle has been summed up nicely by the Treasurer many times: if we are Keynesians on the way down, we have to be Keynesians on the way up  -  Keynesians right through the economic cycle.
The need to understand how the cycle is changing is summed up best in the remark so famously attributed to Keynes himself:
When the facts change, I change my mind  -  what do you do, sir?
In the face of the challenges we now face as a nation, this is what any smart leader, any forward-looking government, must be prepared to do.
So today I want to set out the facts that underpin the decisions our nation faces as we approach this year's Budget.
First, the good news, the shared achievement that we should never take for granted.
Unlike so many nations, Australia's economy is stable and resilient.
Our economic fundamentals are sound.
We have contained inflation, low interest rates, low public debt. 
We are one of only eight nations in the world to have a triple-A rating with a stable outlook from all three major ratings agencies  -  something Australia has never previously achieved.
Our economy is now more than thirteen per cent larger than it was in December 2007.
We have bounced back from the Global Financial Crisis better than any major advanced economy.
If we had made the wrong decisions during the Global Financial Crisis our nation could easily be struggling with recession today.
Instead, Australia is now the twelfth-largest economy in the world  -  when Labor came to Government we were fifteenth.
Unlike the rest of the world, we have very modest debt  -  because we have borrowed in the right way and at the right time, to support growth during the global financial crisis.
Our level of debt is the same as a person earning $100,000 a year with a $10,000 mortgage. 
Millions of Australians with mortgages and personal loans would love to be in a position where their only debt was equal to ten per cent of their income.
Similarly, countries around the world would love to be in Australia's debt position and have an unemployment rate as low as ours.
Indeed, the fundamental proof of our resilience is our ability to create and support jobs. 
Since 2007, we have created almost 900 000 jobs in this country, in a period when twenty eight million new people joined the jobless queues world-wide. 
Our national prospects in the Asian Century are bright.
As the centre of global economic gravity shifts east, it shifts towards Australia. 
Our diplomatic and trade successes in China last month, our improved relationship with India, our strengthening economic ties with Indonesia and our flourishing alliance with the United States  -  these are all proof that our plan to be one of the winners in the Asian Century is bearing fruit.
However  -  and this is key  -  while Australia is stable, resilient and close to centres of growth, the wider world economy is quite a different story.  
There is serious, persistent weakness in global growth  -  and continued volatility in the global economy.
To take one example, a resource-rich nation like Canada has only grown by five per cent in total over the last five years.
The advanced economies grew at only 1.2 per cent last year and global growth reached only around 3 per cent.
This global weakness creates important economic pressures in Australia. 
The contrast between our stability and resilience and the volatility and fragility of so much of the rest of the world is a reason for the continuing strength of the Australian dollar  - consider this. 
Today over 30 central banks around the world hold Australian currency in their reserves.
The increasing importance of our currency for central bank reserves worldwide is recognised by the International Monetary Fund.
Later this year, the IMF will begin quarterly reporting on central bank holdings of seven currencies and the Australian dollar will be one of them.
This shows we are a great investment, but that comes at a price.
The dollar's strength puts pressures on our economy, particularly our trade-exposed industries.
It would be irresponsible simply to wait in hope for these pressures to ease.
So the Government has a plan to create and support jobs, based on our five pillars of productivity, designed to seize the opportunities that proximity to Asia creates.
This back drop to our Budget decision making  -  Australia's resilience, global weakness, a persistently high dollar  -  have been known for some time.
What is new is how strong the revenue pressures on the nation's Budget are. 
We must plan for these strengthening pressures  -  and that is a key part of preparing our Budget for this year.
The persistent high dollar, as well as squeezing exporting jobs, also squeezes the profits of exporting firms: with lower profits for these companies comes lower company tax going to Government. 
We can't assume this will change soon.
The high dollar is also placing competitive pressures on firms here, who face new pressures from cheaper imports  -  holding down prices across the board, with the high dollar making it hard for these firms to pass on price increases, holding down profits  -  and in turn holding down company tax.
Consumers do benefit, but many businesses are doing it tough.
All this means the data on our economy now reveals a significant new fact.
This is the striking and continuing divergence between what economists refer to as real GDP growth and nominal GDP growth.
My best shorthand description of those terms is this.
Real GDP growth is growth in the volume of the economy.
The actual activity in the economy, how many jobs there are, the quantity of infrastructure we build, the amount of goods and services we export  -  how many tonnes of coal, how many international students pay for a course here, how many houses are built.
Nominal GDP growth counts this growth in volume and it also counts growth of the prices of all these things.
Today, real GDP is growing solidly  -  we're creating more jobs, exporting more goods and services and buying and selling more from each other, just as we planned.
However prices are growing at a slower rate than is usual for this stage of the economic cycle, a slower rate than was forecast  -  and so nominal GDP growth for this current year is significantly slower than was forecast and we expect nominal GDP growth for future years to be revised down.
The current data shows nominal GDP growth after the first half of the 2012-13 year was an annual rate of two per cent.
At Budget last year, we had forecast nominal GDP to grow at five per cent.
What's changed? 
While the prices of our exports continue to be lower than their recent peaks because of weak global demand and increasing global supply, the prices of imports are now lower than forecast because of the strength of our dollar.
The prices of goods produced at home are also lower than forecast because competition from imports is so fierce.
This is now putting so much downward pressure on prices that growth in nominal GDP is actually lower than growth in real GDP.
What's more, this has now been true for nearly an entire financial year  -  since the beginning of the June quarter last year.
This has never happened for such a long period in the whole half a century and more of the National Accounts. 
Not during the global financial crisis, not during the 1991 or 1982 recessions.
Not even during the Menzies credit squeeze of 1961, which was effectively a deliberate policy attempt to slow price growth, do we find a similar effect.
Now, that's a long explanation of a pretty technical fact.  
But for the Budget bottom line, it's a very meaningful fact  -  because, naturally enough, companies don't pay tax on volume, they pay tax on value, which is driven by price.  
The Pharaoh might have kept one fifth part of the grain from the field but the Tax Commissioner collects in dollars and cents. 
So even if the economy is growing as much as expected, when prices are growing much less than expected, tax grows much less too.
The bottom line for the Budget bottom line is this: the amount of tax revenue the Government has collected so far this financial year is already $7.5 billion less than was forecast last October.
Treasury now estimates that this reduction will increase to around $12 billion by the end of the financial year.
This unusually low revenue, which wasn't forecast even a few months ago, creates a significant fiscal gap over the Budget period. 
Put simply, spending is controlled but the amount of tax money coming to the government is growing much slower than expected.
Inevitably, confronted with the facts, the economic simpletons and sloganeers will squirm and throw in arguments to distract.
First, you will be told that revenue for the next financial year is still expected to be more than this financial year.  That's true  -  at the same time our population will be larger, more people will be on the age pension, health costs will continue to rise.
Indeed the growth in health and in the age pension will be far higher than the growth in tax money.
So revenue growth will be less than natural growth in key areas of expenditure and is spectacularly lower than reasonably predicted.
It is the failure of growth in tax money to match reasonable predictions that creates the Budget challenge.
Second, you will be told it isn't about less tax money in but about spending.
However, as informed commentators like Tim Colebatch pointed out last week, excluding east Asia, total government spending in Australia is already the second lowest in the developed world.
Of the advanced Western economies, only Switzerland spends a smaller share of its economy on government than does Australia.
The total size of government here is less than the US, less than the UK.
Not as measured in revenue either, measured in spending.
And let me reiterate, for the future we will continue to match new spending in the Budget with savings.
Given all this, tax money down, spending controlled, the question for Budget planners is difficult to answer, but simple to state: how, and how fast, to fill that significant fiscal gap?
Some of the above factors will return to trend  -  overall, revenue is being revised downward over the coming four years, not permanently.
However in part, this is a return to normality  -  returning to long-term averages.
Australia will not go back to the extraordinary revenue peaks of mining boom mark I from 2002-03 to 2007-08.
While we should expect revenue to improve as we move to the production and export phase of the current mining boom, it's clear that the extraordinary revenue peaks of the mid-2000s won't be repeated.
The overall story: by 2005-06 the share of the economy taken in tax reached a peak of 24.2 per cent  -  compared to 22.4 in 1996 and 22.2 as we reported in our last update in October.
The huge profits of that time meant that company tax revenue reached an astonishing 5.3 per cent of GDP in 2006-07 compared to a share of 4.5 per cent of GDP last financial year  -  a fall of around $10 billion in company tax a year.
Capital gains tax was 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2006-07  -  last financial year it was 0.4 per cent. 
We collect less than one-third of the amount compared to seven years ago and in dollar terms the drop in tax collection is around $15 billion a year.
Quite apart from any other factor, remaining competitive in the contemporary global economy doesn't allow us simply to turn back time on tax collection by dialling up tax revenue to these levels.
If I can summarise a complex picture in a few brush strokes, it's these:
The prices for what Australian companies sell overseas are lower, imports are cheaper, local competition is fierce.
Those things add up to business making less profit than planned. 
That puts pressures on our stable and resilient economy and it is one reason businesses and workers still need to work so hard to get ahead.
When businesses make less profit than planned, it also means Government gets less money in tax than expected.
That's the big challenge for the nation in this Budget  -  and it defines the decisions the Government's confronting as we put the Budget together.
Once again, to break this complex picture down in to a personal story. 
Imagine a wage earner, John, employed in the same job throughout the last 20 years.
For a period in 2003 to 2007 every year his employer gave him a sizeable bonus. 
He was grateful but in his bones knew it wouldn't last.
The bonuses did stop and John was told that his income would rise by around five per cent each year over the years to come.
That's the basis for his financial plans.
Now, very late, John has been told he won't get those promised increases for the next few years  -  but his income will get back up after that to where he was promised it would be.
What is John's rational reaction? 
To respond to this temporary loss of income by selling his home and car, dropping his private health insurance, replacing every second evening meal with two-minute noodles.
Of course not.
A rational response would be to make some responsible savings, to engage in some moderate borrowing, to get through to the time of higher income with his family and lifestyle intact and then to use the higher income to pay off the extra borrowing undertaken in the lean years.
Running a nation is always more complex than running a family budget and analogies only work so far.
But I trust the nature of the challenge we confront is now clearer, understood within the framework of the purpose of our fiscal policy and the detail of our medium-term fiscal strategy  -  and I trust that all would acknowledge the Government has some serious decisions to make and announce in the coming two weeks.
As we make those decisions let me be crystal clear about what we will and won't do.
We won't, during this time of reduced revenue, fail the future by not making the wise investments that will make us a stronger and smarter nation.
Better school funding and school improvement will not be jeopardised. 
Our nation cannot afford to leave children behind or to leave our nation's future economy limping behind the pack, unable to attract the high wage, high skill jobs of the future.
To return to John, you would not expect him to stop funding his son's top quality schooling or his daughter's university studies.
He would know that to do so would be to condemn his family to a poorer future.
And we won't fail to make the wise investments that make us a fairer nation.
DisabilityCare must not be jeopardised.
A fragmented, unfair, inefficient system hurting 400 000 Australians with disability and their families and carers  -  and putting at risk anyone who could acquire a disability  -  cannot be left in place.
Once again, we wouldn't expect John to deal with his temporary loss of income by failing to properly support the care of his wife, who has a profound disability.
What is more, these necessary investments are affordable if we make smart decisions.
So the way we proceed with these investments is to fund new structural spending with new structural savings.
But, because we now are confronted with new facts and far more significant reductions in tax money than was expected, we are going  through the process now of making decisions to spend less in some areas than we had hoped, to raise more in revenue in some areas than we had planned.
Guiding us as we make these decisions is the key principle of burden-sharing.
Because I lead a Labor Government, I lead a Government which understands that the whole of society benefits from the services Government provides.
In turn we believe that the whole of society should carry a fair share of the burden of funding Government, that the whole of society shares the burden of these saving decisions.
The more who share the work, the lighter the load for all.
Business, families, institutions. 
Everyone benefits  -  so everyone contributes. 
In the national interest, for the common good.
Now, there are no easy choices.
Of course as a Labor Prime Minister, I find these decisions both urgent and grave. 
This revenue discussion is not historical, it's very contemporary. 
There is new news here compared to six months ago  -  and new news here compared even to three months ago. 
Therefore, I have expressly determined we need to have every reasonable option on the table to meet the needs of the times, even options previously taken off the table.
The nation and the Government must have maximum flexibility to deal with these complex  -  and rapidly changing  -  events.
That is my approach.
In the Budget, the Government will do the right thing by the nation, the right thing for the long-term.
We will save responsibly, even when that means spending less on things which are important and valuable.
We will invest wisely for the future.
No one will be singled out, the burden of our decisions will be shared across the whole Australian community.
We will not cut to the bone.
That is the Government's approach  -  and it is a bright dividing line in Australian politics today.
I began by saying that this Budget will be about a challenge and about a plan.
It will also be about a choice.
Our opponents and their friends crudely flaunt the bitter language of the cut throat and the brandished axe.
We govern for all Australians, we govern to strengthen the economy and to spread the benefits to all.
Those values illuminate modern Labor every day we govern. 
I thank you for the opportunity to discuss them with you today.


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
Defence planning by its very nature is a complex business.
The judgements of governments about Australia's defence needs to be tested regularly.
In 2009, the Government committed to delivering new White Papers at intervals of no greater than five years.
Last year in May, the Minister and I agreed that we would bring forward the next Defence White Paper by a year.
We did this because of the very significant developments internationally and domestically since the 2009 White Paper.
These developments include the accelerated shift of economic and strategic weight to our region of the world; the US re-balance, the ADF drawdowns in Afghanistan, East Timor and the Solomon Islands, and the global financial crisis, the full effects of which were not clear in 2009.
The 2013 White Paper considers these important developments and their implications for our defence policy and defence force.
I want to touch briefly on the main points in the White Paper and then I will invite Minister Smith to make some comments.
First, the White Paper underlines the enormous stake Australia has in managing strategic change in the Indo-Pacific region and managing it peacefully.
In particular, in a US-China relationship in which competition is minimised and cooperation maximised.
And in a region in which flashpoints such as North Korea and territorial disputes are managed peacefully and in a way that avoids the risk of dangerous miscalculations.
Defence policy is one of the key planks of Australia's whole of government strategy for managing these challenges and securing Australia's future in Asia, which is set out in the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper and in our National Security Strategy.
The White Paper reaffirms the central and enduring importance of our alliance relationship with the United States and the contribution this makes to regional stability and to Australia's security.
And it commits the Government to deeper defence partnerships in our region including with China, our longstanding partner New Zealand, and with countries such as Indonesia, India, Singapore, Japan, the Republic of Korea and Malaysia.
Second, the White Paper finds that the key capabilities envisaged in 2009 including a more robust maritime force along with a continuing commitment to fifth generation fighter aircraft and a strategic strike capability remain appropriate for Australia.
The Government therefore reaffirms its commitment to the core capability elements of 2009 White Paper including Joint Strike Fighters, new amphibious ships, twelve new future submarines and our Air Warfare Destroyers.
Third, while the Joint Strike Fighter project has suffered cost overruns and delays, the Government remains committed to the JSF as our principal ADF strike capability and confident of its delivery.
We envisage three operational squadrons of the JSF entering service beginning around 2020.
However, to ensure air combat capability through the transition to the Joint Strike Fighter, the Government is announcing today that it will purchase twelve new-build Growler aircraft.
The Growler is the electronic warfare variant of the Super Hornet.
This capability purchase will allow Australia to retain its existing 24 Super Hornets in their current air combat configuration whilst also maintaining 12 Growler aircraft.
The cost of this purchase is estimated at around $1.5 billion over the next four years and will be contained in the forthcoming budget and included in Defence's four year forward estimates.
Fourth, Government remains committed to the assembly of twelve future submarines in South Australia.
The Government is announcing today that as a result of the detailed design analysis, it is suspending further work on military off-the-shelf or modified military off-the-self options.
Our assessment is that these options are unlikely to meet the operating requirements for the future submarine.
The Government will therefore focus its further consideration on two options: an evolved Collins Class or an entirely new design.
Minister Smith will also make some remarks about the combat system for future submarines and the land-based test platform we are developing.
We are also releasing today the future submarine industry skills plan to ensure we have the skills and expertise in the maritime sector for this major national project.
Fifth, Government makes clear in the White Paper the decisions about Defence funding cannot be made in isolation of the nation's broader fiscal position and priorities.
Into the foreseeable future, Australian governments will have to make choices about priorities and the allocation of resources across portfolios.
The White Paper commits the Government to a funding model for Defence based on the four year forward estimates budget cycle with an additional six years of funding guidance.
Over time, the Government will endeavour to increase Defence spending to about two per cent of GDP.
But I want to be clear that we see this as a longer-term objective as and when fiscal circumstances allow.
There has been considerable commentary about current levels of Defence spending since the last budget.
Notwithstanding current fiscal restraints, under this Government Defence spending over the four year forward estimates cycles topped $100 billion for the first time.
In this year's budget we will once again allocate more than $100 billion to Defence over the forward estimates.
And over that period Defence spending will rise in absolute terms and in a modest way, relative to last year's budget estimates.
The Government believes this level of funding is both appropriate in current circumstances and sustainable.
Into the future, the Government will fund capability acquisitions as and when they come on-stream.
Beyond capability and funding, the White Paper addresses a range of other issues of fundamental importance to our defence organisation.
Among these are:
 * 	How the Government will manage the transition of our Defence Force from its current very high level of operational tempo;
 * 	The vital importance of defence reform to find savings for defence investment and to drive cultural change and improve accountability;
 * 	The Government's commitment to maintaining an Australian defence industry capable of supporting our defence requirements;
 * 	Ensuring the ADF is well positioned geographically to meet Australia's security challenges through implementation of the Australian Defence Force posture review; and
 * 	The critical importance of looking after the health and wellbeing of our serving and ex-service men and women including in relation to mental health disorders
And in that context I am delighted today that we are also announcing a $25.5 million package for enhanced mental health programs for serving and ex-service personnel and their families.
I commend this White Paper to you and I invite the Minister for Defence, Minister Smith to make some comments.


Brisbane
E &amp; OE  -  PROOF ONLY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
I've come here today to say one thing to you, and that is that I stand for Queensland.
I stand with you for Queensland.
And standing for Queensland, standing for the working people of Queensland means you stand against Campbell Newman's cutbacks to the services if this great state.
You've seen 14,000 public servants lose their jobs and you know how hurtful that has been.
Nurses, midwives, thrown out of hospitals onto the streets.
You've seen firefighters sent in to fight fires without foam.
You've seen Breast Screen Queensland smashed up by the Campbell Newman Government.
Working people in Queensland should not have to put up with these cutbacks.
We are going to oppose them, we are going to fight them, and that is why we're here today.
And friends, you were told, you were told that all of these cutbacks were about starting private sector growth, but here in Queensland we haven't seen any employment growth, no new employment growth over the last 12 months.
Queenslanders who want jobs not able to get jobs despite the false promises of Campbell Newman.
Well friends, you know that there is a better way to govern Queensland, a better way to create a future for the working people in this state and their families.
That's the Labor way; it's what we demonstrate at the federal government level every day.
I'm proud that we're the government that got rid of the hated Work Choices.
We campaigned together then and we won.
I'm proud we're the government that is building the big things that matter for the nation's future, doing it in a Labor way.
Just like governments in the past have built Medicare, we're building the National Disability Insurance Scheme, DisabilityCare.
Just like Labor governments in the past have ensured that children can get a great education and access to a great life, we are improving school funding and life's chances all around the nation.
Just like Labor governments in the past we are building for the future.
Clean energy, the National Broadband Network, the infrastructure we need for the future; because it is only Labor governments that get the big things done that matter for the nation and matter for working families.
And we have kept at the forefront jobs.
During the worst of economic times since the Great Depression, we've grown almost 900,000 jobs in this country whilst around the world millions of people have joined the unemployment queue.
We know jobs matter.
They matter to you, they matter to working people and we will always, as a Labor government, focus on jobs and growth because working people need that opportunity.
And having a job is so important but fairness and decency at work matters too.
Which is why I am offended by what you're having to put up with in this state.
By redefining who a worker is for workers' compensation.
By the lazy threats we're seeing from the Coalition, from Tony Abbott, to strip away your penalty rates, a precursor to bringing Work Choices back.
Fairness and decency at work is the Labor way, and we are prepared to fight for it.
Our nation has got a big decision coming in September.
It's a big decision between two visions of the future.
And I tell you what, in Queensland of all places in our nation, you cannot afford Tony Abbott's plans to cut to the bone, to join with Peter Costello's privatisation plans, to join with Campbell Newman's cutbacks and no growth in jobs.
You can't afford that combination here in Queensland.
Abbott and Costello, back to doing what they do best, hurting working people.
That's not a future for Queensland, that's not a future for our nation.
The Leader of the Opposition has already said through his shadow treasurer they stand for cutbacks of $70 billion, and then this very weekend he said he wants to reduce tax, the tax to GDP ratio.
If he did that by 1 per cent that's a plan for another $15 billion of cutbacks.
Now this is of the scale of getting rid of Medicare, of ending payments to old-age pensioners, of taking an axe to childcare, to carers, to students, to the payments that people rely on, to the health and education services that our nation most values.
We cannot allow Tony Abbott's vision of the future to come true.
Instead friends, I'm asking you to get out and fight.
To fight for a better vision of the future, a vision of jobs and opportunity shared by all.
A vision of great services relied upon by all; a vision of world class schools so that we build our future; a vision of a National Disability Insurance Scheme that makes a difference right around the nation.
This is our Labor vision, this is our Labor way.
I'm asking you to get out and fight for it and I'll be proud to be with you leading that fight every day between now and September.
Friends, thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Canberra
[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OMITTED]
In the depths of the northern winter of 1945, Raoul Wallenberg disappeared.
We do not know his fate but it is thought he died later that year.
By this time, the war was over and the Jewish people saved by Wallenberg were counting the miracle of their survival and beginning to contemplate new lives in places of safety like Israel and Australia.
Wallenberg never saw our lovely land in his 34 years on earth.
And yet today we join his name with that of our nation as its first honorary citizen.
I believe this is entirely fitting: as a tribute to this man of moral courage and heroic example.
As a statement of the values Australians hold close to our hearts.
As an expression of our deep gratitude for all that our nation gained when so many saved by Wallenberg came to these shores.
Raoul Wallenberg would have been brilliant in any era.
He was physically brave.
He possessed strategic brilliance and peerless, nerveless negotiating skills.
But what makes his name live on is the way he employed these skills in the service of humanity.
He acted as though there were no strangers.
He lived as though every day might be his last.
That's how Frank Vajda comes to be here with us in Canberra today.
As a nine-year-old in Budapest, Frank and his family had been reported to the authorities for not wearing the yellow Star of David.
A band of armed men came and seized them, and dragged them to a military barracks where they were lined up in front of a machine gun.
The soldiers were debating whether to shoot them on the spot or throw them into the Danube when some men in civilian clothing suddenly appeared  -  Raoul Wallenberg and his escort  -  who negotiated their safe release.
The escort was a man named John Farkas  -  a resistance fighter who was Wallenberg's companion during those desperate days in Budapest.
Mr Farkas came to Australia in 1949, and lived an unassuming life until his heroism was uncovered by the ABC Four Corners program in the early 1980s.
In almost four decades, he had never spoken of his deeds until a journalist came to ask.
Mr Farkas passed away in 1987 but his son George is here among us, proudly bearing witness.
Frank Vajda and George Farkas have known of each other for years but they have not met until today: this story of courage reaching across decades, generations and continents.
So friends, we are here today to celebrate something exceptional in the human spirit.
Something that will keep teaching us lessons for as long as humans record their history.
Something for which we have profound gratitude because the deeds of one man secured, for tens of thousands, the most precious gift of all: the gift of human life.
As the last witnesses to the horrors of World War II leave us, it is vital, it is imperative, to keep alive the memory and example of individuals like Raoul Wallenberg.
That is why there are memorials to Wallenberg all over the world  -  in Budapest, Tel Aviv, London, Argentina, the United States and here in Australia.
But perhaps the most poignant monument is the one outside his birthplace in Sweden.
It is a bronze cast of his briefcase, standing on the cobblestones as though he had just put it down momentarily, its precious cargo of live-giving passports still inside, testament to the example of what one individual can do, even in the face of catastrophic evil.
An embodiment of the Jewish proverb reminding us that even when we are without choice, we can mobilize the spirit of courage.
Raoul Wallenberg's fate may never be known for sure.
He has no grave.
But his legacy endures.
It is measured in the example he sets for our own and future generations.
But it is also measured in the tens of thousands of deaths he prevented through his actions.
Some of the individuals whose lives he redeemed became part of our first, great transforming wave of post-war immigration; among the first to pledge themselves to their new home after Australian nationality was formalised in 1949.
Now, seven decades later, Raoul Wallenberg will join them as an honorary Australian citizen.
This will be the first time this honour has been bestowed by our country.
And I cannot imagine a more fitting individual upon whom to bestow it.
I conclude by expressing my gratitude to the Governor-General for this magnificent act of state to enshrine this most righteous of human beings in our national family forever.
[ENDS] 


Logan City
E &amp; OE - PROOF ONLY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
PM: We're here today to have a cup of tea, and that's a pretty humble thing to do but people are going to be doing it right around the country in support of the World's Biggest Morning Tea to raise funds and to raise awareness about cancer.
And I'd like to thank Dr Helen Zorbas from Cancer Australia for being here and gracing this morning tea with her presence.
As we come together over a cup of tea we will no doubt be sharing stories about people we know who have faced a battle with cancer, are facing a battle with cancer, perhaps even loved ones we have lost to cancer.
It's something that touches every Australian family. There wouldn't be a person in our country who in their family, in their friendship group, in their workplace isn't aware of someone who has battled cancer during the course of their lives.
And around 125,000 Australians will be diagnosed with cancer this year; that's a large number joining the ranks of those who are already locked in a battle with cancer.
It's important that as a nation we make appropriate provision to support people with cancer and to support the healthcare services they need.
I am proud as a Government that we are investing record amounts in supporting world-class cancer care; $2.5 billion has been invested.
And when you do invest you see returns. Australia leads the world in cancer care. In the last two decades alone the survival rate for many cancers has increased by up to 30 per cent.
But we've got to keep going, we've got to keep fighting cancer during prevention, early detection, and new treatments and models of care, and that's a very key priority for us as a nation, and as a result a key priority for me and the Government I'm proud to lead.
Just last week our Minister for Health, Tanya Plibersek, announced an additional $18.3 million over four years for the wonderful work CanTeen does to support young people living with cancer.
And when we look at the young people in this audience or the many that I've walked past and had the opportunity to say a quick hello to  -  I don't think you can think of anything worse than a child having cancer and therefore we do, as a country, want to come together and support our kids in that battle.
Australians are innovative people; we are good at coming up with new ideas.
And we have been responsible for many of the great medical breakthroughs of modern times: trials of chemotherapy for children with leukaemia; the Gardasil vaccine now protecting a generation of Australian boys and girls and preventing them from getting a particular type of cancer.
I'm proud that we continue to support our researchers who are busy working on what will be the next breakthrough in prevention or detection or cancer treatment.
We all want to see those breakthroughs made in our nation; we want to see a difference for people with cancer.
Today we'll come together and put our gold coin in. That makes a difference. As a Government too, here today at a morning tea, part of the World's Biggest Morning Tea, I want us to make a further contribution.
I'm proud to announce today that the Government will invest $2.4 million over the next four years to improve cancer data in order to improve cancer care.
That will enable Cancer Australia to build on the work they are currently doing so that Australians diagnosed with cancer benefit from better collection and reporting of national cancer data.
Now I know talking about data can sound a little bit boring, a bit too much like a maths class; I understand that.
But it is important that around the nation we end up with a national set of data so we know how different treatments are working, we know how often cancers are returning, and if we have all of that information it helps feed into our efforts to make a change for people with cancer.
So I'm very pleased and proud to be able to announce that new investment today.
Here in school we know never to underestimate the power of good information; putting together My School and having national testing data is revolutionising the way we think about schools, so information is important.
Thank you to everyone for coming together today. It matters as a demonstration to others around the nation and I'd urge others around the nation to do exactly what you are doing here today.
Come together, have a cup of tea, have a chat and put in a gold coin. Do your bit, help out, it's important to all of us.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
It is a great honour for me to be here in this beautiful land.
Like Australia, this is a land of the Southern Cross.
No country is closer to Australia than Papua New Guinea.
Our geographic proximity mirrors the closeness of our people and our institutions.
We are neighbours and we are yet more than neighbours.
During a terrible world war, our people were bound together in mutual striving and sacrifice, and some of the places most sacred to the Australian imagination today are on your soil.
Australians fought alongside the men of the Papuan Infantry Battalion and the Pacific Islands Regiment.
All of them comrades in arms  -  too many of them, comrades in death.
Australians received aid from other Papua New Guineans all along the frontline.
Angels of kindness and courage, men and women of PNG who remain heroes to Australians today.
While I'm here I'll be announcing details of a new oral history project, to collect the remarkable stories of Papua New Guineans during the Second World War.
This forms part of our initiative to document and preserve the immense historical and cultural value of the Kokoda Track and other major Papua New Guinean theatres of the Pacific Campaign.
Australians are proud of our part in the shared endeavour of the 1940s.
Australians are also proud of our part in the shared endeavour of the 1970s  -  building the foundations for an independent, modern Papua New Guinea based on the rule of law, democratic institutions and human rights.
As my great predecessor Prime Minister Gough Whitlam rightly said: Australia was never truly free until Papua New Guinea became free.
When other emerging countries followed the false trails of dictatorship and doctrine, you took the harder and the better path.
Free elections under a democratic constitution.
An independent judiciary.
A free and active press.
Openness to investment and growth.
As you approach four decades of nationhood, we survey a remarkable journey for Papua New Guinea.
Just as we are proud of the shared endeavours of our forebears, we are determined to succeed in the shared endeavours of our own day.
So I come here  -  firstly and above all else  -  to honour this land and its people.
To pledge Australia's abiding commitment to Papua New Guinea as one of our closest friends, in every sense of the word.
Here, Australians see a nation able to resolve its political differences peacefully and in accordance with the Constitution.
A nation showing leadership in the Pacific: encouraging Fiji back onto the path of democracy, contributing to RAMSI, fighting the scourge of people smuggling.
A land rich in resources enjoying a decade of uninterrupted economic expansion.
Home to seven million people, increasingly connected to each other and to the world through technology and a wider network of international trade and investment links.
In short, a country surely and steadily finding its own place in the Asian Century.
I come here with a firm faith in Papua New Guinea and its future joined with a firm determination that Australia play our right part.
Through the entrepreneurs of both our nations, partnering in the unlocking of this land's hidden wealth.
The scholarly exchanges between our universities.
The important work of development shared by our communities.
The friendship between our two Parliaments, including  -  I'm delighted to say  -  three strong Papua New Guinean women.
As with every nation pursuing development and growth, significant challenges remain.
In governance and transparency  -  so vital to investment and growth.
In security  -  especially for women, who endure such particular horrors.
In health  -  where levels of maternal mortality remain worryingly high.
In education  -  where so much remains to be done and where so much good can be achieved.
In development  -  where progress towards the Millennium Development Goals is unacceptably slow.
I know you are committed to progress in these fields, and Australia joins you as a partner.
The PNG Government has a far-reaching agenda of reform and we will support and assist you in that vital work.
Our aid program is improving quality and access to education.
In health we are providing medicines and training nurses and supporting a growing number of supervised births.
We help maintain PNG's road network and community facilities.
Australia's development assistance is based on partnership with the PNG Government, embodied in agreed goals and shared commitments.
This is a period of unmatched opportunity for Papua New Guinea.
I know how determined this generation of leaders is to translate that opportunity into benefits for the generations to come.
We can see the signs of progress in the 40 billion kina PNG LNG project, backed by an international consortium including the Australian Government through the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation  -  where I will visit tomorrow.  
We see the same signs in the 41 billion kina in Australian investment and in your commitment to establish an effective sovereign wealth fund based on international best practice.
Australia is by far the biggest destination for Papua New Guinean exports and the biggest source of PNG's own imports of goods and services.
We see the signs of progress in the exchange of human contacts  -  no longer just northwards but southwards as well.
We have researchers and students at each other's educational institutions forging lifelong ties.
Our sportspeople play alongside each other and against each other with passion and pride.
Each year thousands of Australians make their pilgrimage to the Kokoda Track.
All these connections between our people will be made easier by the introduction in the near future of the new PNG Online Visitor Visa.
Of course, the firm basis for all this is our traditional diplomacy  -  the bonds and collaborations of governments and leaders.
Our officials work fruitfully together, our Ministers meet regularly and know each other as colleagues and friends.
I've been delighted to have had regular opportunities to meet with Prime Minister O'Neill over the past two years.
We must build relationships that stand the test of time during the pressures and changes that accompany the Asian Century.
That is why Prime Minister O'Neill and I will tomorrow sign a Joint Declaration for a new Papua New Guinea-Australia Partnership.
The Declaration builds on the 1987 Joint Declaration signed by then-Prime Ministers Paias Wingti and Bob Hawke in Canberra.
This 2013 Declaration points the way to a new level of cooperation based on mutual trust, respect and common values.
Papua New Guinea has grown richer and stronger throughout the past four decades  -  the next four decades hold the same promise.
You will be a nation with a population the size that Australia has today.
You will be a force for good in the Pacific and the world.
The potential conceived at independence will continue to unfold.
And as you grow, our fortunes and futures will be connected, as two hands are joined, in friendship and respect.
Thank you very much.


Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea
[Acknowledgments omitted]
It's a great pleasure to be able to join you here this morning.
Let me thank the Port Moresby Chamber of Commerce and Industry for your invitation today.
The Chamber is one of this city's most respected institutions.
Programs like the Business Against Corruption Alliance, Business Against HIV and AIDS and the Ginigoada Business Development Foundation are fine proof of that.
Let me also acknowledge the Australia-Papua New Guinea Business Council and the Business Council of PNG who join us this morning and who make a major contribution to the ongoing successful expansion of our bilateral business relations.
Above all, I'm in PNG today to express my confidence in this nation and its future.
That's the message I want to share loudly and clearly: this is a period of unmatched opportunity for this nation.
That's the message I'll be sharing later this morning when I meet with your leaders of today  -  Prime Minister Peter O'Neill and his Cabinet.
That's also the message I'll be sharing when I meet with your leaders of tomorrow  -  young Papua New Guineans at Marianville Secondary School and at the University of PNG  -  young people who treasure the most precious commodity in an emerging nation; hope.
They are the grandchildren of Independence.
In an increasingly inter-connected world, they're looking for opportunity, for better lives  -  and in many ways that means they are looking to all of you.
So much of the substance of the things these young people hope for will come from what the PNG business community does every day.
From the jobs you create and the wealth you unlock  -  the virtuous cycle you begin.
Trade and investment, leading to employment which gives dignity and hope  -  delivering the public revenues which are essential to better education, infrastructure and human services  -  in turn promoting future growth and opportunities for investment and trade.
You all know that this country is not only bursting with potential, this is a country already making so much of it.
A rich natural endowment, location in the Asia-Pacific region, the vast potential of your human capital  -  your people.
Eleven straight years of growth, the third fastest growing economy in the Asia-Pacific in 2011, the fifth fastest in 2012.
This is a formidable record and perhaps one not widely enough appreciated in the wider world.
The links between our business communities are so important to this success and where the work you all do matters so much.
As the PNG economy has grown, the economic relationship between Australia and PNG has grown.
Over the past five years, two-way trade has increased rapidly to more than 16 billion kina.
The balance of trade stands  -  by more than one billion dollars  -  in Papua New Guinea's favour.
Australian investment, which has grown fivefold over five years to more than 41 billion kina shows the confidence Australian business has in this country.
Of course, Papua New Guinea is not only Australia's closest neighbour, but one of our warmest friends: from war-time sacrifice and deep historic ties, to the broad and growing friendship between our peoples today.
I want that friendship to be expressed in jobs  -  in growth  -  in the bottom line.
Perhaps no single project better symbolises the promise of economic development than the PNG LNG project, which I will visit later today.
It is a 40 billion kina statement that our economic futures are tied each to the other, a project which will create jobs and growth for our peoples for decades to come.
For PNG, the project holds the promise of up to US$150 billion in returns over its estimated thirty-year life.
For Australian business, the project has already meant US$3 billion in new contracts.
This is why both the Australian and PNG Governments continue to work to get the greatest possible benefit for our peoples from our growing economic ties.
In 2011, we agreed to negotiate an Economic Cooperation Treaty with Papua New Guinea.
The Treaty  -  to be signed later this year  -  will place our economic relationship on a new footing as full and active partners.
Our Ministers also maintain a strong dialogue with our business communities through the Papua New Guinea-Australia Business Forum.
Since 2012, officials and business representatives have met regularly to further strengthen business links.
Of special importance was our agreement at the 2012 meeting to simplify the visa application process for PNG citizens.
The number of visitor visas granted has now increased by 25 per cent in the past year alone, we regularly exceed our ten-day clearing time, and we remain on track to deliver online visa lodgement for PNG tourism and business visitors to Australia by mid-year.
This is a very important development for PNG and Australian business: the PNG Online Visitor Visa will finally be introduced in a number of weeks.
So we are making progress together.
I come here with great confidence in this nation  -  I also come with great realism about the challenges you face.
The United Nations Millennium Development Goals remain elusive. Social indicators such as literacy levels and maternal and child mortality are disappointing to us all.
We know that your Government is determined to harness economic growth to meet this country's development challenges, and you should know that Australia is committed to helping Papua New Guinea's Government and its people do just that.
Our shared aspirations are embodied in the Partnership for Development  -  a partnership based on mutual accountability and with clear priorities in health; education; law and justice; transport and infrastructure.
I particularly note Prime Minister O'Neill's focus on infrastructure, a commitment Australia shares.
This financial year Australia will spend 37 per cent of our development assistance on infrastructure  -  an investment of around 396 million kina.
We're also working closely with the PNG Government to help design a Sovereign Wealth Fund. A best-practice Fund delivering stable returns will support long-term planning and help you to manage future economic uncertainties.
There's another development priority that's dear to my own heart  -  the empowerment of women in our region.
The ten-year A$320 million initiative Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development which I launched at the 2012 Pacific Islands Forum is designed to help.
Prime Minister O'Neill was at the launch in Rarotonga and strongly supports the initiative.
I want to thank the many businesses here who are working hard to extend opportunity to the women of PNG.
The Westpac Women in Business Awards' have helped lift the profile of women in business.
Companies like SP Breweries have been actively recruiting women into their graduate programs.
National Catering Services has implemented policies to ensure equal treatment of women in the workplace.
To encourage more businesses to follow this lead, I'm pleased to announce a new initiative in partnership with the International Finance Corporation to help PNG companies promote women's participation.
I am delighted that Lady Winifred Kamit, one of this nation's most respected leaders, has agreed to be patron.
Lady Winifred, I'm so glad you're here today along with a number of other women who I am looking forward to meeting this morning, and I want you to know how much I admire your achievements and appreciate your support.
Our initiative will focus on two areas.
First, women's welfare and safety, in particular preventing violence against women in the workplace.
Secondly, mentorship, networking and training to bring high-potential female employees into positions of leadership.
No nation can truly succeed without embracing the development of all its citizens and unlocking the talents of all its people.
Papua New Guinea has travelled far over the past 40 years.
So many early challenges have been surmounted. The institutions of a free nation have been entrenched. Economic development has brought new opportunities.
And the prospect of a better future has never seemed more real for all the people of Papua New Guinea.
Australia wants to work with Papua New Guinea as economic partners, as development partners, and as partners in the region, to help you seize that future.
Everyone here is so important to that work.
Doing business together  -  united in friendship and respect. Proud of what we've achieved together  -  and certain that even better days lie ahead.


Canberra
CAustralia's strong economy and Australia's social safety nets are the envy of the world.
In this Bill, we see Australia at its very best.
In this Bill, we see that we still can bethe strong, smart, fair Australia that created the Age Pension and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, Medibank, Medicareanduniversal superannuation.
In this Bill, we see that there is still a place for collective action to solve those great pressures of life that are too big and complex for individuals and families to solve alone.
In this Bill, we see a nation united in a spirit of concern to strengthen and extend the fair go, to ensure no one is left behind; we also see a Parliament ready to put the national interest ahead of ideology.
To those who say Australian politics no longer works, I say simply: read the Medicare Levy Amendment (DisabilityCare Australia) Bill.
This is a united embrace of national responsibility and a great act of mutual care and solidarity.
Every week or fortnight, a sliver of the pay packet will go to DisabilityCare Australia: around a dollar a day for the average earner.
But all that money added together from every corner of the nation will be a mighty force for good.
Today we give an assurance to all Australians who live with disability and to those who care for them: DisabilityCare Australia will be here when you need it ... election after election, decade after decade, generation after generation.
A new assurance for 410 000 Australians living with significant, permanent disability now and for their families and carers.
Today we also give a new assurance to all those Australians who do not have a disability today but who, through the vagaries of fortune, will come to have a significant, permanent disability in times to come.
For everyone who thinks, it couldn't happen to me  -  could it? this Bill brings peace of mind, it brings the knowledge that a scheme as well-designed and stably-funded as Medicare will be here when you need it.
Let me turn to the detail of the Bill. 
The Bill will increase the Medicare levy by half a percentage point, from 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent, from 1 July 2014.
The Bill also makes consequential changes to the upper phase-in amount for low-income taxpayers with income between certain thresholds  -  as well as to the formula for calculating the amount of a person's Medicare levy liability where a person has a spouse or dependants.
These changes reflect the increase in the Medicare levy.
Low-income earners will continue to receive relief from the Medicare levy through the low-income thresholds for singles, families, seniors and pensioners. 
The current exemptions from the Medicare levy will also remain in place, including for blind pensioners and sickness allowance recipients.
A number of other tax rates that include a component for the Medicare levy will also increase in line with this change  -  these include increases in the rate of fringe benefits tax and excess contributions tax.
These bills will be introduced by my Ministers today and further details of these consequential increases are set out in the Explanatory Memorandum.
Every cent raised by the increase in the Medicare levy will be allocated to a special fund over the next decade  -  the DisabilityCare Australia Fund.
By law, the fund will only be spent on supporting people with disability through DisabilityCare Australia.
The DisabilityCare Australia Fund will be established by the DisabilityCare Australia Fund Bill 2013, which will be put before the House as part of this package. 
Full details of this fund will be outlined in the explanatory memorandum to that Bill which is to be tabled by the Deputy Prime Minister shortly.
Increasing the Medicare levy will raise approximately $20.4 billion between 2014-15 and 2018-19  -  amounting to approximately 55 per cent of the total cost of funding DisabilityCare Australia over that period. 
The Commonwealth's share of the fund will go toward our additional contribution to DisabilityCare Australia.
This will cover around 60 per cent of the Australian Government's net new spending on the scheme over the ten years from 2014-15.
In last night's Budget, the Deputy Prime Minister outlined that through this increased Levy and other wise savings, DisabilityCare Australia is fully funded.
DisabilityCare Australia is designed to ensure every Australian with significant and permanent disability, regardless of where he or she lives, gets the care and support they need.
DisabilityCare Australia will end the notorious postcode lottery for people with disabilities in this country.
I want no more of the unfairness and irrationality by which a person gets vastly different support merely because of where he or she lives or how a disability was acquired.
This requires the commitment and support of State and Territory governments.
The Government will assist the States and Territories with funding their share of DisabilityCare Australia, by setting aside some of the money going into the DisabilityCare Australia Fund.
Over the life of the fund, the States and Territories will be allocated a total of $9.7 billion.
The States and Territories will be able to draw down from the Fund when they meet key conditions for implementation.
DisabilityCare Australia will have full coverage across the Australian Capital Territory by July 2016, in New South Wales and South Australia by July 2018, and Tasmania, Victoria, Queensland and the Northern Territory by July 2019.
These agreements will see the scheme cover around
90 per cent of the total Australian population.
The Western Australian allocation from the Fund will be quarantined until we reach agreement with the State.
We encourage the Western Australian Government to join the cause.
All our people deserve the best.
To ensure that DisabilityCare Australia is fully funded, the Government has implemented a number of other savings measures.
Part of the savings from reforms to the Government's assistance for private health insurance announced in the 2012-13 MYEFO which have not been allocated to the Government's dental package will support DisabilityCare.
Funding will also come from reforms to retirement incomes policy, the phase out of the net medical expenses tax offset and other long-term savings decisions now announced as part of the 2013-14 Budget.
Making a new call upon the finances of Australians is not something that is done without care in this country  -  the fact is when a levy does happen, there is rightly a very good reason.
Bob Hawke with the Medicare levy.
John Howard with the levy for gun buy-backs.
This Government's flood levy which rebuilt Queensland.
Now, this increase in the Medicare levy to support DisabilityCare.
Ours has been a fiscally-responsible government.
Offsetting all new spending since 2009, holding expenditure at a level lower than the average seen over the past 25 years.
A levy was not ourfirst choice of funding vehicle for DisabilityCare.
But with the high dollar and the historic anomaly of nominal GDP growth falling below real GDPgrowth for a sustained period, the revenue write-downs have been unprecedented... $17 billion for this financial year since the last budget update alone.
In short, the facts have changed.
I am also deeply conscious that the States and Territories face their own fiscal pressures arising from these same complex economic circumstances.
So we want to be able to offer them more support to pay for the scheme  -  which is why a substantial share of funds raised by this levy will go to the States and Territories.
Most importantly, we've listened to the sound case made by disability support groups for secure, ongoing funding for the national disability insurance scheme.
In a time of burden sharing and wise savings, they are right to want to ensure that DisabilityCare has a sustainable and stable funding stream ...  in order to guarantee the security DisabilityCare is designed to bring.
The President of People with Disability Australia, Craig Wallace, has summarised the argument well  -  the levy will be An insurance premium for good times and bad ... people's disabilities will not go away the next time we have a surplus.
That's the backdrop against which I introduce this Bill.
That's why the Government not only hasbipartisan support for this Bill, we have near-nationwide agreement on this scheme.
Following the ground breaking agreement withNew South Wales last December, the other jurisdictions have joined the cause,one by one: South Australia, the ACT, Tasmania, Victoria, Queensland and most recently the Northern Territory.
That means 90 per cent of Australians are now part of the plan  ... leaving onlythe people of Western Australia still waiting for a decision by their Premier.
People with disabilities and their families have campaigned so long to design and fund a national disability insurance scheme.
Many of those advocates are here with us today  -  I want to take the time to welcome and acknowledge you all now  -  and to acknowledge the passion and dedication of so many people with disability, so many families and carers, who have brought the campaign to this point.
In recent weeks, as the momentum you have built has broken through, as we have struck agreements with States and Territories and announced details of the funding, I have seen the hope and anticipation which Australians with disability, particularly young Australians, now share.
The Saturday before last, I travelled to Melbourne to meet Premier Napthine and sign up Victoria to DisabilityCare.
In Melbourne, I saw Sophie, a twelve-year-old girl who lives with Down Syndrome.
As her parents describe her, Sophie reads and writes, mucks around on the monkey bars, can be well behaved and badly behaved, runs like a billy goat, and is a budding photographer.
She took my photo while we were there.
Last week I travelled to Brisbane to meet Premier Newman and sign up Queensland to DisabilityCare.
While I was there, I met Sandy, who is 17 and lives with a physical disability similar to cerebral palsy.
Sandy has big dreams for his future, like any teenager, but his future also has some big needs: mobility aids that cost tens of thousands of dollars, personal care to maintain his hygiene, physical therapy to maintain his muscles and his health.
When I met this young man he handed me a card signed by him and his mates to say thanks for what we are doing for people with disability  -  a card illustrated by the photo Sophie had taken a week before.
In years to come, DisabilityCare Australia will ensure Sophie and Sandy and so many other young people with disability will have the security and dignity every Australian deserves.
This, above all, is why Australians so overwhelmingly support DisabilityCare.
Over the past six years, the idea of a national disability insurance scheme has found a place in our nation's heart.
In March, we gave it a place in our nation's laws.
Today we inscribe it in our nation's finances.
The people who've gathered here today from around the country to witness this debate, know what this means.
There'll be no more in principle and no more when circumstances permit.
There'll be launches, not trials; permanent care, not temporary help.
DisabilityCare Australia starts in seven weeks  -  and there will be no turning back. 
I commend this Bill to the House. 


Hobart
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
My Government's priority for Tasmania is jobs and growth.
Our plan is for Australia to be a stronger, smarter, fairer nation.
This week, we have delivered more important steps towards those goals for Tasmania.
Stronger: through new investment in infrastructure, including the $500m upgrade of the Midland Highway.
Smarter: through long term plans to improve our schools and new investment in research and skills.
Fairer: by delivering DisabilityCare.
Working together with the state government and the Tasmanian community, we are delivering real steps towards new growth and opportunities.
Our plan for Tasmania means investing in the future. Global economic change is putting real pressure on Tasmanian jobs.
It builds on strategic partnerships and focuses on the things that Tasmania and Tasmanian's do best.
We will build on Tasmania's unique strengths: its natural resources; its landscape; its people; its creativity and its reputation for clean, high quality products.
To create growth in sectors that can flourish, create jobs and help young people build their lives in the state through better education and new opportunities.
We are already doing so much.
We are investing in Tasmania's economic backbone.
As the NBN is rolled out across Tasmania the rollout is creating as many as 800 jobs directly, and helping to create many more through businesses and services.
Today I have announced that together with OfficeMax and the Tasmanian Government we are partnering to provide a further 70 skilled jobs to the state.
This is on top of the 700 new jobs I announced with Vodafone last time I was here.
The NBN is providing the backbone for skills based employment for Tasmanians.
These jobs can continue to move here for decades to come.
Tasmania is in the box seat to exploit its early connection to the NBN with roll out due to be completed by 2015.
Only Labor will deliver a genuine NBN for Tasmanian's with the entire community able to benefit from a high speed, high quality network right into their homes and businesses.
This is happening today in communities all around Tasmania.
Hard infrastructure in Tasmania - Road, Rail and Port - has been a significant beneficiary of our doubling of the Commonwealth spend on infrastructure.
I was very pleased that we were able to announce as part of the National building 2 package in the budget a new round of investment and revitalisation for Tasmania's transport arteries, including:
A Midland Highway Package: that will improve safety and reduce travel times.
Freight Rail Revitalisation: To continue the improvements to the major lines on the freight rail network, including replacing approximately 290 track kilometres of old rail track.
We are delivering a smarter future for Tasmania.
Funding for the University of Tasmania has grown by 29 per cent since Labor came to government and will continue to grow over the next three years.
Under the Gillard Government's reforms, the number of Commonwealth Supported Students at the University of Tasmania has increased from 12,540 in 2007 to 18,713 in 2011.
Schools in Tasmania will benefit from around an additional $400 million through the National Plan for School Improvement.
To achieve this, I have committed that for every dollar that the Tasmanian Government is prepared to invest, the Federal Government will pay two.
A new school funding system is crucial to ensure all students and all schools get the money they need to do a great job.
We will match our investment in the foundations of the Tasmanian economy with an approach that supports success.
The natural environment has delivered Tasmania an abundance of gifts. Clean air and land, plentiful rain and sunshine.
These gifts can be transformed into jobs and economic opportunities for Tasmanians.
This is reflected in primary industries like aquaculture, dairy and wine but also in service industries like tourism and hospitality.
Our approach will be to continue to support these successes.
The growth of the dairy and food manufacturing industries has been supported by strategic investments by the Commonwealth and is an example of what is possible.
What is needed now is to develop further scale advantages and build on the innovations that farmers and processors will need to deliver sustainable long term growth and the jobs that come with it.
Our Plan has already made important progress across these areas and we are set to build on those success.
I have taken the decision that the time for this investment is now.
With the passage of legislation to support an historic accord in the forestry industry we need to move forward rapidly with our plan for jobs and growth.
To do this, as part of the Federal budget I have brought forward the investments this government will make in economic diversification.
Rather than spreading out our investment over 15 years we will focus our efforts and deliver a more focused injection to drive job creation and seize new opportunities for the Tasmanian economy.
To do this we will deliver our investment in just 4 years.
We have also decided on a modest increase of this fund, so that there is $100 million available over the next four years, to be invested in smart ways to drive the growth of sectors that can prosper, in Tasmania, in this Asian century.
The challenge now to operationalize our plan and deliver on all the potential there is here: through smart, targeted investments.
I have asked Minister Albanese to lead this work.
In doing that, I want to draw on the best advice from Tasmanians  -  experts and entrepreneurs, as we continue to deliver.
Tasmanian ALP caucus members have been out in the community, working with them and advocating for them in Canberra.
The delivery of our plan will still be linked to the successful implementation of the forestry agreement and ongoing market stability.
That stability is what the Tasmanian economy needs, and what the Tasmanian community expects.
The opponents of that stability are those who continue to attack the forestry agreement and attack the other long term investments we are making in the future of our economy because it does not serve their own narrow interests.
The Australian Government will continue making investments in Tasmania, building on the investments we have already made.
The key to growth and jobs now is how we work together to seize those opportunities.
I and my senior Ministers will be working in the weeks and months ahead to make sure that we do take those opportunities, and that Tasmanians benefit from the right investments for the future.  


Hobart
PM: Thank you very much to Leanne for that introduction. Can I start by acknowledging my ministerial colleague Julie Collins, who is also the Member for Franklin.
So it is good to be with you and it is also good to be with my old friend Michelle O'Byrne. Not so old, long-time friend I should have said in her capacity as Minister for Health.
In many ways I do not think I could tell the story of what we are trying to achieve here better than the video presentation you have just seen.
It is telling us the story of how we are working to put people in regional and remote locations together with the medical help that they need because we do not want any Australian, no matter where they live in this great country of ours to miss out on the best of medical care.
What we want to do to achieve that is to combine a number of government policies.
None of them more important than the National Broadband Network, I've been assured by Julie that the NBN is just down the end of the street coming here very soon.
Already around 200,000 homes, small businesses, hospitals and schools have construction of the fibre network, commenced or complete in their areas.
We are already seeing the fruits of this; schools linked up to the rest of the world, small businesses in Tasmania linked up to international markets and now we are seeing the power of this technology as it links people up for healthcare.
So I'm very pleased to be here to announce a further step with Medibank Private launching their Anywhere HealthCare virtual clinic right here in Tasmania.
No better place to do that launch than here at Clarence GP Super Clinic  -  a $5.5 million investment from our government and in very good use.
We've met some of the patients today who are here for all sorts of things including good things like getting ready to go on holidays, those vitally needed jabs before you go.
Providing Medicare funded GP services, practice nurses, psychological and counselling services, all of that is done from this Super Clinic and so I am very pleased to be here and I know it is making a very real difference to people's lives.
So what is the next step? Well the next step you have just seen exhibited in this video is Medibank Private's Anywhere HealthCare virtual clinic.
So you can get in contact with the specialist you need with no out of pocket expenses and with reduced referral times.
It means that around the country for people who cannot in their local community see an expert in paediatric care, in psychiatry, in dermatology, many of the specialties that people do need during the course of their lives.
Those people will be able to make a link with those specialists.
That will be removing barriers to care because it is not just about alleviating the journey for people saying well you can get healthcare where you are and you don't have to make a journey to another location.'
We unfortunately know that if a journey is required many people will go without.
They will go without the healthcare services that they need, with all of the costs that that then has for their own personal health.
But it is just too difficult for them to make the journey, take the time away from family, time away from their local community.
We as a government want to play our part in this and what we can do is make sure that Medicare is there.
Our great Medicare system providing the rebates that people need and the rebates across the new technology, so the rebates for telehealth services.
We have made that available and the growth is there to see.
This is going to be such an important way of delivering healthcare in the future.
We have seen over 77,000 telehealth services provided through Medicare by more than 7,700 practitioners to over 33,000 patients.
So already solid footing but much more to do.
Thank you to Medibank for enabling this great new stage and it is a great pleasure for me to be here and have the honour of officially launching it today.
Thank you very much.


Geelong
PM: Thank you very much to Jenny Macklin for that introduction. 
And it is with a great sense of delight that I join her here today, the Premier, Jenny's counterpart Mary Wooldridge and of course our local members who are very great lobbyists, indeed so persistent they will chase you down a corridor, into an office, up-hill and down-dale to make sure they are putting the case for Geelong and the greater region. 
So it is great to join Darren Cheeseman and Richard Marles as well.
We are here for an exciting announcement.
I feel like it has been a weekend of excitement for me and Geelong. 
I had the great delight to coming down here Saturday night with the Premier to turn on the lights at Kardinia Park and then watch Geelong go on to a great victory, even though I'd have to say, Richard, Darren, even the Mayor I think, they were pacing around in the lead up to three-quarter time and in the minutes afterwards, and I was there saying "it'll be fine, Geelong is a strong team, they will kick away in the fourth quarter". 
Notwithstanding that, at the end, Richard Marles says to me "never in doubt", having exhibited all that nervousness in the match. But it was a great evening of excitement.
As exciting as that, I really feel a bigger sense of excitement today because today we are taking the next big step forward in rolling out DisabilityCare around the nation.
And for everyone who is there wearing a t-shirt, Every Australian Counts, or holding up a sign, yes, every Australian does count and DisabilityCare is about making sure we are not leaving anyone behind and we are particularly not leaving behind Australians with disabilities.
Our nation for too long has not embraced into our national life people with disabilities.
We have allowed people to struggle with underfunded and fragmented services.
We as a nation have determined we are going to change that.
I want to thank the Premier for the partnership that he entered into with me to make sure that we are rolling out DisabilityCare in Victoria and we can count down now the days to the launch right here in this region on 1 July.
You have got the launch office here, 120 people working away to make sure that we launch on 1 July and DisabilityCare goes live.
We have had to make the decision, too, about where the headquarters of DisabilityCare should go, DisabilityCare's headquarters for the rollout all around the nation.
There have been a couple of contenders to be the headquarters of DisabilityCare but it is with a great sense of delight that I announce today that the national headquarters of DisabilityCare will be right here in Geelong.
This is great news for Geelong.
Why did it happen? Not because Minister Macklin is a Geelong supporter, we need to make sure that no one thinks that's the reason, though she is a very passionate Geelong supporter.
Why here in Geelong? First and foremost I'd like to thank the Premier because our partnership around DisabilityCare has extended to Victoria saying it would invest $25 million to see the headquarters come here to Geelong.
Secondly, because Geelong is undergoing some tough times. The Ford decision has not been an easy decision for anyone and I met with some of the directly affected workers on Saturday and saw the hurt in their eyes and listened to them talk about what it means for them and their families.
It is exactly the right time to be bringing another source of jobs to Geelong so I am very pleased that we are able to put the DisabilityCare headquarters here.
It is also a tribute to the representation strongly from Richard Marles and Darren Cheeseman who have said to me consistently and very persuasively that given Geelong is the home of the Transport Accident Commission, this is a community that already has expertise in running something that is there to support people with disabilities and given that expertise, it was a natural fit for the headquarters of DisabilityCare to come here. 
So the DisabilityCare headquarters will mean up to 300 jobs. The jobs will start rolling out from next year in 2014.
It will be in full operation when DisabilityCare is in full operation and it means right around the country people will always look to your part of the nation, to Geelong, to this region for leadership in DisabilityCare, leadership in rolling out this incredibly important scheme for the nation.
Darren said in his introduction that this is an important piece of social policy.
It is the biggest reform agenda since our nation decided to create Medicare and its head office is going to be right here and I know you are going to do that wonderfully, very proudly and hold that banner of DisabilityCare high and make sure that as a whole community you are saying to each other and to the whole nation that every Australian counts.
I want to thank the Premier too for the fact that our partnership on this is extending, to the State Government making modifications at the railway station so it is easier for people with disabilities to travel here.
I thank him for that. That's another sign of further commitment. 
So thank you, everyone, you deserve it and I am going to enjoy in the years to come coming down here to visit DisabilityCare and to see all of the hard work that's happening from head office, but that's only possible because of all of the hard work of so many Australians here and around the nation who lobbied for, pressed for, raised their voice for DisabilityCare.
It's starting. It's real. Roll on 1 July. 
Thank you. 


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED
It's a great pleasure to join you this evening and a privilege to introduce this evening's distinguished speaker.
First, however, a few words about the Association.
There's a certain pragmatic genius in organisation in which the order of the words Australian and American seems interchangeable, depending upon whose signature block is on the correspondence.
Fortunately, the acronym  -  AAA  -  covers either contingency.
Perhaps that is how it ought to be between friends, equals and allies  -  and it reflects the seamless way our people share lives in our countries.
Both nations have diasporas who not only enrich the world through their values and commitments but now serve the nations of their birth in the wider world.
No matter how far away, they share their world knowledge with us at home.
They never really leave us: they are our representatives, wherever they live and work. Our reputation rides with them.
It's just that kind of global public good with great national benefits that drives this Association.
Who else would provide the online listings of which Australian pubs broadcast American football and baseball and ice hockey or the emergency register of American-style diners' in Australia.
Who else would advise unsuspecting Americans to try before they buy' when it comes to Vegemite.
Or warn them that when an Australian business contact ends a sentence on an upward inflection it doesn't necessarily mean he or she is asking you a question.
The support the Association offers is also a serious contribution to the affairs of our two nations, including through your partnership with the Australian Government to found the United States Studies Centre at the University of Sydney.
One of the important pieces of work coming from that centre is the three-year $2 million Alliance 21 project.
Enlisting 50 of the best strategic thinkers to identify challenges and opportunities for the US-Australia alliance.
Another important mechanism for knitting new bonds between our nations is the Association's postgraduate fellowship program.
Tonight, by your presence here, you are supporting young professionals with everything to offer and everything to achieve.
Young men and women with the same character and attributes as the young Andrew Liveris.
In 1976 Andrew was a newly-minted Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering from the University of Queensland.
First-class Honours, university medal, a bright love of chemistry instilled by his school science teachers  -  obvious potential for a fine academic career.
Instead, Andrew went for a job interview with Dow.
In the course of that interview Dow offered to show him the world - an offer he could not resist and one they have more than delivered on in the 37 years since.
Hong Kong. Thailand. Saudi Arabia. Of course, the US  -  and so many places between.
Andrew has transformed one of the world's great companies.
Recasting a 20th-century industrial icon as a modern, 21st-century presence in 160 countries and a global workforce of more than 50,000.
Turning Dow into a company dedicated to innovation, research and development  -  a firm that teams up with strong local companies to pursue global opportunities  -  a business producing high-tech manufacturing for new and profitable markets.
As Andrew set about transforming the company, he set about transforming the culture of the company too.
Taking to heart the words of Dow founder, Herbert H. Dow: If you can't do it better, why do it?
For Andrew, better also means better for the planet and its people.
He knows that social responsibility isn't an impediment to corporate success  -  indeed done right it's a selling point.
Now, 37 years after Dow promised to show him the world, Andrew Liveris, the boy born in the Northern Territory, is President, Chair and Executive Director of Dow worldwide.
There's a touch of derring-do to his work, no-one can deny.
A few years ago he played a co-starring role in former President Clinton's dramatic mission to repatriate two jailed American journalists from North Korea.
The plane used in the rescue was one of Andrew's.
When he's not on missions of mercy, he finds time to co-chair President Barack Obama's committee on manufacturing and to chair the US Business Council.
He's written editorials for the Wall Street Journal and given testimony before US Senate Committees.
His views are sought and valued everywhere he is known.
He has been named a Legend in Leadership by the Yale Chief Executive Leadership Institute and was hailed as a True Leader by the Australian Financial Review's BOSS magazine in 2012.
He is one of the most respected CEOs in the United States.
I certainly appreciated his participation in my 2011 Future Jobs Summit.
We agree on much  -  and sometimes agree to disagree.
From his base in Michigan Andrew is a frequent visitor to our shores and a keen observer of the Australian scene.
And still, after all these years, his robust commentary is delivered with a definite trace of an Australian accent.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to introduce to youa great friend of two great nations, Mr Andrew Liveris. 


Canberra
E &amp; OE
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We're here tonight for the nation's largest gathering of mayors and shire presidents, and I've come to say welcome, welcome to Canberra on this cold June night.
I hope you'll be warmed by the conversation and the company.
As well as welcome, I have come tonight to say a big thank you to you for all the work you do.
When we look at local government today, we look at so many aspects that touch the lives of Australians.
Whether it's enabling people to swim some laps in the council pool to wind down at the end of the day; whether it's people hearing the sound of a garbage truck at dawn, or borrowing the latest Miles Franklin winner from the local library and then reading it on a bench in the city park, or taking the kids to the local sports ground, or relying on the local community services, or partying at a local festival  -  the lives of Australians are improved every day by the work of modern local government.
Delivered in local government areas ranging in size from a few densely packed square kilometres in our capital cities up to the great tracts of land larger than many European nations.
In Gippsland and Carpentaria, on the Shoalhaven and in the Clarence Valley; in the outer suburbs and the inner cities, serving people, creating communities, building our nation; that is local government today.
And it deserves to be recognised in our Constitution.
While you're here in Canberra, I know your conversations will range widely, but at the heart of the matter this week is the campaign for the constitutional recognition of local government.
This campaign won't be won by federal politicians nodding sagely amongst ourselves and agreeing that the time is right.
It will be won where you live, in your towns and cities.
Where the reality of the financial relationships between the Government I lead and the Governments you lead is experienced.
Where you know, from your daily work, that conversations on a street corner can turn into conversations that engage and enthuse a whole community.
We won't succeed without millions of Australians whose lives are touched daily by local government, in ways large and small, voting Yes.
That means we won't succeed without the efforts of all of you.
I have got no doubt at all that this referendum, the third time this issue will have been voted on in forty years; this is the last chance for recognition of local government.
With a Government prepared to propose change, with serious and effective bipartisan support, and with a successful grassroots campaign, then this referendum can succeed.
If any of those things aren't in place then this referendum will fail.
I can guarantee every effort from the Government; only the Opposition can deliver bipartisanship; and only you can deliver the community campaign.
I know you are putting together money to fight for a Yes vote.
Tonight, I pledge that the Government will also assist with additional resources for your campaign.
Apart from coming here tonight to personally convey my admiration for what you do, I've come with a request for your help, above and beyond your help in campaigning Yes for the referendum.
It's a simple request but an important one.
With so many Australian jobs relying on manufacturing and with car making at manufacturing's heart, I've come tonight to ask you to support your fellow Australians by buying local when you renew your vehicle fleets.
Help a mate with a job; that's all I ask and I'm sure it's something you can do.
Tonight is a very special occasion.
It's part of what you've been doing for a few days and I know many of you will be here for a few days to come.
We'll see you walking the corridors, we'll see you knocking on Members of Parliament's doors; we'll see you in ministerial offices, no doubt I'll see some of you too.
This is a fantastic way to directly engage.
I know Members of Parliament are looking forward to it; the Government is looking forward to it.
But before all of that hard work continues, please enjoy the night, and we'll enjoy your presence in Canberra over the next few days.
Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


Sydney
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
We're here in the name of a truly great Australian, Margaret Whitlam.
We honour her memory and celebrate her life.
For over sixty years, Margaret was part of our Labor family, and in the end she stood at its very core.
Now with Margaret's absence, there is a gap we can never fill.
So tonight our first thoughts must be with Gough, who is making the lonely journey without his lifelong partner and equal.
Gough  -  you are in our hearts and our affection, tonight and always.
I want to acknowledge another woman of courage and class, Tanya Plibersek.Tanya's the daughter of modest, hardworking, generous people as she put it herself; people who came from Eastern Europe in search of a better future.
Tanya seized every opportunity available to her and now stands at the forefront of our nation's public life.
I've been privileged to share my entire federal political journey with Tanya since we entered the Parliament together in 1998.
I'm proud to call her both a colleague and a friend.
Tanya is just the sort of smart, feisty woman that Margaret Whitlam loved  -  and indeed, Tanya I know Margaret did love and admire you very much.
No-one could better represent this area, its people, its history and its values.
The electorate of Sydney covers a wonderful part of this metropolis where our great party kicked into life.
Yes it's a very different place to the run-down terrace houses of yesteryear with one cold water tap and kids running around without shoes.
Today, we're likely to see solar panels on rooftops and broadband being connected.
I'm not here to give a lecture on Margaret Whitlam  -  but there are some features of her life that can guide and instruct us.
On one occasion Margaret was reflecting on a photo of herself as a baby  -  the picture is reproduced in Susan Mitchell's biography and it shows a plump, healthy, happy infant.
Margaret observed that she was Well cared for. Loved and wanted, as she wished every Australian child could be.
Margaret grew up in the 1920s and 30s, the daughter of a barrister who later became an eminent judge.
It was a life of relative privilege in the Eastern Suburbs of Sydney, and she could just as easily have become a society matron like many of her classmates.
But she didn't.
Even from a childhood of privilege, Margaret had a profound belief in fairness.
Long before it found expression in the Labor Party and her partnership with Gough, Margaret held that value of fairness closer than anything.
It was her touchstone.
To live a good life, she felt she had to spread fairness and opportunity to others.
So marriage to Gough became not just a union of hearts and intellects, but also a meeting of moral and social values.
Because of Gough's ambition to serve, together they spent 25 years sharing the life of the suburbs; understanding the dignity of that life but also the limitations.
Lack of transport. No sewerage. Poor schools. Inadequate hospitals.
As Susan Mitchell records:
it was Margaret who had organised the building of two houses [in the outer suburbs], raised four children there and arranged for them to travel twenty miles to a high school and twelve miles to a swimming pool (before she helped build one in Cabramatta).
Margaret, who had always loved reading, had lived where there were few municipal libraries, no paved roads within a mile of their houses and no paved footpaths. [Margaret Whitlam by Susan Mitchell, p177]
The famous Whitlam Program' was born out of that lived experience, out of deep respect for Australian suburban life.
And at the heart of that program was the rights and empowerment of women including his decision to fling open the doors of higher education for all Australians.
Even now, women still write letters of thanks to Gough for this nation-changing policy.
As a result, Australian women live lives of opportunity unimaginable to our grandmothers.
In our own time, a woman of Margaret Whitlam's intellect, warmth and courage could surely have become a senior federal Minister or even Prime Minister.
Born 40 years later, it could easily have been Margaret instead of me or Tanya.
But why didn't Margaret Whitlam become an elected representative in her own right or even Prime Minister?
The answer is because Gough Whitlam hadn't yet become Prime Minister.
It just wasn't possible for a woman brought up in the 1920s and 30s, even one with a university education, a comfortable upbringing and strong social connections as Margaret enjoyed.
Yet the daughter of a psych nurse and an aged care cook from the suburbs of Adelaide could get there.
The difference, of course, was Gough Whitlam.
The difference was the things that happen when Labor governs.
Through his transformative work on women's rights and access to education, it was Gough who created the Australia in which the Julia Gillards, the Tanya Pliberseks, the Jenny Macklins, the Ged Kearneys could thrive.
That's the great Labor story we share and celebrate tonight.
That's the great Labor story that keeps us renewing our membership, year after year, in good times and in bad.
Because the work of nation-building is never complete.
The only way to truly honour Gough and Margaret's legacy is by extending it.
Throwing forth new bridges to the future.
And protecting the things we've already achieved; the things worth fighting for.
In 2013, that means keeping the Liberals off the Treasury benches and keeping Tony Abbott out of The Lodge.
Think about it this way:
At the 1969 poll  -  the Don's Party election  -  Gough and Margaret were hosting their traditional election night party at their home in Cabramatta.
Margaret put on a brave face all evening but when the guests had gone home, young Stephen Whitlam saw his mum crying in the backyard all alone, and he quickly perceived the reason for her tears.
In his words: After all we'd done, after all we'd tried to do, the bastards won.
In another decisive election year, I want every progressive Australian to know and understand the moral of the story is exactly the same:
Don't let that be us.
Don't let the wrong side win.
Don't be one of those people driving around with a bumper sticker saying: Don't blame me, I didn't vote for Tony Abbott.
Don't let them get away with it.
They aren't ready and they don't deserve it.
Tony Abbott is all platitudes and no policy.
Empty of ambition for the country, but full of ambition for himself.
He's never had a new idea about disability care.
Never had a new idea about broadband or clean energy.
Never had an idea about better funding for our schools.
All we get is talk of cuts and sackings and abolishing good and decent policies like the carbon price, the NBN and our plan to fund schools fairly.
We know what an Abbott government would look like because we saw it in the Menzies era, the Fraser era, the Howard era.
The erosion of common values; the neglect of public institutions.
Public education, public broadcasting, public health,public transport.
The Liberals inherit, but they do not create.
They destroy but they never build.
That's why Paul Keating posed this question about the prospect of an Abbott-led Australia: Is that all there is?
Our answer to that question must be no.
A resounding, defiant no.
There is more.
More Australia can do.
More Australia can be.
Give me a majority and we can do it all.
Especially given our extraordinary track record amid the constraints of minority government:
Keeping our economy strong with almost a million jobs created.
Clean energy up, carbon pollution down.
A fair go for all Australian schools, public and private alike.
Early childhood education; more apprenticeships; and more university places, especially for poorer students.
DisabilityCare  -  the greatest social reform in 30 years.
Bringing high-speed broadband to every Australian and breaking Telstra's monopoly grip forever.
Delivering tax cuts to our lowest paid and making sure superannuation benefits increase, especially for those who need them most.
Higher pay for our community sector workers.
Financial help for pensioners and for families.
Health reform, and aged care reform.
The biggest Commonwealth investment in public transport since Federation.
A Royal Commission to bring healing and justice to victims of horrendous betrayal.
Plain packaging to help protect our kids from the dangers of smoking.
We won't let go of these achievements so easily.
Could we have done some things better?
Of course.
But in the end, on the big things that count, we have proven to be a good government.
A government worth fighting for.
A government affirmed and emboldened in our sense of Labor purpose.
Unlike our opponents, we don't measure political success by how well you've been able to denigrate and disrupt.
We measure ourselves by a very different metric: by what we achieve for Australia.
So to all those who want things to be better, I say things can be better.
With a majority Labor government, things can be better.
With a more constructive Opposition led by someone other than Tony Abbott, things can be better.
After three extraordinary years, we've been toughened and tempered through experience.
We've got the big calls right.
And while the Opposition have a flimsy pamphlet, we've got a plan.
A plan for Australia's future.
A detailed, credible plan to make us winners in the Asian Century and seize the opportunities of tomorrow.
As members and supporters of our great Party, you know better than everyone that politics is about ideas and it's about achievements.
Leadership is about getting the big things done that really matter for our nation's future.
So an election is a contest of values and contest of ideas.
Some people like to set-up an idealised version of a perfect Labor Government and then pick apart all our faults. Any armchair critic can do that.
I know there's a lot of talk and chatter out there.
All sorts of scenarios and alternatives are imagined every day.
But forget all the noise and nonsense.
The choice today is the choice that will be available on September 14: Tony Abbott or me; a majority Labor government or a majority Coalition government.
So I'd say to anyone questioning what's on offer, reduce this election to its most fundamental proposition:
If you want fairer funding for our schools and a life of opportunity for our kids;
If you want a clean energy revolution;
If you want true high-speed broadband;
If you want DisabilityCare;
If you want to protect jobs and working conditions;
If you want those new rail lines rolled-out in our big cities;
If you want to continue our great work on the arts and the environment, then vote for me.
And on the other side of the coin: if you want cuts in health and education, cuts that hurt families and cost jobs, then vote for Tony Abbott.
Simple as that.
We know that true and profound differences are at stake in this election.
Nothing's inevitable.
Everything's possible.
There is a choice.
So share our great story with your friends and neighbours, your work-mates and loved ones.
Hold firm to our Labor faith.
Take pride in our achievements.
And don't let the wrong side win. 


Yungaburra
Today we meet to open a remarkable national memorial.
To honour the memory of 39 young Australians who died for us in a dangerous place far from home  -  in the deserts, green valleys and mountains of Afghanistan.
They are not the first Australians to die for us in uniform overseas.
Gallipoli's rocks and Fromelles' mud  -  Tobruk's sands, the beach of Bangka Island  -  Kapyong's hills and the rubber of Long Tan  -  and so many places near and far all witnessed the last moments of brave young people who we still treasure and who we will always call our own.
Just as the brave soldiers we honour today rightly called the Anzac tradition and legacy their own  -  a legacy of service they took to heart and a tradition of sacrifice they followed in Afghanistan.
This beautiful new memorial captures the spirit of the Avenues of Honour that enrich the history and beauty of more than 500 Australian towns.
Each one a striking reminder of Australia's promise never to forget.
We all know country towns where the trees and white statues that mark the fallen outnumber the buildings that house those who remain.
Communities which said goodbye to too many citizen-soldiers a century ago and welcomed home too few.
The husbands, the fathers, the sons, the friends, the Australians whose sacrifice we honour today  -  they were professional soldiers.
They knew the life of arms and they knew their craft and above all they knew what they put at risk when they went away for us.
And yet knowing all that, they did go away.
I know you all marvel at their courage.
I want you all to know I am amazed by your courage  -  those who saw them not come back and those of you who go away again.
By the strength and grace of the families and friends who continue through life so bravely, carrying so much sorrow as well as their brothers and sisters in arms who carry mental and physical scars from service in our name
You amaze me.
Susan, Gordon, the fruit of your grief could so easily have been bitterness in your lives.
Instead you have created this national memorial to all the sons lost in Afghanistan.
From their courage, and from yours, Australia draws inspiration. 
We will see our mission in Afghanistan through. That is for tomorrow.
For today, we dedicate this place to the memory of those we have lost.
This is a special place that belongs to you, the people these young Australians loved, the people who loved them in return.
This is a special place for the nation to honour all the men and women who have served in Afghanistan.
I want you to know it is also a place which is very special to me.
I attended the funerals of 24 of the Australians whose names will be read today. 
I met many of you on those dreadful days.
I will never forget this memorial here, I will never forget you here today and and most importantly we will remember them.
Lest we forget. 


Holbrook
It's wonderful to be here in Holbrook  -  and what a fantastic achievement we celebrate today.
An exercise in nation-building that spans  -  and joins  -  decades, governments and communities.
The entire exercise has employed about 130,000 people over the decades.
If the entire Hume duplication is valued in today's dollars it is an investment of perhaps as much as $20 billion.
No single government, no single generation, can claim the credit for this grand undertaking.
Still, as Prime Minister I am proud to be in the line of descent from Gough Whitlam, whose National Roads Act of 1974 set these works in motion.
The Hume duplication is part of my Government's enormous efforts to invest in building our nation's future  -  part of our $60 billion investment in transport infrastructure through our Nation Building Program.
Building or upgrading 7500km of roadway across the country  -  a doubling of Commonwealth investment since we came to government.
Building or upgrading 4000km of rail  -  a ten-fold Commonwealth investment in rail over the same period.
A hundred and sixty projects completed.
Ninety more under way.
And for the future, urban projects like Perth Light Rail and the F3-M2 Missing Link.
Australia is still a young country and nation-building is still happening here.
The Hume has been defining where we go' ever since Governor Lachlan Macquarie gave the order in 1819 for the construction of a Great South Road.
A century later, the motley collection of roads connecting Melbourne and Sydney was elevated to the grand status of highway'.
It would be another decade until the final section of the Hume was even sealed.
But its importance had already been decided.
The towns and cities along the Hume's 800 kilometres of tarmac are rich with history.
Hume's own family home, at Yass.
Snake Gully, with its much-loved Dog on the Tuckerbox.
At Gundagai, one of the longest bridges in NSW  -  a full one metre longer than the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
Glenrowan, where Ned Kelly made his last stand.
Benalla and Euroa  -  towns with their own links to the Kelly Gang.
Or one of the small treasures: Tarcutta, half-way between Melbourne and Sydney, where truck drivers once changed shifts and where there's now a memorial wall to truckies who have lost their lives along the Hume and other highways.
Rows upon rows of names  -  and nicknames:  Lenny. Stumpy. Daylight. Blue - because roads can tear families apart, as well as bring them closer.
Reducing the dreadful toll on our roads has always been one aim of the duplication of the Hume.
In 1976 there were almost two and a half thousand crashes and 71 deaths along the NSW sections of the Hume alone.
With dual carriageway the length of the highway, crashes are now in the low hundreds.
Fatalities this year are in the single digits.
I'm determined we keep saving lives and we haven't just upgraded roads to make them safer we've updated laws to make driving safer, especially through the Safe Rates legislation which passed the Parliament last year.
In a big dry country like ours, roads are like rivers. They take us places and define our geography.
Look at any map. It's the roads and the rivers that define where we go.
It's why we put them in our songs and in our stories.
In 1985 Paul Kelly released a single called From St Kilda to King's Cross.
He sang of thirteen hours on a bus, on the Hume, his face pressed against the glass, watching the white lines rushing past.
The time it takes to drive from Melbourne to Sydney has now been cut by three hours  -  Paul Kelly may need to change his lyrics.
Even a grand project like the Hume duplication always prompts mixed feelings and some homesickness for the past.
This is a project that has transformed our landscape.
Forty-nine bypasses, taking thousands of trucks off the streets of our loveliest country towns.
That has turned what was once a capital J Journey into a cruise-controlled, air-conditioned glide.
We all have our memories of the Hume.
The shimmer of hot road ahead that signals a summer holiday has begun.
The first sight of the city, suburb or town that lets us know we are almost home.
That won't change.
We'll just need to remember to get off the highway once in a while  -  taking a break here at Holbrook, or at Goulburn, or Wangaratta.
To remind ourselves that even with such a great road beneath our wheels, the journey isn't just about the destination.
Put today, we are celebrating the arrival at a long planned, long anticipated destination  -  the full duplication of the Hume. 
Congratulations Australia! 


Canberra
PM: Yesterday I had the very great honour of attending the opening of the memorial for those lost in Afghanistan.
A memorial put together by families, particularly under the leadership of Gordon Chuck and Susan Chuck who lost their son Ben in Afghanistan.
The opening of that memorial was attended by a number of the families who have lost loved ones in Afghanistan.
You could see on their faces that the sorrow is still there, but so is the pride in service.
It seems particularly cruel that as that service was coming to an end, that we were starting to receive the first news of more death and more wounding in Afghanistan.
Every death, every loss in Afghanistan hits the nation hard.
I think not only will the nation be hit hard today, but for many, this will be a very painful reminder that the risk is not over, the danger isn't gone.
Our last loss was in October last year and I think many have probably lulled themselves into a false sense of security that we would see no more losses in Afghanistan.
This news reminds us that our mission is ongoing, that the danger is ongoing.
We have got work to do and our ADF personnel are over there doing important work for the nation, but work that has real risks.
On behalf of the nation, I offer our condolences to the family and friends of the commando who has been lost.
He was an elite soldier and a very brave man.
We are thinking of his family and friends today and we respect their wishes for privacy at this time.
The nation's thoughts are also with the family of the soldier who has been seriously wounded.
We wish for him a speedy recovery. Our thoughts are with him as he recovers.
And our thoughts too are with the airman who has sustained more minor wounds.
I will take questions but solely on this matter.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, the death of an Australian soldier generally sparks some calls to reconsider the mission in Afghanistan. What would you say to those who might question what we are doing here?
PM: I would say what I've always said, and as a Government we have shown a constant sea of purpose about this. As a nation I believe we've shown a constant sea of purpose.
We went to Afghanistan for the right reasons. We went there because Afghanistan had provided a safe haven for the training of terrorists. And that terrorist training was implicated in the loss of Australian lives, including in Bali.
So we are very clear about our mission. We are clear about its end point.
The bulk of our forces will come home at the end of this year.
But we have got more work to do in Afghanistan, and so we will see that mission through.
JOURNALIST: As that drawdown date approaches, do you expect the risk for Australian troops to be heightened?
PM: The risk is always there.
The process of extraction will be a very carefully managed one.
The lessons from other theatres of combat have been learnt about the risks of extraction, and so our defence personnel are working hard on managing those risks.
What has happened here of course is the risk that comes by taking the fight to the insurgents, and we have seen that risk take a toll before and it's taken a toll again.
JOURNALIST: How ready are the Afghanistan security services to take over control when we leave?
PM: All of the advice to me and the view of our Defence personnel who work in Afghanistan is that our mission of training and mentoring has made a real difference and increasingly Afghan local forces are able to step up to security leadership.
And that is the process that we are in now so the Afghan people can provide security for the Afghan nation.
That doesn't mean, though, that our mission will come to a complete end.
We have said that the bulk of our forces will come home at the end of this year when the base in Tarin Kowt is closed.
But we will have a continuing role providing assistance and advice to Afghan local forces, and training.
And as I've consistently said we have also left open the possibility of a continuing role for Special Forces beyond the end of the current mission, the current ISAF mission at the end of 2014.
JOURNALIST: Has the likelihood of a continued operation of the Special Forces personnel increased after this sort of incident?
PM: That decision is not related to events in the field.
It's related to strategic discussions between us and ISAF partners and the nation of Afghanistan.
Thank you. 


Canberra
Welcome to Parliament House.
Thank you for coming here to build on CEDA's stewardship of detailed and serious discussion about the state of the Australian economy and its future.
Your presence here this week is not only very important, it is very timely, so I'm particularly pleased to join you first up today.
Three weeks ago the National Accounts for the March quarter of this year were released.
They were solid  -  they showed our economy is growing and stable and strong  -  they were good news.
The National Accounts reflected the economy's underlying stability and strength and our status as a leading nation  -  yes, in a mixed world environment and yes, with some complex transitions underway.
Solid growth at 2.5 per cent for the year.
Household savings at over 10 per cent.
New business investment still around fifty-year highs as a share of GDP, at 17.5 per cent.
Productivity growth now above trend at 2 per cent.
Net exports making their strongest contribution to growth in four years.
If I can speak candidly, the subsequent discussion has been marked by some strikingly misguided commentary.I'm not talking here about criticism of the Government's economic policies  -  not at all  -  I'm referring to glaring misstatements about the economy itself.
If irrational exuberance has an opposite it's probably unreasonable pessimism and we've witnessed that in some quarters these past three weeks.
I want to address that in some detail this morning but first I want to be clear on why I think it's worth doing.
Simply put, your presence here in Parliament House this week presents you with a special opportunity to bring to the national economic debate the correction we have to have.
You can bring to the national public discussion an understanding of the facts, an interrogation of the policy demands that the facts impose on us, an understanding that the benefits of long-term reform are felt precisely over that long-term, and crucially you can present a well-founded confidence in the Australian economy.
I know you will have rigorous and vigorous policy debate and I absolutely welcome critical discussion of the Government's policy approach. 
But I know you want to hear opinion based on facts.
So that's what I'm asking you to do while you are here  -  get all the facts on the table, discuss the real policy challenges, and then challenge the negative economic sentiment that is around in some quarters.
Where have the pessimists gone wrong?
First, some reporting has neglected important specific facts about the quarterly figures.
Two particular features would have given Australians some interesting insights on where the economy is headed.
New dwelling investment over the year rose by 10.2 per cent  -  the strongest annual growth in ten years, further evidence that the non-resource sectors of the economy picking up.
Non-rural commodity export volumes were up 13.2 per cent over the year.
This ramp up largely drove the rise in export volumes  -  and it is a sign that the production phase of the mining boom we have spoken about for some time is now starting to come through.
These are important signs that the transitions we planned for in the Budget are now underway  -  yet they went barely remarked.
Second, the most irresponsible pessimists have tossed around the r word.
Something not so much sinister as silly, a claim I'm frankly somewhat reluctant to repeat, even in order to contradict it, lest I give it weight.
But consider this.
For the third time in just five years, one leading firm of economists predicted a 20 per cent chance that the Australian economy will actually shrink for two quarters in a row.
Another then quoted a 25 per cent chance that growth would halt completely.
Now as Jessica Irvine has pointed out in a column for News Ltd publications, even these sensationally pessimistic statements were still forecasting the most likely outcome is growth.
Or to put it another way, even these outlying forecasts are themselves statements that the glass is actually three quarters or four fifths full.
Yet the effect on confidence can only be negative and on all the facts, is clearly not justified.
One national daily reported on its front page that our economy had shrunk if you excluded net exports.
You might as well say Shakespeare hardly earned a penny in his life, except from the theatre.
And the assault on confidence in Western Australia was particularly sharp.
This arose from the national accounts reporting that final state demand their fell by 3.9 per cent in the March quarter.
Bear in mind, state demand excludes not only net exports but interstate trade.
You might as well say the economy is shrinking in your house when you exclude the money you earn at your office.
The Secretary of Treasury, Dr Parkinson, and his deputy Dr Gruen responded to this unambiguously in Senate hearings ten days ago. As Dr Gruen put it:
The idea that in the face of the largest investment boom we have ever seen, you ignore exports and focus on the piece of the economy that is demand by Western Australia ... belongs in the comic books.
As Prime Minister, I am concerned that left unchecked, this kind of distorted coverage could continue to spread.
Australians woke last Wednesday morning to widespread news reports that markets expected the labour force figures for that day to show 10,000 jobs lost in May.
By lunchtime the ABS figures showed a small increase in jobs.
I don't know if the Australian Communications and Media Authority would welcome a request for 11,100 corrections to be put to air but if anyone here wants to make that submission feel free to cite me in support.
We all acknowledge that forecasting is difficult  -  at any time.
But the continued pessimism is not being matched by the continued performance of our key economic indicators and low expectations can themselves become an economic problem.
Now, as I have said, many serious commentators have taken issue with the unreasonable pessimists.
Many of you here share their frustration.
Michael Pascoe in his Fairfax column was the most scathing but also I thought the most amusing, reporting on what he called squawking. This led, in his words, to squawk like:
The national accounts suggest the economy would have contracted without a 1 percentage point boost from falling imports and rising exports...
Michael went on to say:
It would have contracted if a meteor took out Melbourne and would have expanded if kangaroos started defecating gold.
Yes he is pretty good, isn't he!
Now you came this morning for a discussion about the economic development of Australia, not an episode of Media Watch. 
So it's important that we be very clear about why it matters to get the public discussion right.
Dr Parkinson's summary overall, in that same Senate hearing?
Trashing confidence for whatever reason is not in the national interest.
This is the first fundamental point. Confidence matters. 
Not hope or optimism, but a well-founded positive sentiment based on the facts, recognising that our economy is growing and stable and strong.
In November 2008, in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, Reserve Bank Governor Glenn Stevens, warned about the need to go about business with a quiet confidence in our prospects. 
His words:
Given the underlying strengths of the economy, about the biggest mistake we could make would be to talk ourselves into unnecessary economic weakness.
Still true.
Any irrational threat to economic confidence is a threat to jobs and growth.
The second reason to get the discussion right is that as economic decision-makers, we must be able to separate the signal from the noise.
We need to pick the real transitions as they are coming.
Growth in Asia, enduring for decades to come.
The peak of the mining investment boom.
The digital disruption and the clean energy future.
The pick-up in broader sources of growth beyond resources.
Critical for the economy right now  -  new sources of growth, sustaining economic diversity with a strong dollar.
Perhaps there's no better example of the failure to separate signal from noise than the pessimists who say that the dollar rising is bad news and then say the dollar falling is bad news.
Last week a retail industry leader who's spent years advocating for direct relief from the strong dollar and low-price imports did widespread media complaining that the falling dollar was bad for consumer confidence. 
This actually happened.
I am sure the recent movements in the dollar will not go unremarked here, so I will say just a few things on that front.
The Australian dollar has been at historically high level for some time now and as you all know this has moderated in recent weeks.
Our high dollar reflects our strong fundamentals  -  solid growth, low unemployment, low debt, AAA credit ratings  -  but also the challenges that many other developed economies have faced in the aftermath of the GFC, the worst economic conditions in over 80 years.
More simply, the high value of the Australian dollar has been a combination of our strength and global weakness.
Our strength remains, and the good news is that the signs from America are becoming more positive for their growth.
Improvements in the US economy should be welcome  -  these support the global recovery and growth in the world's largest economy provides significant opportunities for Australian exporters.
While the high dollar has provided benefits for consumers, it has meant significant challenges for some of our exporters.
As the Treasurer has said, a sustained depreciation of the Australian dollar in those circumstances would be a very good thing, to stimulate further growth in the non-mining sector  -  while the firms that have adjusted to the historically high dollar stand to benefit from its fall.
As a Government we recognise we need to be ready to seize the opportunities that the future will bring.
We need to make the right investments and deliver the right reforms.
Your theme this week, of Australia adjusting, neatly captures the elements of agency and change that are in play.
Your agenda demonstrates that CEDA, at least, is able to identify the real economic signals and to work up the agenda points for a serious discussion about what is to be done.
Productivity and structural reform: where Labor's five pillars of skills and education, infrastructure, innovation, tax and regulatory reform are so vital  -  and form a discussion which connects to so many other key areas.
Education: as you put it, ensuring Australia's future prosperity  -  nothing matters more and this week is vital for this reform.
Energy policy: a historic challenge to decouple economic growth from emissions growth.
International competitiveness: where the dollar's recent easing hasn't eased the demand that we plan for jobs and growth and do so through sustained economic diversity.
Innovation: where the jobs of the future depend so heavily on the ideas and the infrastructure of the future.
Health reform and funding models: the structural reforms already made to Commonwealth-State relations and the structural savings we've delivered in Commonwealth spending have begun a process which must continue to sustain public finances.
The big one, the Asian Century, a century of growth and change, of Asian middle-class demand for high value Australian services and goods.
Education and tourism, agriculture and advanced manufacturing, financial services, health services, digital media.
These are the real issues, the big picture, the things that matter. You are absolutely right to be discussing them here this week.
2013 is a big year for Australia.
Economic choices and political choices are before us all.
Choices with consequences, choices with purpose, choices which should be informed, informed by the facts.
The facts are these.
Labor  -  returning the Budget to balance faster than most of the developed world.Our net debt  -  one-third Canada's, one-fifth Germany's and one-eighth the size of the United States.
Equivalent to a person with a $100 000 income each year having a $12 000 mortgage.
Our nation's best ever credit rating.  Interest rates are low.  Inflation is contained.The average tax to GDP ratio under Labor, well below the previous Coalition Government.
Since Labor came to power, the Australian economy has grown by 14 per cent.
And the bottom line of all bottom lines: under Labor, our nation has created more than 950,000 jobs.
You have a big program before you and I'm looking forward to our conversation because there is so much to discuss. 


Canberra
This is my 15th year in Parliament, but I am always learning new things about this place.
For example, I was recently told that it would take one painter 16 and a half years to paint the entire building.
Which, if nothing else, gives us a new perspective on Michelangelo's achievement in the Sistine Chapel. 
Perhaps just as remarkably, more than 20 million visitors have passed through the House's doors in 25 years.
Australian political giants and foreign dignitaries.
The leader of the world's largest nation  -  Hu Jintao.
The leader of the world's largest Islamic society  -  Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono.
The Queen of Australia and the Prime Minister of this parliament's distinguished ancestor in Westminster  -  Tony Blair.
The Prime Ministers of two of our closest Commonwealth friends  -  Canada's Stephen Harper and New Zealand's John Key.
And all four Presidents of the United States elected since the opening of this place.
Legends of radio, television and the Parliamentary press gallery have walked these corridors. 
Spiritual leaders and business tycoons.
Community groups and protest movements whose causes span the ideological spectrum. 
Millions of excited schoolchildren and their patient teachers.
Australian tourists and international visitors.
People drawn by the striking lines of this building and itslight-filled design.
The warmth of its Australian timbers. The beauty of its magnificent art collection. 
People who have come to see our democracy in action.
Both the cut and thrust of Question Time and the unifying spirit of great bipartisan moments.  
People who come to have their voices heard, see their argument made.
To receive a nation's thanks. Or its apology.  
And I think it is not too much to hope that these visitors leave inspired.
Not just by the place Australians have built.
But the country, the civic pride and the democratic system that this building represents. 
Today though, we are here to honour those who made this place possible:
Its visionary architect Romaldo Giurgola, who unfortunately can't be with us today.
And the men and women who brought that vision to fruition; taking an empty hilltop and turning into our nation's foremost public building.
We also celebrate the thousands of people who come to this house every working day.
There is a group that is not employed by the Parliament but which makes this place both their home and their subject-matter (for good or ill): the press gallery, who have the opportunity to render such a vital service to our democracy.
There are the cleaners who maintain the 9.6km of corridors and the guides who make visitors feel so welcome within these halls.
The electricians who make sure the 40,000 lights go on.
The gardeners who care for the 13 hectares of grounds and mow the sloping lawns that children just love to roll down.
The editors who produce the 19,600 pages of Hansard each year.
The tabling office and chamber staff who have overseen the passage of more than 4,200 bills.
The parliamentary librarians who have fielded more than 680,000 enquiries.
The chefs, waiters and baristas who have prepared and served hundreds of thousands of meals and millions of cups of coffee.
The security guards, plumbers, printers, switchboard operators, fitness trainers, nurses and IT staff.
All of you who do your jobs so well and with such quiet efficiency that you sometimes miss out on the recognition you deserve.
In a place often associated with prima donnas and limelight, you are backstage making sure that the show goes on.
More than 70 of you have been here from day one, a distinction you share with just four of my Parliamentary colleagues.
There is no better illustration of the apolitical dedication that so many of you bring to your daily work.
And no better reminder that the smooth running of this building is something we should never take for granted. 
So on behalf of all Australians I pay tribute to Aldo and to all who created this building, and I thank all those who through their hard work, patience and good-humour give it life every day.
Through their love of freedom, generations of Australians have built a great democracy.
You have given that democracy a fine and worthy home.
On behalf of the nation, I simply say: thank you. 


Canberra
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Everald Compton. I'm delighted with the initiative that you and Wayne Swan took in identifying the ageing of the population and how that should be turned into an asset and not being a liability.
And I see based on your remarks about the Asian Century a great opportunity for aged care services in Australia to be exported to China where the demand will be enormous, and I think it could even get to the point of becoming a major export for the country and I wondered what you thought about that?
PM: Thank you very much Everald, and thank you for the contributions you've made to our policies too.
Everald's been working with us on a set of participation policies to make it easier for older Australians to continue to work.
So many of our public policy settings have made assumptions about when full retirement is, and in modern Australia where we need to lift participation and where so many older Australians want to continue in work, Everald's played a very leading role making sure we get those things right.
I also agree with your analysis about our potential to export aged care and health care and education services, financial services to Asia.
This is going to be such a big part of our future, including the export of public policy services. We are good at public policy.
Things like compulsory superannuation, Medicare, carbon pricing; these things are rightly studied in our region as models for advanced economies as to how you manage ageing populations, how you manage social welfare, how you manage to reduce carbon pollution.
So I think all of that Australian expertise and those leading-edge services can be a source of income and prosperity for us in this Asian Century.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, Baden Firth from the Mitsubishi Corporation. If you could give us your comments on the achievements that you feel you've delivered through the Fair Work Act to date, and then what sort of agenda platform you'll be taking to the next election around industrial relations, I'd be very grateful. Thank you.
PM: Sure. Certainly we're very proud of the Fair Work Act and whilst it's going to I'm sure be the continued topic of lively conversation with the business community, here again I think it's important that people get the facts on the table.
We are seeing rising productivity. We are seeing wages contained. In terms of levels of industrial disputation we are below the average of the Howard years.
And indeed much of the industrial disputation in recent statistics has arisen from state government bargaining disputes with state government employees like teachers and nurses.
So this is the set of achievements of the Fair Work Act.
We've recently passed some changes to Fair Work which have been about better balancing work and family life and addressing modern problems like bullying.
We believe we've basically got the settings right. We will not go to the election with a big program of change.
We will go to the election saying this is a system that is working for Australia.
And we will certainly go to the election resisting the alternative  -  whether it is frankly put or only quietly spoken  -  an alternative that takes us to the very divisive conflict of the Work Choices years.
QUESTION: Good morning Prime Minister, Ken King, CEO of the Pilbara Development Commission.
I'd just like to ask you for your comments about northern Australia. Particularly northern Western Australia, the Northern Territory and the north of Queensland as regions that provide great opportunities to drive the economy from the resources sector in particular.
And I think more importantly, not just about extractive efforts, extractive industries, but more importantly, your policies around encouraging people to live as well as work in northern Australia.
PM: Thank you very much for that question. I'm in the business of saying we should get things done. I do note that that's not necessarily embraced by all.
We've seen a bit of a flim-flam pamphlet come out on the future of northern Australia which promises rounds of endless reviews and meetings but not much content.
We've taken a different view; we've just got up there and got things done.
So whether it's been our record investments in the Kimberley to open up that region, whether it's been the huge investments we've made in the Northern Territory and in the north of Queensland, the investments we're making in infrastructure, the investments we're making in education to encourage people to aspire to the highest levels of education.
These are practical changes for northern Australia.
We've been working well with local government representatives in northern Australia. We actually work well with the Barnett Government on the strategy for the Kimberley.
We worked well with the Northern Territory Government to do things like secure the INPEX investment and to build the associated training facilities, which means that people will get jobs.
We've had our moments with the Queensland Government, but our big investments in the north of Queensland continue. And they will make a long term difference.
Northern Australia has the opportunity to benefit from many of our policy settings, including our settings for a clean energy future  -  we're talking about parts of the country where clean energy development is going to be a big part of their future and their future prosperity.
So we're out there on the ground doing practical work every day, and that's the approach that we'll continue to take.
QUESTION: Good morning Prime Minister, Gloria Jacob from Regional Development Australia in the Pilbara. Following on from Dr King's question  -  I was wondering what your position would be on encouraging more people to live there, certainly in northern Australia, but especially with regards to the special economic zone?
PM: Look I think you've got to be very careful about some of these economic suggestions.
We do have a zonal tax rebate for people who live in remote regions. I don't want to get into the work of constitutional lawyers  -  that's not my bag  -  we've got constitutional lawyers who do that for the nation.
But there is of course a lively discussion about whether or not such a proposal  -  the one we have in operation now and any proposal to build on it  -  would survive constitutional challenge. So that's on the income tax side.
On the business side  -  what I believe is if you get the underlying conditions right, then you will attract private sector investment.
And the underlying conditions are about traditional infrastructure, where we are a Government that is investing more in roads and rail and ports than any government in the nation's history.
We've radically upped investment since the days of the Howard Government.
If you can build new communications technologies  -  part of what has kept people from living in northern Australia or in more regional or remote Australia is the sense of isolation  -  the NBN and all of the technologies associated with the NBN can end that for all time.
Part of what has dissuaded people from living in those areas is the sense that they wouldn't be able to get quality services for their family. There wouldn't be quality in the local schools.
There wouldn't be quality in the local health care facilities. There wouldn't be the opportunity to go on to higher education.
We have worked to transform that. What I want to achieve in this parliament this week with the new school funding and new school improvement plan would radically lift the quality and resources of schools in regional and remote Australia.
The investments that we've put into universities that work in regional and remote Australia are working at transformation too.
So if you can get all of that right; the infrastructure, the human capital, the access to information, the sense for people that they could live lives supported by appropriate services in those parts of the country, then I believe individuals will respond and the private sector will respond as well. 


Canberra
I want to offer a special acknowledgment to the Founder and Chairman of these Awards, Mr Joseph Assaf
Joseph has made a towering contribution to multiculturalism and to the business community.
His deep commitment to the values of innovation, tolerance and social equity has become legendary.
That's why I've appointed Joseph to the Civil Society 20 group  -  the C20  -  as part of our wider engagement process for the G20 meeting in Australia next year.
A big part of our effort will be showcasing Australia's multicultural success-story and how it helps us reach out to the world.
Multiculturalism is a success story.
Perhaps our greatest success as a modern nation.
And 25 years of the Ethnic Business Awards show just what that achievement means.
For a quarter of a century, we've been celebrating men and women who have come to this country with their worldly goods in a suitcase, with hands ready for hard work and heads busy with ambitious dreams.
Migrants who have founded the businesses that have shaped this nation.
The tradesmen and labourers who delivered nation-building infrastructure like the Snowy Hydro scheme.
The family construction companies that built our city suburbs, street by street, in the post-war boom years.
The mum-and-dad entrepreneurs who gave us great and enduring family-owned businesses, from the corner shop to our iconic department stores and shopping malls.
The men and women who have become property moguls and giants of manufacturing.
And the ones who have created the local jobs that have kept our towns and our regional economies humming.
And now, new generations of arrivals who are engaging the world, at the outer frontiers of new technologies.
Ethnic businesses have much to do with the prosperity, stability and strength of our economy.
While there are some who leave the land of their birth in desperation, fleeing war or persecution, escaping a nightmare, many others  -  including my family  -  make the life-changing decision as a clear choice.
As the fulfilment of a dream.
Through human history, migration has, to some extent, selected the risk-takers.
The men and women who see opportunity and seize it.
Those who see a glass half full and have a plan for the other half.
The very qualities so essential to business and entrepreneurialism.
Thirty per cent of small business owners operating in Australia today were born overseas.
Six of the top 10 Australian billionaires listed in BRW's Richest 200 list had a first- or second-generation migrant or refugee background.
The spirit, energy and ingenuity of our ethnic businessmen and women are things that cannot be taught, or bought.
They come from within.
But there are things governments can do to make the first steps of a new migrant steadier.
Things we can do as a generous and welcoming community, and which we have been doing for decades through programs like the successful Adult Migrant English Program.
But it is important that we also hold out a hand not just of welcome, but of help, to the children of those who have newly arrived.
The boys and girls who will design the cities of our tomorrow, manufacture the products of our future, dream up the innovations of the next century.
But before they embark on those lives, they need a good education.
And that means proficiency in English.
Our schools already offer effective and intensive English-language tuition.
But I believe we can do more.
That's why, as part of the Government's National Plan for School Improvement I'm determined to see greater resources go to students who speak languages other than English at home.
About 100,000 girls and boys stand to benefit from this additional funding.
It's an important investment.
An investment in the lives and prospects of individual boys and girls, at a time of profound transition in their lives.
I want to make sure that the new life we hold out to migrant children and their families is a life of genuine opportunity from the very start.
Of course, if proficiency in English is crucial for those making new homes here, proficiency in languages other than English  -  particularly the languages of Asia  -  is becoming essential to our national economic interest.
The Asian Century has dawned.
The centre of world economic activity is moving closer.
The share of world output generated within 10,000km of Australia's borders has doubled over the past half century.
It now accounts for more than a third of all global output.
This will rise to around half of all global output by 2030 - the year a child born today will finish high school.
I want that child  -  and every child of that generation  -  to have the chance to continuously study a priority Asian language throughout their years of schooling:
Mandarin, Hindi, Indonesian or Japanese.
Of course, the reality is that the example of multilingualism is already being set for us, daily by members of the ethnic business community.
Men and women fluent in the languages of our current and future trading partners, and fluent too in the cultural nuances so crucial in a global marketplace.
Our ethnic businessmen and women carried these skills with them when they came to Australia.
Now they pass them to their children and grandchildren.
It's an inheritance from which we all gain.
We've come a long way from the days when we tended to think of ourselves as a melting pot headed towards the goal of assimilation.
We no longer use that language.
And we no longer seek the uniformity that it dictated.
Migrants aren't forced to anglicise their names and disguise their backgrounds.
We can be proudly Lebanese-Australian.
Staunchly Greek-Australian.
We can observe Ramadan, or Hanukkah, or Vesak.
We can trace our family trees, preserve our faiths  -  or profess no faith at all  -  and feel safe in doing so.
We can carry forward our ancestors' names, pass on our mother tongues.
We can gather to mark Glendi or Diwali.
As the founder of these awards, Joseph Assaf, has pointed out, we need look no further than the Chinese and Indian diasporas to know that a growing number of individuals see themselves  -  and behave  -  as transnationals.
Proud Australians, but fully engaged in a wider world of commerce, culture and intellectual inquiry.
Australians, but with a special, and precious, entre to the world economy.
With the cultural insights, the language skills and the contacts.
Joseph gave a speech some years ago in which he remarked that on Christmas Day, seven million phone calls were made from Australia.
Seven million living connections to the world beyond our shores.
That speech was delivered almost a decade ago.
These days, I imagine, the living connection' is increasingly made through Skype.
The Christmas card has become a text message.
Indeed, the very first text message ever sent, back in 1992, contained just two words:  Merry Christmas.
And if our social connections across the world are now maintained via swipe-screens and Facebook, business is increasingly conducted the same way: instantly; urgently, immediately.
The tyranny of distance has become the tyranny of 24/7.
It's a tyranny I suspect Joseph Assaf meets head-on, with gusto.
Most of you know his story  -  the archetypal migrant story.
The 22-year-old Lebanese migrant working in a factory and teaching himself English.
In time, founder of the communications agency Etcom.
Founder of these awards, 25 years ago.
A mover and shaker in ethnic radio, on countless boards and committees.
A sought-after conference speaker.
A passionate advocate for education.
But passionate, above all, about the precious gift of multiculturalism that defines us as a people.
Congratulations Joseph on 25 years of the Ethnic Business Awards.
And congratulations to all those ethnic businessmen and women whose stories and successes are so central to Australia's national story.
Our story.
Our unique contribution to the shape of the world.
Written  -  in pride and unity  -  together.


