
S\ ST ER'S 9
FOR PRESS: CL2JA16 L/ SRA R' PM. No. 5/ 1968
CONGRATULATIONS FOR NEW PRIME MINISTEIR
The new Prime Minister, Senator Gorton, is receiving
congratulatory messages from many parts of the world. Following are
texts of some of the messages
U. S. A. " Warmest congratulations to you on assuming the
great and challenging office of Prime Minister. It gives me
strength and comfort to know under your leadership the same
close and mutually satisfactory friendship and relations as
between our friends Menzies and Holt will continue between
our two countries. Australia has a great role and voice in
the free world and I look forward to close communication and
frequent discussions on matters of mutual Interest. Mrs.
Johnson and I send our warmest personal regard-, and best
wishes to you and Mrs Gorton. Lyndon B. Johnson."
Britain " I send you my warmest congratulations on your election.
Despite the sadness of the occasion, I was very glad to have the
opportunity in Melbourne of meeting you and discussing some
of the matters of common concern to our two Governments.
" I hope we can continue to keep in our traditional close
contact. " Best wishes and sincere regards. Harold W1ils on."
New Zealand ", My Cabinet colleagues and I send you our congratulations
and warmest good wishes as you assume the office of Prime
Minister of Australia. The relationship between our two countries
is a very special one not only in our own area but abroad, and
especially at the present time when we stand together in defence
of freedom and democracy in Malaysia and South Viet Nam. We
face common problems in respect of the South-East Asian area
and the preservation of Commonwealth defence arrangements.
Nearer home, we have a common stake In the well-being and
development of the peoples of the South-West Pacific. The Free
Trade Area Agreement has given the Trans -Tasman relationship
a new dimension and we have every reason for ensuring that it
proves beneficial to our two countries. We have both come to
accept the necessity for the closest possible consultation and
co-operation between us, particularly at the political level, but
in many other contexts as well. I am sure that we shall find
many occasions for acting together. I personally look forward
to working as closely with you as I did with Robert Menzies and
Harold Holt. Keith Holyoake." / 2 
-2-
India " My colleagues in the Government of India and I
have great pleasure in sending you our warm felicitations
and good wishes on your assumption of the high office of
the Prime Minister of Australia. I am sure that under
your leadership Australia will continue to prosper and that
the close and friendly relations between our two countries
and people will grow stronger. Indira Gandhi."
Ambassador Averell Harriman of the U. S.
" Heartiest congratulations on your election as Liberal
Party Leader and Prime Minister. I send you my very best
wishes in the vast responsibilities which you are now assuming.
We all look forward keenly to working with you on matters of
common concern. Under your wise and vigorous leadership, I
am sure that our relations will continue to grow in mutual
confidence in the Interests of our two countries.
" With my warm personal regards,
Averell Harriman".
Japan " I beg to congratulate you on taking office as, Leader
of the Liberal Party. I heartily wish you both success and
pros per ity. Eisaku Sato"
Malaysia " Please accept the congratulations of my colleagues and I
on your election as the Prime Minister of Australia. I look
forward to working and co-operating with you in all matters of
mutual interest for the benefit of our two countries and wish
you every success in all your endeavours.
Tunku Abdul Rahman"
Singapore " Congratulations on your election to leadership. May
the links between us. grow strong with you as Prime Minister
of Australia. May our common interests be furthered by closer
co-operation. Lee Kuan Yew"
Philippines " The Filipino people join me in congratulating you on
your election as Prime Minister of Australia. ' He wish you
every success In your Administration for the continued peace,
progress and prosperity of your great people.
Ferdinand E. Marcos." / 3 
-3
Israel " I know that I am expressing the feelings of all my
colleagues in the Cabinet and of every citizen of Israel when
I send you this message of very warm and sincere congratulations
on your assumption of office as Prime Minister of the Commonwealth
of Australia. We all wish you success and we look
forward during your term to a continuance and strengthening of
the happy relations of friendship and mutual understanding between
our two countries. Pinhas Sapir Acting Prime Minister"
China " While visiting Bangkok as official guest of Thai
Government I learned with great pleasure from today's newspaper
of your election to premiership. Please accept my hearty
congratulations and best wishes for your success.
C. K. Yen Vice President and Premier"
Italy " Learning the news of your appointment as Prime
Minister of Australia, I wish to convey to you also on behalf
of the Italian Government my warmest congratulations together
with my very best wishes of success in your new task hoping
that the traditional ties of friendship and co-operation between
our two countries will be further strengthened.
Aldo Morro,. Prime Minister."
CANBERRA, 11 January, 1968 



FOR PRESS: JA16 1 p. M. No. 616
MR LEE'S " AST OF SUEZ MISSION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
The Australian Government fully supports the
Prime Minister of Singapore in his attempt to persuade the British
Government not to speed up withdrawal of British forces from
Singapore and Malaysia. Hower er, we do not feel the actual physical
presence of a senior Australian Minister, who could only arrive in
London a few hours before the talks were due to begin, would add
much force to the support already expressed.
Mr Lee will, however, be provided by the
Australian Government with a statement setting out Australian
support of his objectives.
CANBERRA, 11th January, 1968. 



FOR PRESS ~ E'o'b 2 4 JAN 1968 ~ PM. No. 716
t"-ALKS WITH MR THOMSON ON BRITIH
WITHDRAWAL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
The Right Honourable George Thomson, British
Secret ary of State for , Ommonwealth Affairs, today told the Australian
Government of British proposals for speeding up the withdrawal of
British forces from Singapore and Malaysia.
The precise proposals will not be disclosed partly
because the British Cabinet has not yet, as we are told, made final
decisions, and partly because we hope that these proposals may be
modified in the light of the views expressed by Australia, New Zealand,
Malaysia and Singapore. However, It can be said that the proposals amount to
drastic alterations of previously understood arrangements as to the
continuing availability of British forces In the region
Australian Ministers expressed their keen concern at
the proposals and made it clear without In any way becoming involved
In rancourcr reedination that they were not resigned to the proposals
and oould not accept them without protest.
They stressed that questions of security are global
questions and that It was vital not to damage the security system of the
South-East Asian region. They expressed the view that a continued
presence of British forces In Malaysia and Singapore could provide a
greater contribution to peace and security than the deployment of those
forces in the European region, and that if economic considerations led
the British Government to their present proposals, it might be preferable
to make savings In some other area than thux of Malaysia and Singapore.
They also stressed that Australia and New Zealand did not have the
capacity to take over the role which British forces had been playing in
that area. Mr Thomson will bring Australia's views before the
British Cabinet before a final decision is made.
CANBERRA, 12 January, 1968 



FOR PRESS: 25JAN96 AAft P. M. No. 8/ 1968
PMG MOTOR DRIVERS' DISPUTE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
I gave directions that I should be kept fully Informed
on the postal dispute during the week-end, and was kept ac, 1ised of
developments by the Postmaster-General and by officials.
I discussed the matter with the Chairman of the
Public Service Board, Sir Frederick VWheeler, at my home this
afternoon. At midday today I had received a telegram from the
General Secretary of the Amalgamated Postal Workers' Union ( Mr Slater).
The telegram said " FEDERAL EXECUTIVE APWU OF AUSTRALIA
STRONGLY URGE YOU REQUEST SIR FREDERICK WHEELER,
CHAIRMAN COMMON4WEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD, TO
CONFER WITH APWU REPRESENTATIVES AS SOON AS
POSSIBLE. REPRESENTATIVES IN CANBERRA TOMORROW.
WILL RECEIVE ANY MESSAGE FORWARDED HOTEL KURRAJONG" 1
I replied this afternoon as follows
" I UNDERSTAND THAT AFTER YOU GAVE
ASSURANCES TO THE PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD THAT THERE
WOULD BE NO STOPPAGES THE BOARD HAD AGREED TO CONFER
WITH APWU ON MOTOR DRIVERS PAY CLAIM[ S NEXT FRIDAY.
HOWEVER, BECAUSE OF YOUR TELEGRAM I HAVE ASKED SIR
FREDERICK WHEELER TO BE PREPARED TO CONFER WITH THE
UNION AS SOON AS THE MOTOR DRIVERS HAVE RESUMED
NORMAL WORK AS DIRECTED BY THE ACTU. MATTER IS
THEREFORE IN YOUR HANDS AND CONFERENCE COULD BE
HELD TOMORROW AFTER RESUMPTION OF NORMAL WORK."
CANBERRA, 14 January, 1968. 



FOR PRESS: 11 2 4 JAN 1968
L / 8 R AV PM. No. 9/ 1968
POSTAL DISPUTE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
This evening, I sent the following telegram to the General
Secretary of the Amalgamated Postal Workers' Union ( Mr Slater)
" MY TELEGRAM OF JANUARY 14 HAS ALREADY
TOLD YOU THAT A CONFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC
SERVICE BOARD WILL BE ARRANGED AS SOON AS YOUR
UNION WISHES AFTER THE DRIVERS HAVE RETURNED TO
NORMAL, REPEAT NORMAL, WORK.
" THE BOARD WILL GIVE FULL CONSIDERATION TC
ALL THE MATERIAL WHICH YOUR UNION PUTS FORWARD
ON WAGE CLAIMS STOP I CANNOT GIVE AN ASSURANCE
THAT A DECISION BY THE BOARD WILL BE GIVEN WITHIN
24 HOURS OF THE CONCLUSION OF THE CONFERENCE BUT
THERE WILL BE NO DELIBERATE OR UNDUE DELAY IN
GIVING A DECISION," 1
This was in reply to a telegram which I received from
Mr Slater this afternoon, which read
" YOUR TELEGRAM OF 14TH JANUARY CONSIDERED
BY FEDERAL EXECUTIVE APWU STOP MY EXECUTIVE SEEKS
AN ASSURANCE FROM YOU THAT IF A RETURN TO WORK
TAKES PLACE THAT A CONFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC
SERVICE BOA-' RD WILL BE HELD FORTHWITH AND THAT AN
ASSURANCE BE GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT AND THE PUBLIC
SERVICE BOARD THAT A DECISION BE GIVEN ON THE DRIVERS
WAGE CLAIM WITHIN 24 HOURS OF THE CONFERENCE
TAKING PLACE." i
CANBERRA, January, 1968.
Background Note:
The Prime Minister was kept fully informed today of all
developments in this dispute. He had telephone discussions with the
Postmaster -General, Mr Hulme, in Brisbane, and had talks at Parliament
House with the Chairman of the Public Service Board, Sir Frederick
Wheeler. 



PRESS, RADIO AND TELEVISION CONFERENCE
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, SENATOR
JOHN GORTON, AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA 17TH JANUARY, 1968
PRIME MINISTER Well, gentlemen, this is a press conference for the
purpose of enabling you to ask me questions In the hope that I will be
able to provide some sort of an answer to them. It Is not an occaabn
for me to make a statement but rather an occasion for you to raise
matters which are In your minds.
Q. V/ hat action will you take If you get a bad answer today?
PM: Well, we don't know of course what the answer of the
Union Is. They haven't yet decided as far as I know. But we will be
forced to seek to keep the . kustrallan mails moving. We hope that
commonsense will prevail and that the Union will go back to work.
That Is our objective. We don't quite know well I don't quite knowwhy
this inconvenience shouli be Inflicted on the Australian people
with such a history of events. Let me remind you of that history.
On the 11th, I think It was, a driver was dismissed. On the 12th,
agreement was reached for the reinstatement of that driver.
Subsequently there was a stoppage and I received a telegram from
the Union saying would I accelerate a meeting with the Public Service
Board from the date on which it was previously agreed to be held, and
I said yes, I would, so there is no dispute about the driver being
reinstated, there is no dispute about an accelerated meeting, provided
the men to back to normal work. There has been no attempt to
invoke any punitive clauses but the strike may go on. I don't believe
that any Australian Government could sit back and not attempt to move
the mail whatever the circumstances might be. Now, you would not
expect me, indeed I think It would be a matter for the Postmaster-
General and the Minister for Labour and National Service to explain
the steps that they would hope to take should such steps be necessary
as I hope they won't be.
Q. Jack Commins, ABC: Can you give us your initial
reaction to Prime Minister Wilson's announced cuts of yesterday?
Will there be any speeding up of the review by the Defence Comm ittee
of Cabinet?
PM: Well, I think we have already given a reaction to the
announced cuts because they are more or less in line with what was
suggested to us would happen by Mr Thomson when he was out here,
and we made a press statement after that, you will remember,
expressing great regrets that these ctitm-should take place, expressifig
our belief that in this part of the world Singapore, Malaysia In
that area, relatively small forces could contribute far beyond their
numbers to the maintenance of a security in the area which would
enable a proper economic development In the area. And we expressed
some concern that the Naval and Air supports, quickly and speedily
available in the area if necessary, appeared to be In doubt. Our
reaction to that is the same as It was then. We feel that If economic
considerations are those which has made the British Government make
this decision, then savings could better be made In some other part
of the world If we are concerned with keeping security. Other than
that I can't go any further than I have before, except to say, as
perhaps is known to you, that the British Government has extended / 2 
( do&amp; t period of their -withdcrawalof ground-forces by nine months after
discussions with Australia and the other countries concernied, and
It will now be 1 think It is four years, December 31st, 1971, before
the proposed plans are completed. We are pleased that this extension
has taken place.
Q. Now that you know the British plans, Prime M! rIister, and
In view of the guns or butter economic evolutionary pro.,. Qss that we
are going on with now, could you undertake to make a statement or
bring out a Defence White Paper which would outline clearly the
responsibilities that we are going to have to undertake over the next
two years?
PM: I'll discuss that with the Minister for Defence and the Defence
and Foreign Affairs Committee. But I think It must be clear that we
ourselves cannot step in and fill the place that Britain has been filling
in that part of the world. We would want to lend assistance as we
are now, provided the countries there continued to want us to lend
that assistance and said so, but there Is a limit I think to the amount
that a country such as ours can afford to expend on defence because
there are requirements of development, requirements of immigration,
requirements of looking after our own population which at Bome stage
must be considered as being something from which, in effect, has
some effect on Australia's defence potential rather than the mere
guns and ammunition which also have a direct effect. The amount that
we are expending on defence Is quite large. You mentioned guns and
butter. I don't know whether it's guns and butter exactly, but guns
and development and human relations in our own country must be
brought into a balance. I'll consider a statement In more detail,
although I think that this might have to wait perhaps untI there are
further discussions, until we are a bit clearer as to precisely what is
meant by one or two matters mentioned In Mr Wilson's speech, and
until we are a little clearer as to what the five powers concerned
might In concert do.
Q. Max Hawkins, Brisbane Telegraph: Do you see this
withdrawal as the end of the British Commonwealth Brigade there, or
do you see some other battalions or forces that the British are taking
out coming In to fill the gap,? Have we been asked to
PM: As I understand it, the British ground forces are, at the
end of the period to which I have been referring, to be withdrawn
from the area. If that Is so, and they now being a component part
of the Commonwealth Brigade, I don't see how the Commonwealth
Brigade would continue after that date.
Q. Armfield, Melbourne Age: Will Britain's decision to
scrap its Fill have any effect on the cost of the Australian order?
PM: This Is something I propose to find out quite rapidly but
can't tell you now.
Q. Will you be making a statement to Parliament very soon and
how soon will Parliament meet?
PM-. Padfament will meet in March, but whether in the second or
third week in March might depend a little on events but let's say
the second or third week In March. And I would think that, yes, there
ought to be a statement made to Parliament on a matter of this
Importance as soon as may be after It meets. a. / 3 
3-
Q. Mr Prime Minister, have you any details yet on the programme
of the meeting of the five powers affected by British withdrawal from
South-East Asia?
PM: No. No details. Indeed, I don't believe there are any details,
Idon't believe there are any firm proposals as to when such a meqtIng
should take place. You will remember that Tunku Abdul Rahman
suggested some time ago that there should be such a meeting. The
then Prime Minister Indicated that Australia was interested in attending
such a meeting If and when It was held, but the other powers had to
express their views on it too. I noticed that Mr Wilson in his statpment
s aid, If I recall it correctly, he would be Interested In a five-power
conference but such five-power conference must start from the premise
of the decisions taken by the British Government. We, for our part,
would attend such a five-power contdrence but we are not at the moment
Intending to Initiate or call for It.
Q. Sir, on the Post Office again. Do you have any thoughts as to
a long-term solution of the problems in the Post Office because every
time there is a dispute it holds up communications of the country, as
we have seen In the past year?
PM: Well, I think It's a pretty hard sort of a question, If I may say
so, to ask a Prime Minister at this stage. The running of the Post
Office Is the responsibility of the Postmaster -General and the Public
Service Board also comes Into the picture. There has been, as you so
rightly say, a number of disruptions In the Post Office. I would hope that
we could, through the responsible Ministers, and I would include the
Minister for Labour and National Service in that, although they are
really a client Ministry for the Postmaster -General, to see whether
there was some underlying malaise which could be removed. But that
is a matter of looking into seeing whether there Is some underlying
malaise, to see what action could be taken If It Is there. I don't think
it Is directly concerned with the Immediate problem which faces us
today. But it is something clearly that needs to be looked at.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, I am sure that the war In Viet Nam must
be a priority for your consideration, and In view of this, I wondered
whether you would care to comment on the statement by Senator Mike
Mansfield, the Leader of the Majority In the Senate of America In
which he this week called for an end of the bombing In North Viet Nam
and an effort to persuade Hanoi to enter Into peace trks. VWhat would
your opinion be about this?
PM: Well, my opinion on the bombing of North Viet Nam Is this.
In the first place, tile United States could, If It wanted to, because it
has the power to do It If it wanted to, virtually destroy North Viet Nam.
It has not used that power and I would strongly be opposed to it ever
seeking to use such power In that way. What it has been doing Is using
bombing In an attempt to interdict, to interfere with, to delay the flow
of men and materials from the North to the South. If there were a
clear indication that shoukd that type of bombing cease, then the North
Vietnamese would, for their part, stop serxi-ig men and supplies to the
South and start talks so that during the period of time when such
talks were taking place there was neither bombing of the North nor
sending of the troops or mateilals to the South by the North, then I
would consider that a reasonable proposition. 
-4-
Q. John Jost of the Age: Has there been a decision on the
Victorian Turnover Tax, specially with regard to Commonwealth
Public Service salary?
PM: WNell, that Is a matter under discussion between myself and
the Victorian Premier at the moment.
Q. Did you raise this with him yesterday, Sir, when you spoke
to him?
PM: I made a courtesy call yesterday.
Q. Chalmers, Australian Press Services: Mr Prime Minister,
has Cabinet, or will Cabinet consider an official enquiry Into the
disappearance of Mr Holt?
DM: The answer to that is no. There has been an enquiry by the
Victorian Police Irto all the events of that tragic day. The report has
been presented. In view of some of the matter printed1 in It which
has perhaps led to your question, I propose to make the report the
Victorian Police have compiled available. It will require a day or two
to get it copied in sufficient numbers for everybody to have It, but I
think there Is no need to go any further than that.
Q. Stephens, Adelaide Advertiser: For the past eighteen nmonths,
there have been discussions going on at the Service level about the
future British defence role In Australia, In the Australian ar--a. In
view of the latest decisions, do you feel those talks are worthwhile
continuing?
PM: Well, yes, I think they are worthwhile continuing. The
British Government and the Minister who was out here have expressed
the view that defence arrangements are useful even though there are
no Immediate forces In the particular area that Is being discussed to
enable those arrangements to be put straight away Into practice, and
there may be something In this. Anyway, let me put It this way.
They are not talks which I would seek to break off ourselves.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, In view of your quite obvious sympathy
for Mr Lee of Singapore and his plight, Is Australia prepared to
consider giving him interim assistance during the period such as, for
example, paying for the Gurkha brigade battalions or something of
that nature or, at this stage, is our assistance merely restricted to
the planning side of it?
PM: No, at this stage, we are giving assistance to Mr Lee In
Singapore. The details of that assistance I don't carry in my mind, but
we are giving both economic assistance and military assistance in
various ways in that field. It Is not Intended, nor has it been suggested
that that should be accelerated or increased at this moment.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, there has been a proposal for the
estal ishment of a naval facility in Western Australia. Now I add
another one to this, there has also been the question of the future of
Woomera at stake. Is the decision made by the British Government
likely to affect both Woomera and the Western Australian naval
facility?
PM: I can't answer that question. I don't know enough at the moment
to answer It. I'm sorry. 
Q. John Moses, Channel 7: In the absence of Britain, how do
you see broadly our defence and economic responsibilities to our
Asian neighbours, Including Indonesia?
PM: Our economic responsibilities, particularly to our closest
Asian neighbours, to Singapore, to Malaysia, to Indonesia, to the
Philippines but I think we are talking of the area Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore. this Is the area In which I would like to see
our major effort made in this economic assistance field. But there
are two provisos to that. One is that the countries themselves wish
for some physical forces present as an Insurance policy against the
Insurgencies, an Insurance policy against brushfire wars, not of
course with any concept of preventing a full-scale Invasion from some
other place but just to keep the peace in that particular area, to keep
the peace against small outbreaks in that particular area. So that
also is a field to which we have contributed, and that proviso cuts down,
to some extent, wh,-t we can do in the economic field. The second
proviso Is the one I started with, that Australia has to consider its
own development, Its own requirements In many fields, in health, In
education in social services, apart from development Itself;
It has to keep its immigration going, it has to develop its industrial
muscles and Its potential for the future. And these things cannot be
sacrificed to greater use either of overseas reserves which are heavily
called on by defence commitments or defence commitments In other
ways.
Q. In Commonwealth/ State financial relationships, you have been
described as something of a centralist. Could you state your general
attitude on this rather touchy subject?
PM: Yes, I think so. I don't think it is an accurate assessment of
my psotion to call me a centralist. It Is more a matter of philosophical
approach. I would have thought a centrd 1st was somebody who wanted
to take a field and to centralise the administration of that field In
Canberra through one public service, as it were, and that In the fields
In which the States are so heavily engaged would, in my view be
inefficient and wrong; particularly in such fields as education, I am
sure It would be wrong. On the other hand, we have a theory that the
proper thing to be done In Australia is to hand out sums of money to
various State Governments and leave it entirely to those State
Governments to divide those sums of money between the various
competing fields Inside that State between education and health, and
building of roads and all the other things the States have to do. Now,
in general, I would of course agree with ths, but In particular one could
find the situation developing where from the national interest, scmethinig
was being neglected in one of the six States and that State was falling
behind the other States in that field and this could be detrimental to
Australia as a whole. I think that It Is this kind of approach of mine,
I think It Is a kind of approach of, well, If water Is to be conserved
In Australia, it ought to be conserved where Its conservation will do
most-good for the nation as a whole, even if It means that It is in some
particular State where it would do the most good for the nation as a
whole, and therefore the money Is not divided strictly on a population
basis because we need it to be down there. That's where the water
that's where we get the most effectiveness from It, and therefore we
just don't divide it on a formula around the States. These are
qualifications which I put to the theory of complete handing over of the , o / 6 
-6
PM
( Contd.) money and leaving it completely to the States to develop. This, I
think, Is the basis of a charge of being a centralist, but as I say, I
don't think It is a properly-based charge because I would not seek
to interfere In administration nor, unless It could be shown to be
something that were detrimental to the national interest, to try and
keep a balance In the fields between the States.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, when do you meet the State Premiers
to discuss these matters?
PM: I know what you when do we have a general
conference. But I think it worth saying that I have alzmdy had a
courtesy call on Sir Henry Bolte. I will be meeting Mr Pizzey on
Thursday. I will be having a chat with Mr Asldn during the weekend.
These are just talks to Individual Premiers. I don't know that I
could give you a timetable for a Premiers' meeting now because there
are a number of unknown factors, a number of unusual circumstances
just at the moment which make things awkward, but we would have
one as soon as we reasonably could....
Q. Is it imminent, before the next Parliamentary Session?
PM: I don't think it is before the next Parliamentary Session.
I wouldn't rule out the possibility that it might be.
Q. Would you consider redistribution during the current
Parliament?
PM: A redistribution of seats? Yes.
Q. Have you decided upon the Commissioners, Sir?
PM: I haven't had a great deal of experience with these press
conferences and I might be putting my foot In it. I think what has
to be done is that the Commissioners are provided by the various
State Governments... ( 1-terruption) let me finish The Commissioners
need to be provided by the various State Governments and I am not
sure whether I am at liberty to answer that direct question, but let us
put it this way that the State Governments know whom It Is that we
would wish to be provided as Commissiorers.
Q. I was thinking of the time factor. Mr Holt said he thought
they would be announced by the end of the year that has just ended,
and we are running out of time on the....
PM: I don't think it will be long.
Q. I see. Do you expect any trouble from the Country Party
this time?
PM: Why should I?
Q. Nancy Buttfleld, Macquaie Network, Adelaide:
Prime Minister, will you be looking into a new basis for grants
for the States?
PM: Do you mean a new formula? ** 9a / 7 
-7
Q. A new way of allocating the grants.
PM: Oh, I hadn't thought of it but one never knows what might come
up at these conferences.
Q. Stewart Harris, London Times: I was wondering, Sir, if
there was trouble in the Malaysian/ Indonesian area, say over the next
couple of years, would you feel free to withdraw any Australian battalion
from Viet Nam, temporarily if necessary, and do you have such an
understanding with the South Vietnamese and American Governments?
PM: I know of no such understanding with the South Vietnamese or
American Government. You asked me this question out of the blue.
I know of no understanding, but it would seem to me that it would be
a very odd military situation to be in, to have a battalion integrated
In a force, engaged in opeations, liable to be withdrawn and disrupt
all the people with . vhom it was serving. I should think It quite unlikely.
Q. Sir, In the light of your emphasis here today on development,
are you yourself wedded to the concept that has prevailed in the
Government that defence spending should be limited to 5 per cent of
gross national product cr are you liable to take a more flexible view
In the light of the quick march of events in South-Ems t Asia?
PM: I wouldn't want to pin mysBlf to a particular percentage of GNP,
whether it be five or four or three or any particular percentage of GNP,
but I would hope, indeed It will be necessary to see that our expenditure
on defence, a good deal of which is already committed for the next
two years, does not cause us such commitments then or after then that
it interferes not with butter but with the development of Australia.
Q. just to take you back to the Premiers and the States/ Commonwealth
financial relations for a moment, are you prepared to go ahead
with the usual Premiers' Conference that is usually held in February and
also will you go ahead with this proposal of Mr Holt's to have a meeting
of Liberal Premiers
PM: Well, the meeting of Liberal Fr emiers is what I call a family
meeting. It is not a meeting which the Government as such is concerned
in having. It is not a meeting Indeed in which Liberal Premiers alone
attend. It would be a meeting which the Liberal leaders of the various
States, whether they were Premiers or whether they were Treasurers or
Leaders of the Opposition would meet with members of the LiAbaral
Party In the Commonwealth sphere for a family discussion, and that is
all it would be. It is not something that can be equated with a Premiers'
meeting or something of that kind, and I think that the tim~ etable'that
was in mind has been disrupted and it is very difficult to fix a date but
I would in princre expect that that should happen.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, the relations with the Country Party have
just been mentioned. I would like to ask you what action you have taken
or propose to take to heal the breach between Mr McEwen and Mr
McMahon?
PM: Well, we are starting a new Government. I. was never closely
associated with events in the last Government to which you refer, but
as far as I am concerned, at the sta rt of this new Government, the
book should be ruled off there, and a new start made. e 9 / 8 
-8
Q. Is that feasible, Sir, In the light of discussions that ; have
gone on between the two Ministers?
PM: I hope and trust so&amp;
Q. Will you yourself, Sir, be Influenced in your choice of a
Cabinet by any considerations of the strained feelings that have
existed between the Country Party and the Liberal Party, or will
you be guided by uour choice of whom you consider the best person
for a portfolio?
PM: You said would I be Influenced in my -choice of a Cabinet
Is that what you mean, or do you want to go further than that?
Q. The Ministry in the broad.
PM: I would not expect, indeed I know that Mr McEwen would
not expect that any people chosen by Liberals would be subject to
question or to veto by himself any more than he would expect any
Country Party Minister to be subject to question by myself. I think
he has made his situation quite clear, that he regards it as his
prerogative, and has regarded It as his prerogative to say who It is
that he will or will. not E erve under but that he regards that as the
limit to which he should go.
Q. Prime Minister, do you have any plans at this stage for a
tour of South-East Asia or perhaps even further afield to meet with
other world leaders?
PM: I want to go to South-East Asia as soon as it is possible to
do so, but I do have things which you have been mentioning to me in
the course of this press conference possible meetings with Liberal
leaders, possible meet ingswith State Premiers, by-elections one
by-election meeting of the Parliament, getting prepared for that,
and I don't see much chance cf this happening until after the first
Session of the Parliament this year.
Q. Talking about by -elections, Sir, can you give us the date
of the opening of the campaign, and your appearance in Higgins?
PM: The 13th February that is, if I am pre-selected!
Q. How long do you intend to spend in Higgins, Sir?
PM: During my campaign?
Q. Yes.
PM: I would expect to spend some days there, not necessarily
on end, but a number of scattered days during t he course of the
campaign in the electorate. Partly I would be Influenced on this by
the requests of the organisation in the area and the Liberal Party
in Victoria.
Q. Prime Minister, In the formation of your new Ministry, do you
plan to keep the same number of portfolios? Do you plan to keep the
same number of Ministers?
PM: Probably. 0 0 0 / 9 
-9-
Q. On the assumption, Sir, that you win Higgins, how soon
after the by-election is declared, will you be remaking your Ministry?
PM: I would hope to announce a new Ministry and possibly some
different administrative arrangement orders as between the
Departments within two days, I think.
Q. H-ow strong is the possibility of an early election, Sir?
PM: I haven't considered the possibility of an early election
myself.
Q. In selecting your new Ministry, Sir, would you be influenced
strongly by the number of Ministers from particular States or would
you select the men for their own sake?
PM: I would seek to select the men whom I bdl leved had the
ability to carry out the work involved. I don ' t think you can entirely
disregard some State representation. I don't think you could, for
example it's a s illy example that you could leave the State of New
South Wales without one Minister, or say Queensland or any other
State or most States, but I would not be seeking to get a balance of
members of the Ministry as between the States, but you would have to
have some regard, as I have sa id, to some State representation.
Q. And some regard to the Senate? Will that be fixed and
absolute?
PM: Well, in this life nothing is ever fixed and absolute, you
should know that!
Q. Sir, may you actually have a reduction of Ministers, is that
what you....
PM: No, It wasn't really meant that way. I haven't been thinking
so much in terms of numbers on this, and you asked me so I didn't
want to say definitely" e" in case it turned out there was some
slight difference, so I Bald " probably".
Q. Are you likely to be making administrative reshuffles within
the Ministry, combining some portfolios and creating new ones?
PM: Well, there will be some changes In administrative
arrangements orders which are the orders which provide functions
for particular portfolios, or at any rate there are some which are
under consideration at the moment. But I think that is about enough
on that one!
Q. Sir, because of the decisions of Britain and the United States
over the past few months which have a direct effect on us, have.-you
given any consideration to a supplementary Budget?
PM: Not yet. At this stage I have . had no Indication of a
supplementary Budget.
Q. Sir, you have spoken of the need to visit South-East Asia,
have you given any thought yet to a tour of Australia as Prime Minister?
0 0/ 10 
10
PM: Well in this week I will have been in Victoria, New South
Wales and Queensland. That is a tour of half Australia in the first
week, or an appearance in half of the States of Australia in the first
week. Of course It is not so long since a Senate election in which the
other three States were also visited. I am not sure whether you
mean will I wish to be travelling around to look at all the development
projects tl-roughout Australia. Perhaps that was in your mind?
Q. This would include part of it. ' Yes Sir.
PM: Well, no, I don't think so. Really, I honestly think I have
been travelling around Australia over the last four or five or six or
seven years pretty solidly and pretty continuously. i would hope to go
and see particular development projects but this is not a tour in the
sense of a South-E.-ast Asian country tour.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, after Britain's decision to devalue,
the Cabinet set, up a framework of m easares to deal with the
repercussions on Austra lia. Could you tell us what progress has
been made with those moves and how soon we may expect decisions
to be made?
PM: Well, I think we are waiting for assessments from the
Department of Trade and Industry in relation to any secondary
industries which may have suffered losses as a result of the Government's
decision, and from the Department of Primary Industry in
relation to any industries there which may have suffered losses.
And when I say " suffered losses'tI mean suffered losses, not
" failed to get gains".
Q. Vhen will that Committee be reporting There is an
inter -Departmental Commnittee considering this question?
PM: I will have to ask the Ministers directly concerned.
MR EGGLETON: Perhaps one more question, gentlemen.
Q. Prior to DIr Holt's death, Sir, there was a lot of talk
about a Viet Nam summit meeting. Has this now been negated because
of the series of talk. s that were held in Canberra during the period
of the Memorial Service or do you anticipate there will be a Viet
Nam summit?
PM: I.-thlnk there probably will be meetings of people leading
the nations concerned, but I know of no time set down for it and no
arrangements at this stage which have been made for it.
Thank you, gentlemen. 



~ 11
2 SJAN 1968-
FOR PRESS: AR~ P. M. No. 10/ 1968
POSTAL DISPUTE: UNION'S CONDITIONS UNACCEPTABLE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
At approximately 9 p. m. tonight the Government
received a telegram from the Executive of the A. IP. W. U. stating that
the Executive would instruct its members to resume normal work
but only if the Government would agree to four conditions.
The first condition is that the mail driver previously
dismissed should be reinstated and this has been agreed by the
Government days ago.
The second condition is that immediately after the
resumption of normal work the Public Service Board would hold
a conference with the Union on their pay claims and the Union
has already been told that this would happen.
The third and fourth conditions were that the Public
Service Board would give a decision before the conference
concluded and that if their decision was unacceptable to the
Union the Government should direct that the matter be referred
to the Conciliation and Arbitration Comm~ issioner.
No Government could accept dictation that the Public
Service Board be directed to give a decision before the conclusion
of a conference on pay claims although we have given an undertaking
that there will be no deliberate or undue delay in reaching a
decision. Nor could any Government accept the proposition that
existing legislation be ignored and that the dispute should
bypass the properly constituted authority namely the Public
Serv-ice Arbitrator and go direct to the Conciliation and
Arbitration Comirission.
If the Union is dissatisfied with the Board's decision
the matter should go, in accordance with existing legislation,
to the Public Service Arbitrator after which the full process of
arbitration becomes available.
The Government hopes that the Union will adopt this
course, which has always been and remains open to it.
But in the meantime the mails must begin to move and
the Postmaster-General and th6 Minister for Labour and National
Service, who are handling this dispute, will take whatever steps
are necessary to this end.
CANBERRA 18th January, 1968. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 11/ 1968
CONTEMPORARY SCULPTURE FOR Nl,; W-ZEALAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
An exhibition of contemporary Australian sculpture
is being sent to New Zealand to represent Australia at the
Christchurch Pan-Pacific Festival commencing next March, and
then to be shown in public art galleries in Auckland, Wellington
and Dunedin. The Commonwealth Art Advisory Board has arranged for
the sculptures to be assembled in the Albert Hall, Canberra,
and the final selection is being made by the Commonwealth Art
Advisory Board today ( 18th). The exhibition will then be open
to the public from tomorrow until 24th January.
The exhibition is the first comprehensive Australian
sculpture to be sent overseas and also the first which has had
an initial showing in Canberra, It will not be seen elsewhere
in Australia.
CANBERRA 18th January, 1968. 



OPENING OF YOUNG LIBERAL YEAR 1968
BRI SBANE
18th January, 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
I don't think that it is possible for me really to
communicate to you the great warmth of feeling that rises
within me by having you here and by having such an undeserved
reception from you. But I can say this, that though I think
that as of now this reception is undeserved, I will promise
you that as far as it lies within my power, I will try in the
years ahead to make it deserved.
One of the things that has been worrying me since
the party elected me to be Prime Minister and the reception
that I feel that this has had throughout the country is the
feeling pressing in on me a little that there are great
expectations of dramatic changes, of sudden variations in
direction, of immensely exciting things happening all at once.
They can't happen that way in the field in which we are engaged.
You can't all of a sudden, in the middle of a financial year,
in the middle of a particular course, have pyrotechnic displays
which change everything in one moment. But that doesn't mean
that we cannot start on new courses, that we cannot think in
new directions, that we cannot, with increasing momentum,
although that momentum may take eighteen months or two years,
but with increasing momentum, set the goals before you and
the people of Australia, indicate what is required to reach
those goals, call on you for the effort needed to achieve those
goals and in that, way, perhaps, meet these new challenges that
you expect us all together to meet. So if there is no drama
immediately, bear that in mind. If there is no sudden
pyrotechnic, bear that in mind. This does not mean that there
will not be for you and us together, new paths to follow which
you may help to indicate to us.
You, Sir, spoke of an Australian national anthem
" God Save The Queen" and " Australia". It reminds me of
somebody who, I think, went to Canberra with their small child
and saw the House of Representatives beginning as you remember
the House of Representatives always begins with a prayer.
The small child said, " Are they praying for the Members of the
House of Representatives" and the mother said, " No, they are
looking at the House of Representatives and praying for
Australia". Actually, that was first told against the American
Senate. But you did speak of a National Anthem. While, of
course, " God Save The Queen" is the over-riding anthem for
Australia, and I regard this as of some significance in a
growing country, I must tell you I am a " Waltzing Matilda" man
myself. I know that song may have originated during the
Marlborough wars somebody once told me that was true, I don't
know. I don't think it matters. i/ hat I think matters is that
it was first sung when this country was first discovered and
first developed. And not beyond the bounds of this country was
it known for some while, but then it began to be known, and
those who went from this country in the 1914-1918 War spread
" Waltzing 1vatilda" and marched to " Waltzing Matilda" and it
became known a little in Europe and other countries of the
world. 
2.
In between times whenever two or three Australians
might be gathered together in some foreign country, sooner or
later, somebody usually with a frightful voice would begin
to sing " Waltzing Matilda" and it would become even more known.
I remember myself during the Second World Wat we were in England
and stationed in London and wearing a different uniform from
the RAF, a dark blue RAAF, and walking into nightclubs, because
in those days, they were still interested in nightclubs. and * 1
that was relatively early, and the band when we walked in would
begin to play " Waltzing Matilda". There was a warm feeling
spreading through one at that just as there was when the slouch
hat was hauled to the peak of the flag pole above Bardia to
the strains of " Waltzing Matilda". I think this song is so
integrated into Australia that whatever a government might do,
whatever an ABC might do and, of course, ABC's are far more
important than governments in relation to this " Waltzing
Matilda" will never be able to be taken away from what is the
ethos of the Australian people. Have your anthem, Sir, but
please do not ever allow this song to fall into disuse.
I remember once I went into Taiwan, and the leader
of our delegation was a very distinguished gentleman called
Sir John Latham who was the Chief Justice of Australia, and
he confided to me on the way that the one song he hated above
all others was " WValtzing Matilda", and I said, " Why?" And he
said, " Viell, I am a lawyer, and it is absolutely ridiculous
that a swagman would jump into a billabong and drown himself
merely to escape a charge of stealing a jumbuck, which would,
at the utmost, mean about five days in gaol." 1 So I had great
pleasure when we arrived in Taiwan in persuading all the
Chinese authorities that the one song that the leader of our
delegation liked better than any other was " Waltzing Matilda",
and it would have been thoroughly successful except that they
had played it in Chinese music and he never knew what was being
played, and neither did I! But it is, I think, a part of the
blood of this country of Australia.
mean, what Haavo inweg tonu. i jathoen m th avjñ~ eng auasses, o ng9 6awlayt rtehea lliyn podroet ant thing
atth e afnuyt u'rgei, ve na mnod mewnhta t inc ahni wset ordyr awi sf rwohma-tt haer e pawset . g-otoi nHge ltpo ubsu iltdo for
build the future. I think that here in this country we
have a great deal to draw from the past and a unique opportunity
for the future. Just use your imaginations for a moment
forget that you are living in a capital city in the Australia
of today, in which you were born, in which many of your parents
were born, which is your country, and think what it must have
been like at the beginning when to these shores came people
from England, from Scotland, from Ireland, from the United
Kingdom. Think of them living in some loneliness, fairly
isolated from the countries which gave them birth, pushing out,
further out into the country with the women isolated from
contact with other women to gossip ( which women always like
to do) living alone, clearing the land, raising a family in
strange surroundings, in unusual circumstances, in loneliness,
calling for effort, calling for fighting against drought and
flood and fire and famine, and of the steadfastness which kept
those people there and which, over the years as this country
developed, built it first in the hinterland, and then as a
result of the riches grown there because of the years of effort
put in there, built the cities which in turn provided the
technological and other advances required. Think for a moment,
just for a moment of that history, where you depended on bullock
trains for transport, where you depended on horseback or buggy
for travel. That is not history for which any country need have
anything but pride. It has enabled us to reach the stage we
have reached today. From it we can draw some inspiration for
what it is we wish to reach in the future. But what is it that
we wish to reach in the future? 
3.
Very largely, this is in your hands. It is in the
hands of your leaders, but your leaders will be swayed by the
feelings that you have as to what it is you wish this country
to stand for, as to the paths you wish it to follow.
I am sure and I now talk politically in the best
sense that what you would want to see in this country for the
future is a continuance, and perhaps a refinement of that
political freedom that we have today, that you would be prepared,
as at some time you might have to be prepared, to fight against
some doctrine of absolute and autocratic rule from the top, that
you would be prepared to see that it is impossible for a society
to live in anarchy, and that you would seek to find between that
autocratic rule from the top and that anarchy from the bottom,
some arrangement by which the general will could prevail, giving
freedom to all but not allowing that freedom to extend where it
became licence and threatened the freedom of others. This, I
am sure, is the political base on which you would want to build
our future country. But having given that political base, then
what do you want to see?
Of course, and this is simple, you would wish to see
the material capacities of this country, the material rewards
to those who are living in it, growing, This is obvious, this
is simple, this is easy, this is not, ultimately, important.
But you would wish to see that happen, I am sure, and you would
seek to see that it did happen. But that alone, that alone
couldn't make this a great country, couldn't allow us to take
the chance, the unique chance that we have here to build and
show that a democracy can provide in the world a country better
than any other system can provide. I say " unique" because they
must follow their own talents to the top of their bent, whether
they lie in the field of painting, whether they lie in the field
of music, whether they lie in the field of business administration.
wherever it may be, there is inside each human being, in this
and all other countries, a desire to express themselves, and the
way they can express themselves is by taking the talents that
are inside them and using them and they can only do this if the
opportunity is provided, if the education is provided, if the
material well-being is provided.
There is, I think, some quite meretricious cynicism
in this country today, at least some meretricious cynicism
reported in the papers of this country today about the youth
of Australia, that they have thrown away the values of the past,
that they question the values of their parents. Of course, they
should question the values of their parents and I think they do.
I don't think they throw them away. I don't believe, and I
think you are some living examples to justify my lack of belief,
that there is in the youth of Australia a cynicism. I believe
there is in the youth of Australia a desire to build. I believe
there is in the youth of Australia a desire to give, I believe
that the youth of Australia would respond to other words of
President Kennedy's, " You ask what yo ' ur country can do for you.
Ask rather what you can do for your country". And it is to a
man like me, standing in a place like this tonight, of such
enormous importance that there should be in this room from all
over Queensland so many young people who are taking an interest
in how their cauntry shoula be governed, in the paths their
country should follow, who are prepared to give themselves to
see these paths are followed, their country outside of themselves
is made great. It is of~ such importance to a man like me standing
here, it is of such importance to our country, it is such a
refutation of this cheap charge of cynicism so often levelled
against the youth of Australia. -4 
It will not be long, in the way in which the lives
of nations are mentioned, it will be little less than the
blinking of an eye before some of you here in this room are
called to do the same kind of work that my colleagues and
myself do now. You are preparing yourselves for it, and I
only hope, and I believe that this will be true, that when
that time comes you will be buttressed, you will be supported,
you will be given the spiritual courage which we are given
now by having you here with us.
I haven't much more to say to you. I don't propose
to talk on details of politics or details of policies some
other time. This is the first speech that I have made since
becoming Prime Minister, and I wanted to make it to young
people. I wanted to make it not on what the rate of taxation
should be, or what the rate of excise should be or what there
should be given to this or to that, but rather on the motivating
forces, on the real wellsprings of a nation which alone will
keep a party great, which alone will keep a country great, and
I believe that I see here before me living examples that that
spring is in this party and is in Australia.
I will finish as I began, that I will do my utmost
to be worthy of the support of people such as you, and together
we may see, we may attain more than Henry Lawson thought of,
not only " the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended
and at night the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars", but
in those sunlit plains are people, happy, arguing, working,
building, and by effort, because by effort alone these things
can be attained, making a country great materially and great
spiritually for the people who live in it.
This conference is open. 



l" n .1t
2 5 JAM t968
EMBARGO: G) RA
NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA UNTIL 10. 30 PM
ON SUNDAY, 21 JANUARY, 1968
TEXT OFPRIME MINISTER'S " MEET THE PRESS"
INTERVIEW
Following Is the full text of the interview given by the
Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton, In the " MEET THE PRESS" programme
telecast by BTQ Channel 7 inBrisbane tonight.
The Prime Minister recorded the programme while In
Brisbane a few days ago.
Introduction by the Chairman, Mr Reg Leonard:
From this studio, exactly nine weeks ago, I was privileged
to introduce to you the Prime Minister of Australia. That, of
course, was Harold Holt. Now I don't want to dramatise what
has happened between and brought sorrow to this station, except
to say that five weeks ago today, Harold Holt, as you all know,
was swept to his death. And I want to add this. That tonight it
Is my great privilege to introduce to you his successor, to pre~ mit
In the second week of his high office, the new Prime Minister of
Australia, Senator John Gorton. Good evening to you, Sir.
PRIME MINISTER Good evening.
MR LEONARD The panel are John Wakefield, Elgin Reid and John
Athert on. We are going to talk to the new Prime Minister for
minutes. If I may say so, with great respect, before the questions
start, I have never known an Australian who has become so well
known In a few days as our guest tonight. But let me say this:
The Prime Minister Is no novice to politics. He has been around
for quite a few years in Canberra, and he has been the Leader of
the Government In the Senate. He Is,. If I may put It In a nutshell,
a very rugged Australian, with a great war record and a distinguished
academic record Master of Arts,, Oxford University.
Now, with those few words, please start the questtong.
Q. Prime Minister, what is the biggest problem that you face
as Prime Minister in your view. Put another way: What do you see
as this country's major difficulties over the next few years?
PM: I would have to give a general answer, and I will give It In
these general terms. Our great difficulty Is to try to see that the
competing demands that are made upon Australia can be met withot
putting burdens on the Australian people which might destroy their
incentive to meet those demands. We have requirements here which
have grown really enormously over the last few years. We have
requirements for development which must take place if we are to
grow into the nation that we can grow Into. We have requirements * e9oee/ 2 
2-
PM. for looking after our less fortunate citizens, and so on through
( Contd.) education and health. Now there is also a limit to the amount of
taxation that can be put upon Australans In order to meet these,
and the real problem is the apportionment of resouirces amongst
these conflicting demands, not only In our Government but in
State Governments and Commonwealth Government.
MR LEONARD: Forgive me for Intervening very briefly, Sir, you
were asked about challenges to your Administration, which is very
new; would you regard the current troubles with our postal workers
and mail deliveries as a great challenge? I presume you would.
I know there are great difficulties about commenting on this In
any detail because the situation could change dramatically between
the time we are recording and Sunday night when we go on the air.
But wouild it be fair to ask you, as a general prlifcl' 4e in Industrial
troubles of this kind which hold up the nation's business, would It'
be fair to say that the Government would not retreat?
PM: I think that in this case not as a general principle but
answering you in this case, the Government could not retreat.
At least, the Government could not allow Australian malls to
pile up and not to be delivered. I think our attitude on this I can
summarise in a few words. We hope that the striking drivers will
go back to work as soon as possible and then use all the processes
of Arbitration which are available to put their case. We hope that
this will happen, but we can't wait Indefinitely for it to happen
while mail is pilng up because Australia's life blood could be
clogged If we did. We have no choice but to move the mail. We
hope the strikers will go back
MR LEONARD: I think, like you, most Australians will hope that by
the time this goes on the air it will all be over. John Atherto
Q. Prime Minister, getting away from that, Is there one particular
achievement you wodil like to pull off during your term as Prime
Minister?
PM: It may surprise you to hear this: There are achievements
In the field of social welfare which I would like to see brought to
fruition during my time as Prime Minister. This I think will
Involve some rethinking of the methods by which a uch things as
pensions are paid, the methods by whicl uch things as
Repatriation benefits are paid, the approach to health problems
where at the moment somebody who has a long, continuing
illness can, In fact, be ruined and face ruin because he cannot
be covered. Now, what I would want to see, and It would not be
easy to work this out and I don't pretend It Is worked out In my
mind now, but what I would like to see Is a situation where
somebody who was genuinely Indigent as a result of the slings and
arrows of outrageous fortune not his own fault and had the
fear of that and the burden of that lifted from him. I am ndt to
be taken as saying I believe In a complete welfare state and handouts
all down the line, but I would like to see real misfortune overcome.
Q. Would you be Interpreted incorrectly If we said you were
favouring some kind of national Insurance? a / 3 
-3-
PM: It might turn out that that could be a correct Interpretat ion
but that Is not the one which I give it at the moment. I will try to make
It clear: I haven ' t plans but plans can be worked out. They may or
may not involve national insurance.
Q. Prime Minister, how do you propose to overcome your
relative Inexperience In foreign affairs and your lack of contact with
internatbnal leaders?
PM! Well, let me remind you of a few facts. I was the Chairman
of the Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee for a long timei After
that time, I have acted as Minister for External Affairs on a number of
occasions, and when the former Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies,
took over the portfolio, I acted on all except policy matters. I have
been In charge of the running of the Colombo Plan, for example, for
a couple of years. I have met, and I know well, Harry Lee of Singapore.
I know Tunku Abdul Rahman, I know Tun Razak, I know Malik from
Indonesia. I don't claim great experience or great knowledge, but there
Is some experience there.
Q. Prime Minister, can you tell us please, we are assuming
or we know that you will be elected to the House of Representatives
next month can you tell us how soon after that you hope to be able to
go to Viet Nam?
PM: I think I must answer that, as much as I would like to,
I see little prospect of going there until after this Session of the
Parliament Is concluded which might be April or May, as far away as
that. You see, there are meettin~ to be held before the House reassembles,
there Is some preparation to be done. I see little prospect of getting
away until the Session is over.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, It has been claimed in some circles,
particularly overseas, that on Viet Nam you are a hawk. Are you,
and how far you willing to go to support peace Initiatives, not
necessVly ~ m America, on Viet Nam?
PM: Well, bird-like labels always need a little bit of explanation
before you can really know what they mean. On the whole, I think I
would regard myself as neither a hawk nor a dove, but as an owl In
this matter I don't mean you can't see very well, but you've got the
reputation,, I hope, for wisdom In It. All we want there Is that there
should be a cessation of fighting. Well, we could get that by withdrawing,
of course. But a cessation of. fighting which would leave the South
Vietnamese people able to work out their own destiny, and we hope
with our and other people's assistance, build up their own economy.
You have asked me, I think, about bombing. I have pointed out
recently with this question that the Americans could, if they wished,
comple tely destroy North Viet Nam, but that that would be a wrong and
a stupid thing to do. The bombing Is trying to stop the flow of men and
materials from the North Vietnamese to the South. It is hampering
It; It is not stopping it, but It Is hampering It. If there were an
undertaking, a package deal that talks would start when bombing stopped,
and that the sending of men and materials from North to South would
stop when bombing stopped, then that is a goal which I think we would
all like to see achieved. 9 / 4 
4-
Q. Do you think there Is any chance of peace talks with
Hanoi be fore the next American Presidential election?
PlMt I am afraid I must say I am doubtful because I think
that the North Vietnamese are waiting and hoping that there may be
a change in the United States at the next election, and may be quite
intransigent until then. I hope not,, but I fear so.
Q. Do you imagine there would be any dramatic changes
if the Republicans won the Presidential elections? Last time it was
being said It would be unthinkable they would step things up.
PM:. Well, I don't like to comment on affairs in a foreign
country. It depends. Some people in the Reputlicans have some
views, some others.
Q. I shouldn't have u~ ked that question, Prime Minister.
Q. Does Australia under your leadership, Prime Minister,
stand as firmly and as fully committed to the Viet Nam war as It has
done up until this point, and are you willing, if it Is considered a
military advantage, not necessarily a necessity, to Increase our troop
commitment there, Including more conscripts?
PM: The answer to the first part of that question is yes, we
are committed for all the reasons we first went Into It. VIe think
aggression must be stopped and must be seen not to pay. The answer
to the second part of the question is, at this moment, no. You asked
me If it wasn't a military necessity..... I believe we are now extending
all the effort that we can extend as a nation of twelve million people
with her other requirements In this kind of field.
Q. This means, does It, Sir, that we have gone as far as
we can go In Viet Nam?
PM; Well, subject to some complete kind of change. You know
we have recently decided to send the tank support and the engineer
support. I am assuming you are meaning that?
Q. Yes President Johnson has wished you well, Prime Minister.
Like your predecessor, are you all the way with him, or will you be
putting some new thoughts to Washilngton?
PM: Well, I think my predecessor had a tag hung around his
neck which was not really justified. He did say at the end of a rather
jocular speech, I think at the White House, " I'm all the way with LBJO
which at that time was an election slogan they were using, and this
has been taken to mean that he was saying that Australia would
slavishly follow the United States policy. Well It didift mean that
then, and it doesn't mean that now. I can assure you it doesn't mean
that now.
Q. Will you be putting any new thoughts to Washington? 000 
PM: If we have new thoughts, we would not be inhibited In
putting them to Washington.
Q. Prime Minister, many people find it difficult to follow
Labor's policy on Viet Nam, mainly because so many people for the
party seem to speak on It. Now could you tell us what Is your
Interpretation of official ALP policy on Viet Nam?
PM: I don't think ar~ yhody could you tell you that for reasons
that you have spelt out yourself, but I believe that th well, I
know that the official policy of the governing Labor body Is that we
should say to the United States " Cease bombing North Viet Nam at
once; put your troops Into a holding operation" In other words,
make them stand where they are and allow them to be attacked but
don't allow them to attack...... " and If you, the United States won't
do that, then we will withdraw our troops from Viet Nam Immediately."
On the other hand, I did seem to remember during the Senate campaign
some claim from Mr Whitlam. that he was El Supremo and it didn't
matter what the Federal Labor Conference said. I doubt that, and
I think his comrades don't believe him.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, during Mr Holt's two short years
In office he made several trips to Vlashington for personal talks with
the President. Do you expect to k1eep up this personal liaison with
whoever will be President of the United States? Do you hope to?
PM: I do hope to keep up a personal Rlson but whether the
number of trips would be as many as Mr Holt took in those two years
I doubt very much. Some of those trips Mr Holt took were In fact going
over to a Prime Ministers' Conference in London or something of that
kind and he called in on the way. But I think I probably would not make
a large number of special trips.
Q. Do you indicate by that answer that you think Commonwealth
Conferences are falling on their face or
PM: I was only really Indicating that a number of the visits
that Mr Holt made to President Johnson were not specially for that
purpose.
Q. You might be going to Commonwealth Conferences then,
I take it?
PM: Well we'll wait and see.
Q. Mr Holt also made quite a number of trips to South-East
AsIa6 cb you propose to follow this pattern and visit Asia reasonably
frequently and keep in contact, personal contact, with the leaders there?
PM: Definitely. I think this was ene of the great things Mr
Holt did was to get a personal contact with the leaders of the countries
nearest to us with whom for years to come we will be most closely bound.,
and for the first time really, show that kind of Interest of an
Australian Prime Minister and get the benefits of the personal knowledge
that flows from It. I would certainly hope to do this. 9 o / 6 
-6
Q. Conversely, too, Prime Minister, lately we have been
asking more leaders to our own country. Do you hope to keep that
policy going?
PMkv Yes. I do. I hope that before very long the Prime
Minister of India will be visiting us.
Q. How deeply are you worried, &amp; Sir, a, bout Britain's
earl y withdrawal from South-East Asia as it had been originally
planned?
PM: Quite deeply. Not from the point of view of the
Austra lian Continent's own security. I am not worried about ta t.
I haven't regarded the fox ce there, which is a small force, as
something directed towards the defence of the Australian continent
Itself. But I am worried about the removal of what, In effect, has
been a police force, able to stop small Insurrections, able to stop
small attacks by one country In the area on another. You will
remember the parachute raids that took place on Malaya itself
at one stage from Indonesia, the landing of troops. This kind of
thing they were able to stop, nip In the bud before It grew and I am
worried that this security Is removed from that area.
Q. Sir, just for my personal Information, and probably
for some of the others too, Mr Holt told us once in this programme
I think It was when Mr Healey, the British Defence Minister was
out that there was some examination going on regarding the prospect
of a shared base by Britain and Australia In this country. Can you
tell us what the situation is about that, now?
PM: Only that military discussions have been taking place
between the staffs in Australia ' and the staffs in Great Britain, but
they ha-ie been confined to planning discussions which have not yet
come up to either Government for consideration as to whether those
plans should be put Into operation or what the cost of them would be
or whether the cost could be borne.
Q. Would the announcement by Mr Wilson In the past few
days affect that plan work, do you think?
PM: Well, Mr Wilson has stated that the main purposcs of
the United Kingdom' s moves and decisions are to save foreign
exchange and for economic purposes,. so It may be that this thinking
could be affected.
Q. Witb the British withdrawal, Prime Minister, from
our near North, would you consider, if asked and I think indirectly
the country has been providing Austinlian troops to fill up the gap
In Malaysia and Singapore, and in the light of what you have told us
now about our commitment In Viet Nam, could we ever really afford
to do this? 2
PM: Well, I wouldn't consider putting In Austr alian troops
to fill up the gap the British had left because I don't believe we can
afford to do this. o, o / 7 
-7
Q. isn't it a fact that Australians must face up to It that we
are going to drift In all fields further apart?
PM: There will always, I think, be special ties between the
United Kingdom and Australia, ties of family relationships, but I
believe that just as the relQ-tionshlp between Australia and the United
Kingdom now Is really quite different from what It was fifty years ago,
so the future too will see changes compared with what the relationship
Is now, but I think it must continue to be ties of sentiment, sentiment
must continue for many years ahead.
Q. Taken strictly, I know it isn't your Department, but can
you see an appreciable weakening of our trade ties with Britain, in a
way which may damage our rural economy particularly?
PM: Wiell you are quite right. This Is the Minister for Trade's
Department more than mine. But If Great Britain were to enter the
Common Market, and no-one knows If this might at some future time
be allowed to take place, then I think it could affect quite seriously some
of our industries.
Q. Sir, how do you see the future of the Commonwealth,
having In mind Britain's attempt to get into the Common Market, and if
it doesn't it won't be its fault, and the withdrawal from East of Suezdo
you think the Commonwealth will endure, and In fact, that Britain
really wants it to?
PM: Again I wouldn't want to comment on what Britain might or
might not want to happen. This would be quite Inappropriate for me, and
besides it would be silly. I think we can only wait and see what the future
brings and to provide in the future the answer to the first part of your
question will It endure, and If so, in what way, In what form.
Q. Now In our limited time, I think overseas matters and
foreign policy have haid a fair go. Could we get on to something
perhaps nearer home
Q : Prime Minister, soon you will have to face a review of the
composition of your Cabinet. Now, we don't expect you to go into
details here. But do you undertakce, if any changes are necessary,
that you will go ahead with them, no matter which personalities are
Involved.?
PM: I undertake that I will do all that is possible but one can't
Ignore completely the representation from the States and things of that
kind. But I don't think one needs to pay slavish adherence to them
either. You can't ignore them completely, though.
Q: ~ What we are getting at, Sir, is that If you have got a dud,
no matter where he is, will you root him out?
PM: Well, I wouldn't say we had any duds!
Q. Again not going into details, Sir, could you just say are
you planning great changes in the Mvinistry? v / 8 
-8
PM: I wouln't say great changes, no.
Q. You did talk at your press conference the other day
of changes or a recllotment of administrative duties. What did
that mean? It was rather a broad statement you made.
PkMt Oh yes. It means and I am a little Inhibited in
answering this because I don't want to go into too much detail
but it does mean that some Department which at the moment
has a number of functions to fulfil under what Is called an
Administrative Order could perhaps have one of those functions
taken away, and that function could be provided to a Minister In
aiolher Department. I am not talking of really significant,,
Important Departments, but there is, I think, a good deal of
tidying up which could be done to regroup the functions of
Departments. For example, just to give you a more concrete
example of sotatthing which might happe.... We did pass a
Referendum giving the Commonwealth authcrity to look after
aboriginals. Now at the moment there Is within the Prime
Minister's Department a Secretariat in charge of that with the
Minister for Territories having some connection with it. Well,
an Administrative Order change might put that under the more
direct control of a particular Minister whose particular
responsibility It would be. This is the sort of thing I see.
Q. It wouldn't go as far as amalgamating If that is
the word the Army, Navy and Air Force
PM: L No, it wouldn't
Q. Do you think, Sir, that 26 Ministers might be too
many?
PM: e I don't know how to answer that. On the
whole, I think they all have a great deal of work to do, and also
it does no great harm, in fact I think itc'. oes good for a Parliament
to have in it somebody who is responsible to It for some part of
public administration and for the expenditure of public money,
and who can be crosc -questioned on it. Let us suppose, for example,
ycu wiped out as people have suggested we should although I
don't believe we should Army, Navy and Air and just -had
Defence. I don't believe any Minister for Defence, even if he was
a genius, could answer to Parliament for the expenditure in Army,
In Navy, in Air and in Defence and would have to rely very, very
much more than at present on the Public Service Heads of those
Departments to provide him with information and he could indeed
In those circumstances, I think, claim with reasonable fairness
that he couldn't be expected to know all the details Parliament might
want him to kncwv. There are arguments both ways.
Q. Prime Minister, are you completely happy I don't
imagine : Wu are how unhappy are you, I should say, that Mr
McEwen, the leader of a minority party should dictate who will
not be Leader of the Liberal Party? a0.00/ 9 
-9-
PM: I don't think Mr McC-wen did dictate who would not be
the Leader of the Liberal Party. What Mr McEwen did say was
that he wouldn't serve underneath one particular man. But that is not
to say either that was a decisive factor In what happened to that
particular man, and certainly Mr McEwen had nothing to do with
the choice of any of the other candidates who stood for the leadership.
Q. WTe don't want to embarrass you, Sir but assuming
that the particular gentleman had been elected Leader and Mr Mc~ wen
had carried out his threat,, what then would have been the future of
the present Government?
PM: Oh, I think It would have been extremely precarious.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, are you confident, the way it has
worked out, that the coalition can work smoothly, and tell us frankly
I don't know why we shouldn't mention his name how are you going
to get round the relationship between Mr McEwen and Mr McMahon?
PM: Well, again, something of this kind was asked me only
a day or two ago, and the answer I gave then, I give to you now.
This is a new Government. We want to rule the book off and to
start afresh. Given goodwill and I believe there is goodwill and
given knowledge that we must work together for the good of Australia,
I believe that the tensions which previously existed might not exist
In the future, I hope o.
Q. Will1 you forgive nm while I am on that point. I think
you will agree there is one part of the book you can't rule off, and
nobody knows better than you that you have got a hostile Senate...
PM: Oh,, that is a different part of the book. On the other
hand, I have had quite a lot of experience of the Senate when we haven't
had a majority. Vie haven't had a majority for years and years and
years. The DLP and Indeyt adents have held the balance of power for
the last two years, and now It Is a switch to the DLP holding the
balance of power. Well, one just does one's best and we do seem not
to have done too badly in the Senate, and from a Parliament's point of
view as opposed to an executive's. The Senate has made some
improvements in bills. If they were stupid enough, and silly enough
to reject the Budget or something of that kind, this would be quite
wrong. They haven'c done that.
Q. Also apropos of ruling off the book, Sir, Labor probably
won't want to, and wouldn't you thinkc that the fact that the Deputy
Pr! me Minister has said that he does not trust the Deputy Leader of
the Liberal Party will be fully exploited by y. iir political opponents
at election time?
PM: I have no doubt whatever that they will seek to make the
greatest use they can of this...
Q. Do you think they will get much mileage out of it, Sir?
0 0 0 
10
PM: Well, It depends I suppose partly on how much it is
overshadowed by what Mr Caiwell has to say about the present
Leader of the Opposition.
Q. Touche!
QO Can we clear. up a point, Sir? In your candidacy for the
Prime Ministership, did you enter into any agreements with any
groups of supporters on mutual support for some other candidate for
some other position or did you offer any promotions or anything?
PM: Absolutely none. I am happy to say that there Is not one
single person who can say that they were promised anything as an
Inducement to support me, which Is a great benefit and a great help.
There Is not one. What I did do was to advise Mr McMahon
personally that I thought he would be wise not to stand for leadership
but for stand for Deputy Leadership. If he did that, I thought he would
consolidate his position. But that is not an Indication of any promise
or any deal or anything of that kind.
Q. As you made no arrangements or gave no guarantees and
you don't expect many changes in the Ministry, I take it we won't see
many new faces around the place at the Administrative level In
Canberra?
P K: Well, I was asked did I contemplate great changes, and I
think that was the question I answered.
Q. I was talking about personnel changes.
Q. Sir, no doubt you have been appraising your opponent, Mr
Whitlem for some time, just how serious a political rival do you
regard him, having in mind the elections?
PM: I think he has got a very good TV appeal, particularly if they
don't make him up too much, and I think he presents a case very well
Indeed, and has an appeal, and I would regard him as quite a competent
Leader of the Opposition, a very competent Leader of the Opposition.
Q. Prime Minister, perhaps you will concede, at this stage anyhow,
more Australians know him than know you. Now, how are you going
to pick up the leeway befcte the next general election?
PM: If you ask me to come and talk to you again, I'll do that and
that will help what has been happening now and I will be making up
the leeway. generally
Q. The House of Representatives, Sir, 18ka rather more turbulent
Chamber than the Senate to which you have been used to. How do
you think you will go in the House, and how do you think particularly
you will apprcach Mr Whitlam, an experienced~ Representatives man,
over the centre table?
PM: Well I can tell you that I am not filled with any apprehension
about this, and this Is partly, of course, because I am not only
facing Mr Vihitlam, I am facing Mr Whitlam and the Labor Party,
and I have behind me the Liberal Party and the Country Party, and I
am happy in my support, so I have no apprehension. 0 0. a / 11 
11
Q. Mr Prime Minister, would you concede that Mr VWhltlam has
welded the Labor Party Into a greater force to be reckoned with than
your side of the House has had to face In elections for some time?
PM: On the surface It certainly appears that way, particularly
when one doesn't look too hard at Victoria.
Q. Tell me this. I think you will agree that one of the weapons
in politics, particularly In the House of Representatives as long as I
have known it anyway, Is this needling technique. Are you satisfied
that you won't fall into traps caused by that?
PM: You mean, will! I be able to dodge water quickly
Q. Do you feel that you won't be ruffled by this kind of
technique?
PM: I can only say that I hope I won't be.
Q. Prime Minister, how do you propose to acquaint yourself with
the particular problems of the various States?
PM: I haven't the slightest doubt, from experience and foreknowledge,
that the particular problems of the various States will be presented with
great force and clarity, and over and over again by the people speaking
for the various States. I don't think there will be any chance that I will
not be fully aware of the particular problems.
Q. ' Would It be a fair thing to ask if you think they are getting as
fair a deal as it Is possible at the present time?
PM: t It is a question that could be looked at but I couldn't ansme r
at the present moment. I think we must remember this that neither
the State Governments nor the Commonwealth Government are able
to do all the things they want to do and should do. Wlhat I mean by
" should do is co~ uld do with advantage. There is a general feeling
around that the Commonwealth can do anything, that the Commonve aith
can do this or that. It can It. It is Inhibited too.
Q. Prime Minister, will you give us a quick run-down, please,
on your attitude to the contentious question of northern development.
PM: Why is It contentious?
Q. Because a lot of people think up here there is too much talk
and not enough action
I
PM: I see. I was wondering whether you were thinldivg of the
theory put forward by some social agronomists that you get greater
return from Investment In the higher rainfall South than you do from
investment In the North. Well, my approach would, I am sure, follow
the indications which, before I assumed this office, I gave. I was
responsible for telling the CSIRO to put the Tropical Pastures
Laboratory in at Townsville. I took part In the decision made by the
Cabinet not to build an Army camp in the South where, for military
reasons and administrative reasons cud economic reasons It would
have been better, but to remove It to Townsville. I have played,
as I think they will tell you, quite a considerable part In helping to
expand the university college at Townsville, and the teachers' college. **. 9e/ 12 
12
PM This is perhaps not the ktind of development you are thinking of.
( Contd. ) You may be thinking of roads, water conservation and things of that
kind, but It is a very real kind of development.
Q. Sir, we are not talking only about Queensland. We are talking
about the North, too, and Western Australia where there have been
problems, too.
PM: L I see, I thought you were mainly referring to Queensland.
Q. No, we are trying to approach this on a national basis.
PM: I see. Well, then what I was trying to do was to give some
indication which, quite fortuitously happened to be in Queensland.
I think the development of the North is one of the real problems we
have got. I am Inclined to think1 , although at this moment without
being dogmatic, that the conser vation of water in that area is one
of the great developmental projects which can take place. But I don't
ever see a situation where the North will be as closely populated
as the South. I don't see this happening becats e of some natural
disabilities, but that doesn't stop It being developed to the top of Its
bent.
Q. What Is your attitude, Sir, to migration from Asia? In the
last couple of years there has been some further liberalisation, Do
you want this to continue, this coutinuing liberalisation of migration
from Asia.
PM: Well, I think so. What you are talking of Is the length of time
people have to stay here before they become naturalised and that
kind of thing. Yes, certainly, I agree with that. My general attitude
to this problem Is thi1s. We have In Australia at the moment, I think,
almost no racial consciousness, almost no colour consciousness.
There is, I am afraid I must say this In some areas this kind of
feeling against aboriginals, but against Asians, I believe It doesn't
exist. Now I don't ever want It to exist. It Is a matter of judgment
at what point, how big a percentage of the population you have before
this kind of thing begins. 1~ YOU can avoid that kind of
development, as long as yo a~ n%# p1ople In short supply who can
help us nurses and doctors and dentists and people of that kind
then subject to those two provisos, I am quite glad to see the path
the Government has been following.
Q. Prime Minister, what are your thoughts on conscription?
Do you like our system at present of being able to call up young men
for active service abroad under the lottery system?
PM: L I can't think of any other way of doing It which could not be
attacked on the grounds of complete unfairness. You would, I am
quite sure, have suggestions of undue Influence, suggestions of
well, corruption Is a word, if it couldn't be seen, and it couldn't
publicly be seen that that was the way In which pecplc. were chosen.
I think myself that it Is the fairest way.
Q. When we mere kids this was long before your time, Sir
we all had to go Into cadets. Everybody had to go In. Wouldn't that
be a fairer way, assuming you could train them, of course? 9 o / 13 
13
PM: Oh, well, of course If you put every twenty-year-old
youth in the Army, then, clearly, there would be no need to select
particular people, but In our day, all we needed was a tent and a
303 and, I think, a clip of five rounds of ammunition. This wouldn't
do nowadays. I think you would find the cost would be quite crippling,
not only of equipping and housing the youths but of taking them out of
the development of Australia.
Q. Prime Minister, we just didn't clear up one little
point " by lottery for overseas service".
PM: Yes, well, you are suggesting they should be chosen
by lottery for overseas service?
Q. Oh, no. I am saying is It fair, or do you think it is
fair? You said there is no alternative, or it is the best way to
call up men for military training because there could be no rigging,
but these lads have-to go overseas, some of them.
PM!-Yes. What decides whether rtey go overseas or not
Is the unit they happened to have joined, The initial choice is, as
you say, by taking a marble out of a barrel. They then join a unit
of one kind or another and are trained as a part of that unit. If that
unit goes abroad, I think It would be quite impossible to start taking
component parts or individuals out and send it away.
Q. Prime Minister, you mentioned as one of your aims,
or hopes on becoming Prime Minister e~ zRier tn this session, of
helping the unfortunate. Now the Opposition claims that ten per cent.
of Australians live below poverty level. Have you got any thoughts
on what you feel about that?
P ML Well, I don't believe that ten per cent, of Australians
do live below poverty level, but I do believe that there are numbers,
quite eignificant numbers of people, living in great hardship or In
poverty, and those are the people that one wants to help, particularly
if It Is not due to their own fault.
Q. Very early in the programme you said that and
expanded on it a little. Do you include In that a desire, If it is
possible, to Increase the pensions for the unfortunate people?
to achieve
PM: Well, whatever means can be taken/ the end I have tried
to set out will be taken
Q. What about the thrifty, Sir, who are hit by the means
test? Do you think abolition of the means test is ultimately practical?
PM: I don't see it happening. 0 0YO say " ultimately".
Ultimately is a long time. I see great difficulties in its way, although
as an objective it Is part of the Liberal philosophy, of course. You
remember in England there was a pension payable without regard to
the recipient, and after a while It turned out that it was a small addition
to people who had enough money but It wasn't enough to live on for thcas
who had uo m~ oney at all, so there had to be a supplementary pension
Introduced which was subject to a means test, and this Is the sort of
problem you get Into, particularly as prices do and will rise gradually
year by year. 
14
Q. Prime Minister, It has been said that the security
authorities of this country, following the death of Mr Holt, and
perhaps Influenced by the Incident with Mr Caiwell, want the Prime
Minister of this country to have more consistent and constant
security. Is this so, and what are your views on the question of
guarding the country's leader?
PM: I am not quite sure what the view of the Security
authorities Is. I think it Is fair enough to attempt to guard a leader
when he Is walking through crowds or in an election campaign In which
he may be attacked, as on occasions Mr Holt was, but I can tell you
that my own Ideas are that If I couldn't get Into my own car and go for
a drive where I wanted to and visit some friends when I warted to
without someone following me, I would tell the Security people what
they had to do.
Q. No matter how discieet the surveillance?
PK. Yes, I don't like It.
Q. Well, gentlemen, that Is a good point to close on, I
think. You want to be free. You don't want to be watched?
PML. Yes.
Q. That's the freedom you seek and which no doubt you
will. demand if you can get past the the Security boys, and I daresay
the Prime Minister can do lots of things that ordinary people can't
do. If you will forgive me now, I will close on that one and come
back in a moment to thank you.
Well, Mr Prime Minister, in the last week and a bit
you have certainly had your share of television and press Interviews
and I think It can be fairly said by people who don't share your
political philosophy as well as those who do, that you have not
attempted to dodge qiuestions but have been frank when you didn't
know the precise answers, and who can blame you for that after only
a few days in office. And I want to say, from this station's own
point of view, that we are immensely proudto have had you he re within the
first fortnight of your office, and we do want to thank you very, very
sincerely for having come, and believe me, when you said half way
throtgh this programme that you would come here again, we are
going to take you up on it. 



2 5 JAN 1968
L/ SRAW'
TELEVISION INTERVIEW H THE PRIME MINISTER
SENATOR THE HON. J. G. GORTON
ON A. B. C. TELEVISION NETWORK 21ST JANUARY, 1968
Interviewer Mr Robert Moore
MR MOORE Prme Minister, you came to office with a full hand, so to
speak. A foreign crisisr the British withdrawal from our part of
the world; a domestic crisis, a big one the mail strike. And
what we might call a political crisis a split In the coalition;
or at least the legacy thereof. Prime Minister, could it have
been worse?
PRIME MINISTER: I Imagine things could always be worse, yes.
Q. So you're fairly optimistic in spite of the last ten days?
PM: Yes.
Q. To turn to the British withdrawal if In fact there is a
need for British forces in South-East Asia, presumably that need
will remain when the British go. What exactly Is the need and how
does it affect Australia?
PM: Well, we, as I think I've made clear, greatly regret the
British decision to withdraw their forces from the Singapore/ Malaysia
area. ThIe need, I think, Is this first of all to have ground forces
there, not in large numbers, but some ground forces there, able
to be backed up swiftly by naval and air support. The purpose of
having them there Is not to resist a major attack from some other
part. It's to be a police force, to prevent small wars breaking
out, to prevent insurgency, I think to contribute to t he security
of the area, so that it can develop economically.
Q. Now, these conditions will apply whether the British are
there are not, In fact they may even be greater when the British
leave, and yet one gets the Impression from your press conference
that In fact we will perhaps diminish our forces there as a result,
of the British diminishing theirs, which seems to be an odd thing
to do if considerations still apply?
PM: Well, this has not been decided. We are certainly keeping
our forces at their present level there, over the period of four
years before the British completely withdraw. I Intended to give
the Impression In my press conference that we could not move In
and fill the gap that Britain is leaving..
Q. Sorry, Sir, Is this because we don't feel the danger is great
enough, or because we don't have the capacity?
PM: We would have the capacity, but we would only have the
capacity if we sacrificed other needs of Australia which I, myself,
think are of greater Importance to Australia. esseet / 2 
-2
Q. Then In a sense the British withdrawal isn't as serious as all
that?
PM: Well, it's not serious enough for us to say we're going to
sacrifice our development we're not going to look after, with
compassion, people in this community we're not going to provide
better health and education and things of that kind. In my judgment, lt's
not serious enough for us to do that.
Q. If we're not going to Increase our military commitment there
as a result of the British withdrawal, do you see a much closer
diplomatic relationship between Singapore, Malaysia, Australia and
New Zealand, say?
PM: I think that would probably follow, although It is pretty close
now between those four countries. Singapore, Malaysia, Australia
and New Zealand have really got very close diplomatic relations now.
Q. It seems that Lee Kuan Yew, or even the Tunku perhaps, feels
that they're not quite close enough?
PM: L With whom?
Q. With Australia and New Zealand, and perhaps Britain
PK. Now, why do you say that?
Q. Because they seem to be pressing more strongly for fivepower
talks than we are?
PM: Oh, I see five-power talks as distinct from general diplomatic
relationships
Q. Yes, they seem to be moving much more towards a quite
specific alliance.
PM: Well, the five -pome r talks are something that we would attend,
but not something which we would initiate.
Q. Now, given the fact that our defence situation presumably will
change In the area once Britain leaves, do you feel that this may
perhaps require a new foreign policy to take account of this that
we may In fact develop closer relationships with Indonesia and
Japan?
PM: I would hope that the closer relationships which have been
developed with Indonesia In the last period, would continue to be
strengthened. I would like to see close relationships and friendly
relationships and diplomatic relationships encouraged between
Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore and, of course, with Japan which
Is playing a significant role in that area. Anything that we can do,
short of sacrificing Australia's own needs, to create an atmosphere
in which the standard of life can be raised in those countries the
burden or fear of aression can be taken away, or subversion, we
would try to do.
Q. Prime Minister, we now turn to Viet Nam which I imagine one
has to see In context with the British withdrawal as well, but not
unrelated. How close in fact are we to taics with North Viet Nam? e. / 3 
-3
PM: I don't think that at this stage we are particularly close to talks
with North Viet Nam, though people are exarnirt ng the possibilities
of such talks. There has really been no Indication that there would
be talks, from Hanoi, and as you know, the United States has kept
suggesting that there ought to be talks. All that Hanoi has done Is
say Cease bombing and then, maybe at some unspecified date In
the future, they might have talks.
Q. Now, supposing that said " Cease bombing, and we will",
what would -you say?
PM: I would say, If they said " Cease bombing,, and we will
have talks," I would think we should say " That" s fine. We' 1T
cease bombing, you guarantee not to send reinforcements In men
and material into the South, and the talks could begin at once.
Q. Then we say: " Cease supplying the South and we'll have
talks'". Is that what you say? In other words, we apply the
condition?
PM: We would say: " We will cease bombing". Which condition
they apply....
Q. Yes.
PM: " And we'll do that if you stop building up your forces
In the South, which our present bombing Is designed to stop, and
we would then be glad to see talks opened as soon as possible. I'm
expressing my view on this. I'm obviously not speaking for the
United States Government Y'm speaking for myself.
Q. Do you feel, Sir, that perhaps we might be at some
diplomatic disadvantage if it looks as if we are the ones who are
applying the condition now?
PM: I don't see why because one condition being applied by
North Viet Nam a condition being applied without any guarantee
of talks, and It seems to me perfectly reasonable if, as Is the
case, the present bombing was designed to stop the tnt to stop,
because it doesn't hamper and hinder the flow of men and raw
materials from north to south, that If we stopped that, and we
didn't get at a military disadvantage so that the flow of men and
materials from north to south could continue un checked, it would
seem to me all to be part of a packaged deal.
01 May we not be asking North Viet Nam to do too much?
To put It another way, aren ' t we asking North Viet Nam to concede
the war, If we ask them not to supply the south? In other words,
may this not be an impossible condition for them, however much
we desire It?
PM: I don't think so, because the suggestion is a bombing pause,
and during that pause, talks start. Now, if It's a bombing pause,
there ought to be able to be a reinforcement pause too, so that the
talks can go on, and I don't believe that anybody has conceded
anything except two Inter-related military operations would both
cease. e9* e * a/ 4 
-4-
Q. Prime Minister, can we now turn to economic aid another
aspect of our relations with the countries near us how much economic
aid should we give, and why? What should be the reasons behind our
economic assistance?
PM: People tend to put a particular percentage of GNP as the amount
of economic aid one ought to give. I've never understood why pluck a
figure out of the air, and say this is the figure, we should attain that.
I think we should give as much as we feel we can give without seriously
interfering with Australia's own requirements perhaps interfering a
little with Australia's own requirements, but not seriously, because we
have a nation to build and a people to look after ourselves. Having said
that, the purposes of our economic aid ought, and again this Is a subject
with which I know different points of view can be put, ought to be designed
to build up a technological capacity of countries,. to enable them to look
after the machines which they need to expand their industry or to look
after their agriculture, or whatever it may be, and to provide a sort of
capital for them to enable them to grow.
Q. Eir, you've just said, and you said earlier In your press
conference this week that the amount of aid we can give is limited by
the need to develop our own country, and by our own defence requirements,
and this can sound either like good housekeeping ( W perhaps selfishness,
and I would like just to pin you down a little further on your attitude
here, because as many people have said, we don't know a lot about you,
but I suspect much more than people are admitting
In the Senate on October 26t h, 1967, during that part of the
debate which narrowed down to Australian economic assistance to the
Pacific Islands, after a brief comment by Senator Tangney, you went
on to say, and I agree It's out of context but I think it's still Indicative,
you went on to say
" I do not know that I have borrowed anything from humanity
in general; from my point of view, what we give Is assistancef
I must admit that I believe that that Is quite enough for the
Australian taxpayers to be asked to supply to that part c( the
world. Now, without being cyilcal, I don't think that sounds altoge ther
a mean attitude but it doesn't sound a generous attitude either. You seem
to me to be denying any kind of moral obligation that we might have
towards people In a worse posllbn than ourselves.
PM: L I wouln't think that was right when you said deny any kind
of moral obligation. I think Inherent in that Is a statement that that
Is enough for us to give, which means that we are accepting that amount
of aid, and presumably because it is a moral obligation, but we have to
balance a moral obligation against the requirement of our own people.
I think that we have to bear In mind that we are twelve million people
with, as I say, a nation to build and a continent to develop. I think we
need to bear in mind that If all our resources were directed towards
assistance in these countries, they would not make a significant amount
of difference there.
Q. Sir, to come back to this quotation, I don't want to harp on it
of course, but in that you do suggest that you are worried mainly
about the taxpayer being asked to give too much in forms of econrmlc
aid. Are you .1 0 0 
PM: I would like to see the taxpayer's money, which is the source
of all money, directed primarily to developing our own country and
looking after our own people, but to give some assistance, and I
couldn't give you a precise level in this Instance, but to give some
assistance even though It might slightly Impinge on that, but I
wouldn't want to sacrifice Australia's growth.
Q. You wouldn't see it being a big Increase In our budget then,
economic aid.?
PM: I don't think I would at the moment, no.
Q. Prime Minister, I'd now like to come home and to the mail
strike; I don't want to go Into the details of It. This Is not the time
and place to do that but I think It does raise a general philosophy,
which I'd like to explore with you of your attitude towards Industrial
disputes In general, and to paxhaps trade unions, and I'd like to do
this In what may seem an odd way by going back to your maiden
speech in the Senate back In March, 1950, which you made In the
first flush of the Liberal dawn, and referring to the 1947 Banking Act
as an abuse of government power,, you said this
" We do not believe that it Is the function of
government to work out the destiny of the individual. It Is
the function of the people themselves"
and you went on to say " This philosophy has illumined all people of
liberal minds throughout the ages, and among liberal minds
I Include trade unionists who, In the past, fought exactly
the same fight as we are fighting on this issue.
Now, my first point Is, couldn't the post office workers argue that
they are fighting for their own destiny In the very terms of your
liberal philosophy?
PM: Well, perhaps they could argue that way, but I don't think that
It would be a valid argument, because we have set up In Australi a,
and we have accepted in Australia, generally accepted the belief
that if people are dissatisfied, then there is conciliation machinery
and arbitration. machinery to which application can be made, and that
after application to conciliation and arbitration machinery, then what
Is decided there should be accepted, and this, I think, must prevail
unless there Is to be law of the jungle.
Q. Is what Is really wrong with the mail-strike the fact that
It inconveniences the community? Is that why it Is so serious?
PKO I think that there are two I think that is one very, very
se~ fous thing, but It does more than Inconvenience people', it could
clog up business; It could put people generally out of empl oyment
if It continued long enough; It could stop things operating that is
serious enough. But there is also a principle involved of upholding
arbitration, and I think both those are very significant.
Q. Could I come back to the first point. I-bw, In fact, do you
as a government balance the claims of a particular group of workers
in an essential industry against the needs of the community as a whole? 
-6
PMV. How do we balance It? Well, I don't think it's the government's
job to balance the claims of a particular group of employees against the
nation as a whole. I'm not quite sure that I understand you, but I
think perhaps that's the job of an Arbitration Court or something of
that kind.
Q. What I was really getting at was, obviously, the degree of
reaction by the Government will vary according to whether the workers
on strike are In a very essential Industry, an essential Industry, or
in a trivial Industry, say like Ice-cream makers.
PM:. Yes, It will.
Q. You come to a stage where you must step In, where the
machinery has broken down. Now, it could be I'm not saying In
this case that It is a certain dispute; in fact, a group of workers have
a very legitimate claim, public opinion and the government are wildly
against them, but public opinion can be selfish too It can be in
certain circumstances, Now as a government, how do you balance
this conflict?
PM: I think any government must balance it this way. I think any
government must say that the vital needs of a community as a whole,
the vital needs of the nation, muet be protected not Impetuously, but
they must not be allowed to be destroyed, and this must be the
paramount and over-riding consideration, I think.
Q. Sir,, at your press conference a few days ago, you spoke of
what I think you called " an administrative reshuffle" when talking
about the Cabinet of the future. I wonder whether this mail strike
may not be one of the things you had in mind because It does seem to
me odd that this strike should involve the Prime Minister, the Postm
aster-general, the Minister for Labour and National Service, the
Public Service Board, with somewhere the Arbitration Commission
looming In the background. It all seems very confused now Is this
an example of what you would like to streamline?
PM: This wasn't particularly what I had In mind, nor is it
precisely. It's very nearly setting out the facts, but not quite
precisely. It does Involve the Public Service Board because Initially
applications are made to the Public Service Board for variations.
After such applications have been made, If either side is dissatisfied,
then there Is a public service arbitrator, and after the public service
arbitrator, then subject to the Arbitration Court Itself, there Is
a further application to a neutral umpire In the Arbitration Court.
The only way In which the Prime Minister comes Into It Is that the
Public Service Board Is under his administrative control, and Indeed
the only way the two ways In which I have come into it are these.
Firstly, In reply to a telegram to me asking If I would speed up
meetings with the Public Service Board, bring it forward before the
date when It was due to take place, I desired to minimise the chances
of conflict, and I sent a telegram back saying " Yes, I would have
a meeting as soon as they returned to normal work. That's one
way. The other way I came Into It was making a decision with my
colleagues that we have to keep the n-a Us moving, no matter what.
I would say to the community that having been done, then the process
of keeping the mails moving is in charge of the Postmaster -General and
the Minister for Labour and National Service comes into it because of
their general trade union relationships. 
-7
Q4 Do you agree maybe it's not confused, but do you
agree that It's very complex anyway?
PM: It's not as complex as It looks, but it certainly looks
complex.
Q. I wonder If we could move on, related to what you said
there too, to your conception of the office of Prime Minister. A
lot of people have written a lot about this and said a lot about It,
that perhaps In Australia and Britain too, we're developing something
more like the President the Prime Minister is getting bigger and
bigger in the community and In Cabinet and so on. Now, do you see
yourself as Prime Minister as essentially Chairman of a Committee
or a Super Minister?
PM: L Well, I don't like that sort of super-Minister thing It's
got overtones of Supermac or Superman. I don't see myself that
way. Now, I don't see the Prime Minister as Chairman of the
Committee. Ideally, of course, perhaps if we had an Ideal world,
the Prime Minister shouldn't have to do anything at all except go
round and meet people because he ought to have Ministers in charge
of all various areas, and leave them to do the job, and they should
do it and talk to him about doing it, and he should just sit back and
think about what we're going to try and do next, the goals we're
going to reach. I don't think we'll ever reach that Ideal stage, and
there must be Cabinet responsibility for a number of matters. But
I would believe that the Prime Minister now or In the future Is not
to be Chairman of the Committee so that a majority vote In the
committee says what's going to be done. He should put to the
Cabinet or the committee what he believes ought to be done, and
if he believes strongly emugh that It ought to be done, then It must
be done.
Q. I'd like to move on from there. It's sometimes said that
the most important decision a Prime Minister has to make Is the
making of his Cabinet. Now, it isn't the time to canvass the details
of what you have in mind, but I wonder If I could put it on the
pessimistic side which zeems to be the quickest way of getting an
answer. What would you look for In deciding to drop a Minister,
if I can put It that way? What Is it that makes a bad Minister?
What is a failure In politics?
PM: I think that's a very hard question to answer. I really
do I don't think it's a question that, flung at me like that, that
I can answer.
Q. Can I put It this way? Is it because a Minister Is a
bad administrator or because he gives bad advice in Cabinet, or
because he's politically unsound? I mean, we could make a longer
list than that, but I'm just wondering what It Is In fact that a Prime
Minister takes into account when he decides that Bloggs must go?
PM: L So and so is a good Minister so and so Is a bad
Minister?
Q. Yes.
PM: I'd like notice of that question because It 
8-
Q. I wonder if perhaps we could take It up another time then?
PM: Possibly
Q. Thank you very much. Could! I turn to the Coalition.
Mr McEwen, a few weeks ago, Indicated that he would not serve under
a particular Liberal Party leader. Now,, for your part, would you
refuse to allow a particular Country Party member to serve under you
as a Minister?
PM: No. I would not believe that I had that right; just as the
Leader of the Country Party doesn't believe that he has the right, to
say he refuses to allow a particular member to be made a Minister.
He believes his right Is limited to saying this: " i I will not serve
under so and so. He doesn't believe that he has the right to say:
77M~ f not serve with.
Q. So, in return, you would accept a package deal, if I can
use that word, from the Country Party?
PM: L Yes.
Q. Do you thinkc there Is any problem, In fact, in having
some Ministers less directly responsible to you as Prime Minister,
than others?
PM? I don't think so. I don't think Iis arisen in my experience,
with relation to other Prime Ministers, which I have been able to
watch from the outside, but it just doesn't seem to have appeared.
And we have an understanding, and I think the understanding was held
by Sir Robert Menzies with Mr McEwen, and by Mr Holt. We don't go
in there as two separate teams with Caucus beforehand, and decide
block votes beforehand, or put similar opinions. We try to, and I
believe we do, go in as individual members of a government, and on
many, many occasions you'll find discussions in which the Liberal
and Country Party Ministers agree to something, and Liberal and
Country Party Ministers on the other side raising doubts about it.
Q. You don't think that your position, In fact, may be
weakened by events of the past few weeks?
PM: I don't think so. No.
Q. I tikone ct the most Interesting things that observers
will be watching, with perhaps a certain degree of well-intentioned
malice perhaps, will be how you handle the Senate. There's a certain
irony In your becoming the Prime Minister, and you're on record at
the time of the postal regulations debate and so on, as suggesting that
perhaps the Senate is In danger of over-stepping its role In certain
directions? What are you going to do about it?
PM: Therdfa absolutely nothing anybody can do about it unless
you have a constitutional referendum, and I haven't got that In mind.
The Senate, I think, has not over-stepped Its role in the past,, except
that I was a bit dubious about that postal regulation one; I think that
perhaps that was perhaps a little over the line. But It hasn't rejected
Budgets; It hasn't refused supply,$ I t hasn't made the House of
Representatives go to the people. ' If It did, It would certainly be
acting, I think, irresponsibly, and wrongly. But it has a role to
0 0 0 / 9 
-9-
PM examine legislation, to try and improve It, to make amendments,
( Contd.) to send It back for further examination. And provided It acts
responsibly, I think It has an advantage to a government.
Now, we have not had a majority In the Senate for some time,
but things -well, they've been held up, and there have been
arguments and so on, but things have gone on. We're In no
worse position now than we were before, In fact It might even
be said to be in a rather better one.
Q. I want to mention one name, and one name only. What
are you going to do about Senator Wright? Woo him, or contain
him?
PM: Woo him or coutain him? Wr,. qld you care to define
your words?
Q. Well, are you going to elevate him, promote him, win
him over, or are you going to try to Isolate him or bring him
into line?
PM: I've always had quite a regard for Senator Wright,
except from time to time when we've had an argument. But I'm
bound to say that during the period of time when I was Leader
of the Senate, and I think you'll see this if you look at the record,
that he was of great assistance to the Government. He came In
and supported the Government on a number of occasions, and put
our case for us very well.
Q. Did you say he supported the Government on a number
of occasions?
PIML Yes. I did.
Q. On other occasions?
PM. Oh, I'm sorry. I mean, actively supported actively
came in. We argued well and put active support rather than
just.
Q. Sir, I'd like to touch on one aspect of your own career
in the Senate, and one only, and I do it for perhaps not the
apparent reason. And that's the VIP affair, because I feel
anyway that if there was ever a time when you made your name
and came before the public as a potential Liberal Party leader,
If ever the occasion arose, it was then. My own personal view
Is that If there was ever a time that you made your run without
knowing it what Is interesting is that in the newspaper reports
of your tabling the documents in the Senate that day, the word
" Insist" crops up " Senator Gorton insisted on tabling the
documents" and this phrase did you In fact Insist, and if
you did, against whose advice did you Insist on tabling them?
PM: I don't know where the newspapers got that particular
word from. You know, they have political corrspondents, and
they go round and talkc to people, and then they come out with
their own words as to what happened. I just prefer to put It this
way, that having discovered that these things were in existence,
and believing it proper that a House of Parliament should have
information as to the expenditure of public money how it was
spent. And the House having asked for that information, it was
a proper thing to do to provide it. 1 
10
Q. Well, if you didn't have to Insist, did you have to resist
dissuasion, and there I'll leave it when you've answered that.
PM: There was some discussion about It.
Q. Sir, I'd like to end this discussion, to turn to your more
general political philosophy, and I'd like to begin on the economic
side of It. You are on record as saying that you oppose monopolies,
and that you're all for free competition, not for disastrous
competition, but for free compe~ tition.
Now, Is the logic of this attitude a two-airline system, a
three-airline system or a four-airline system?
PM: I think it's a two-airline system. You can't apply this logic
all across the board. You musn't say " I believe in this and
therefore In every field this must happen". I mean, I'm not in
favour of a two-railway system, that kind of thing. The philosophy
that I was seeking to express was this: That I believed that the
community was better served, and people themselves were better
served, and that they had more opportunity to develop their own
individual capacities and try somethi rg out and see how good they
were in fields where there was free local competition. But I
think history has shown that it Is not awfully comfortable always
for businesses to have competition, so they tend to amalgamate In
many fields, and after a while that might mean it could mean that
competition just wasn't there at all. Well, If competition wasn It
there at all, you would have a private monopoly that could be
controlled by government of course, higher taxes moving in, but
what would be a better way of controlling it, in my view, is to provide
competition from a government. It wouldn't then be a monopoly,
but instead of having a private monopoly, you provide competition
from a government Instrumentality,, and let them fight it out.
Q. I still can It see, Sir, why you object to having, say,
two private airlines and one government airline?
PM: Well I suppose the answer to that would be, perhaps not
philosophical, I suppose the answer to that would be that there is
just not enough traffic and passengers and revenue for an extra
airline
Q. Couldn't you allow the entrepreneurs who disagree with
you the right to go broke?
PMO Yes, I'm not sure that they'd go broke without expecting
to be baled out.
Q. One other point, Sir, and this is not strictly speaking the
concern of the Federal Government, but I think It Is a concern of
Liberal philosophy. Does your philosophy allow restrictions on the
production of margarine, say, or restriction of the consumer's
choice?
PM: I would have thought that that was a matter for S tate
legislation.
Q. I think it's still a matter for general Liberal philosophy? 0 0 A1 1 
11
PM: Yes, It Is.
Q. What is your view on that?
PM: This is of course a matter for Liberal philosophy -you're
entirely right on this. It Is also a matter for decision by the
sovereign States. I wouldn't like it to be thought that I was
expressing a philosophy here which might be designed to interfere
with what the sovereign States thought they ought to do.
Q. So, you're not a centm list after all?
Well, Sir, I'd like to end on your quite specific political
philosophy, and I'll be very brief on this, but going back in your
maiden speech in March, 1950, you said that
" In the past there has always been a tendency on the
part of governments of every kind to gain more and more
power because, I suppose, Members of a government believe
that they are good men and will not abuse It. But that
danger always exists."
WNell, that's what somebody else has called " the neverending
audacity of elected persons".
Now that you're on the other end of the government stream,
how are you going to protect yourself from falling into this abuse of
power? Are you conscious of it?
PM: I would be conscious of It because It because
ever since Acton, I think It was, said " All power corrupts, but
absolute power corrupts absolutely' this has been one of the
things that one's always had In mind In the field of politics. But,
it still remains true that, although I might be conscious of it, I
might subsconsciously be led to say " Well, I know 11m right here
so I'm going to do It" and that danger exists.
Now, I'd try to stop it myself. If! I didn't, then I'm pretty
sure that the Party would, or the House of Representatives would,
or the Senate certainly would.
Q. Prime Minister, thank you very much for giving us your time. 



TELEVISION ITflER VIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, SENATOR JOHN GORTON
FOR B. B. C. " PANORAMA" PROGRAMME 22ND JANUARY, 1968
Interviewer Mr Michael Charliton
Q. Hello, is that Prime Mlinister Gorton
PM: Yes, Mr Charlton
Q. Prime Minister, could I first of all congratulate you on
your appointment.
PM: Thank you very much.
Q. And ask you what you feel is going to be the lasting effect
of Britain's withdrawal from the Far East on the very special
0 relationship that has always existed between Australia and
B ritain?
PM: I doubt if there will be lasting effects on the relationship
between Australia and Great Britain. We are very disturbed at
the power vacuum that will be created In that area by Britain's
withdrawal. We do feel that a comparatively small number of
troops on the ground there could contribate more to world
security than they could In any other place In the world, say,
for example, in Germany, but that's a decision for the British
Government to make.
Q. Surely this decision has done no more than hasten a
trend which was already firmly established and generally
0 accepted by Australians.
FM: Well, it has done, I think more than that. It has
certainly hastened a trend and hastened it in a way which we
thought was not going to take place. But that's talking only of
the withdrawal of the ground troops. I think, possibly, It has
also gone this far that the provision of a quickly available
land and quickly available naval and air support which was
ear-marked for the area In case of need or which we thought
was going to be ear-marked for the area In case of need, it's
now doubtful whether that will be available.
Q. The feeling is that It will make you lean very much closer
to the United States?
PM: Well, I think that our own security Is perhaps bound up
now more with assistance from the United States but I'm not
sure that this actual move will contribute much to that. You see, we
don't see this withdrawal as necessarily putting Australia Itself
in danger', why we deprecate It Is because we see the opportunity
of small warE starting In this area, of Insurgency starting in
this area which might not start or which could quickly be stopped
if there were a relatively small number of troops there. ./ 2 
2
Q. Could I suggest to you that many Australians would possibly
regard this in the same way as they regarded the shock of the
decision of Britain to join the Common Market some years ago.
As a spur towards understanding that It had an independent
nationhood to fulfil. Now, won't that accelerate this process,
make Australia more aware of Its own position as a power In
Asia and contributing itself to all this?
PM : Well, it wil I certainly strengthen what I think Australia
already believed and that is that it had to play an independent role
and it had to develop itself as far and as quickly as It can, but we
haven't got the capacity to be, ourselves, a power in Asia or
anywhere else. We are twelve million people. VWhat Is the
population of London?
Q. About that.
PM: Yes, well we're about the population of London. We can't
at this stage, whatever the future may hold and the future may well
show that at some stage we can, but at this stage we are not able
to be a power in our own right.
Q. What effect do you see it having on the future of tbe
Commonwealth, the idea of an evolving Commonwealth, a multi
racial Commonwealth with Britain at Its hub, at its centre?
PM: I think that that is probably something that I would have to
wait for time to tell.
Q. What are you prepared to do to strengthen Commonwealth
links yourself now?
PMt Well, we are already of course contributing quite a lot to
various Commonwealth activities. I haven't got any specific plans
to do anything more than we're doing.
Q. But do you fully support, for example, the British Government's
policy towards Rhodesia?
PM: I don't think you could expect me to comment on the British
Government's policy I think that would be wrong for me to
publicly comment on the British Government's policies.
Q. But you, yourself, are less of a traditionalist, aren't you,
than either of your predecessors, Sir Rob. art Menzies and Mr
Holt you're not as emotionally Involved In the Commonwealth
idea with Britain as Its head as they were?
PM: I think that would be a pretty accurate assessment. I'm
not as much a traditionalist.
Q. Well, how do you Irtend to be different from them?
PM: Well, I would like to think that I could be as efficient and
as good as they were in many ways perhaps I could put It this
way that the first and over-riding and paramount consideration
In my mind on all things would be Australia's Interests and that
-would come before anything else. / 3 
-3
Q. choose Ib entowteiceen yAouu sstraaidli at hae nodH'fef Oitetdh aSt taytoeus, awnhde nB raitsakiend, tyoou
said you would be Australian to the boot-heels. It's only a couple
of years ago that Sir Robert Menzies was saying that Australians
were British to the boot-heels. Mbw, can you explain the difference
In those two statements?
PM: Oh, perhaps we've changed our shoes.
Q. Now, as far as the withdrawal goes, you've said that it
needn't necessarily imply danger for Australl a but the Foreign
Secretary has said here recently that Britain will maintain a
capability to come to your aid. Now are you reassured by that?
PM: Not really no. I'd like to know a lot more about It, what
It consists of, what Its avaiJ, 4ility is, how It is going to get here
and a whole lot of wusioshich at the moment I don't know the
answer.
Q. It sounds as if you feel that may be Impractical in view of the
withdrawal from bases.
PM: Oh no, It's just that I don't know the answers to a lot of
questions
Q. You, yourself, Sir, have departed from the tradition of
sharing the burden with Britain of defence. I mean, when you were
the Minister of the Navy, you were buying American ships in
preference to British ships. Do you not feel that Australia may be
paying some of the price of not helping to share the burdens of
defence in the Far East to your North
PM: Well, I don't think you're entirely accurate in what you
say. I did, when I was Minister for the Navy yes, I bought some
guided missile destroyers from the United States, that is trite.
At the same time, I bought some Oberon submarines from the
United Kingdom and re -equipped the fleet air arm with large
helicopters from the United Kingdom. It seems that you were putting
only part of the question.
Q. Yes, more generally, though, Australia's defence Budget
was running only at 3 per cent for a very long period after the
Second World War.
PM: Yes.
Q. And, of course, Britain's was three times its size. A., ustralia
has only just lifted its defence Budget to 5 per cent, I think, hasn't
It Britain's is still greater. Now, do you agree that you could
have eased the burden in the past from Britain?
PM: I don't thin k so. I don't. Wha. t Is more, I think that there
is a different situation In the United Kingdom and here. We have
a continent to develop and a nation to build. New things have got
to be done calling for more people, calling for more capital, for
effort, and in the long run, the buildi ng up of a nation with greater
numbers, greater industrial muscles, greater capacity would, I
think, be a greater contribution than subordinating that at the present
time to the purchase of military hardware. ./ 4 
" 4
Q. Well, do you say, therefore, that Britain's ability to
participate in this, In development, has been impaired by her
decision to withdraw?
PM: No, not at all. There may be we haven't seen it happen
yet and I hope we won't there may be some Impediment in the
flow of British capital out here to help In this development and to
participate in this development, but if that happened, it wouldn't
be as a result of anything we did. It could only be as a result of
something that England did.
Q. I was wondering whether you felt that psydidogical
factors in Australia's disappointment that Britain has withdrawn
might do some injury to the prospects of British imports to Australia?
PM: I don't believe so, for one moment. I think this could get out
of perspective a little. We understand Britain's problem. We had
talks In which there was no rancour, no recrimination and I think
that the nation has no rancour and no recrimination at all about this.
But we do feel if overseas exchange were to be saved, then a greater
contnbution could be made to general peace-keeping in that area.
Singapore, Malaysia, than by keeping battalions In German y, but
that Is Britain's decision.
Q. But In view of what has happened, would Australia, faced
for example with having to make a choice between American capital,
Japanese capital and British capital, in a hypothetical situation Is
it more likely to reject British capital now, in favour of the other
two, bearing in mind the reality of what has happened?
PM: We would not reject capital from Great Britain for one minute,
nor indeed would we reject capital from the United States or Japan.
We need capital there Is in this country argument and discussion
as to whether it should be debenture capital, of how much Australian
capital should be required to be invested In some particular
development project. But that really has nothing to do with the
subject you are opening up. Wle need capital, we would hope to
continue to get it.
Q. And lastly, Prime Ministe; r, can I ask you about whether
devaluation in this country, which cost you, I think, something In
the region of Z130 million plus the withdrawal East of Suez.. is
likely to encourage you to diversify your holdings of Sterling here
in London? Are you likely to try and spread this more evenly in
other parts of the world?
PM: I haven't considered this. It's not something on which I
could make any comment at all because anything I said could have
something read into it and really, nothing should be read into
arything I say, so I'll say nothing.
Q. Thank you very much indeed, Prime Minister. Good night.
PM: Good night. 



CONF3RENCE OF THE PRSIDING OFFICERS AND CLERKS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTS
-8 FE196823RD JANUARY, 1968
peech by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
A
Mr Speaker, Mr President I'm not quite sure which is the correct form of
address at this moment in this Chamber.
This as has been pointed out, quite like old times to have
a chance to stand in this place and to talk to a distinguished gathering, but
it has one difference. Those on my left are not Opposition; those on my
right are not Government,, rather all are independents gathered together to
discuss how better to make a Parliament work, and If this Is the last speech
that I male In this place, as it may well be, I can think of no better audience
to which to make such a speech, itor any better subject on which to address
you. This is, as the President has pointed out, as the Speaker
has pointed out, the first occasion In Australia when you have all come
together to discuss the duties you have to your various Parliaments, and
through the Parliaments, to the Austraian people. That In Itself, I suggest,
is pregnant with value for the future of Parliaments throughout Australia.
Presidents and Speakers are most Important people. Indeed, to ordinary
Members of Parliament, as you will have noticed, they have some of the
attributes of Ben Bolt. Do you remember that old poem about Ben Bolt,, in
which sweet Alice trembled with fear at his frown? That Is what we at
any rate In this Chamber do with respect to our President, and I am sure
that Presiding Officers in other Chambers find the same reaction from
Members sitting in those Chambers. If they don't they ought to, and I am
sure that after this Conference they will.
Because one of the important jobs of Presiding Officers Is
to keep In order Members of Parliament who occasionally get a little unruly,
not infrequently get off the point and sometimes get a little difficult to
understand, Presiding Officers have to keep them in order and keep them
talling about the subject before the House. This Is a great necessity for
the conduct of parliamentary business.
But over and above that is a duty not laid down anywhere,
not to be found in any manual, but nevertheless something which Is the
oil which helps the wheels of Parliament to turn, and that Is to sit in the
Chair, no matter from what party the man sitting In the chair may come,
and inside the House act with complete Impartiality, and outside the House
to take every opportunity to make the Members of both sides of the House
mingle together in a social sort of a way, and so get to know each other
as men and as human beings, so that when battle Is joined inside the Chamber,,
it Is joined with the knowledge of the personality and the honesty of the
person towards whom that argument is directed. This is a very significant
part of the duties of a President and a Speaker.
Of course they do have other matters which are sprung
upon them suddenly and upon which, too, they must be judged. When
something boils up in Parliament and points of order are taken, it Is
suggested that somebody Is out of order and ought to be thrown out or at
least subdued when this turbulence suddenly comes to the surface, this
too has to be quelled by the President or the Speaker. How often have we 
-2-
seen them sitting in their Chairs, and seen the officials with whom I haven't
yet spoken, wandering ur with perhaps an occasional word of advice because,
of course, every President and every Speaker knows his Standing Orders
completely and utterly and doesn't really need any advice. Nevertheless,
one sees them going up and perhaps suggesting a nuance here or a nuance
there before, ex cathedra, comes the final decision. I am sure, from my
own observation, and I think you would all agree with me, that this little
suggestion, this little reinforcement of what a President and Speaker was
going t'o do anyway, by an official, is also of immense importance to the
running of a Parliament. I think there is only one other thing I wish to say.
Presiding Officers still, particularly in the House of Representatives, but
I suppose in all Parliaments, when they are appointed to their position, by
tradition are taken by the arms by two of their supporters and dragged,
struggling and unwilling to the Chair. Since in most cases they have taken
a certain amount of pains to make sure that they do get elected to the Chair,
this occasionally surprises some people. But it has a very valid historical
reason, as of course you all know, and it is a reason which needs to be
remembered and needs to be applied, because you will recall initially that
the Cpeaker was the man who spoke. Now, of course, he doesn't. He
never says anything except " Don't say that" or " That's out of order:' but
initially he was the man who cpoke for the House of Commons to the King,
and said " You can't do this". " You can't impose that tax." " You are
overstepping the law there". The position of Speaker in those days was a
very dangerous occupation for a commoner to have. More than one Speaker
suffered seriously as a consequence of speaking for the House over which
he presided. That is why, originally, there was some real regret, there
was some real opposition to being taken to a seat which in modern parlance,
we would call a hot seat. ;' ell, that doesn't apply now, but what does apply now
is still a necessity to speak for the House in the House, rather than speak
for the Government in the House, or speak for the Opposition in the House,
to speak for the institution of Parliament as opposed to the parties that make
it up or the executive which depends upon its support. These are the reasons
why you all are so honoured in the occupancy of these positions, and these are
the reasons why we are so honoured that you have gathered here in Canberra
to discuss how better, if it is possible to be better, to carry on the functions
of Houses over which you preside and the business which comes before them.
As I make what I hope will be my last address in
this Chamber, particularly if the electors of Higgins support me, I am
mindful that I will be changing from a President I know to a Speaker I do
not know. Without stating the exact quotation because it mig t not sound
proper or appropriate, let me say that I hope that the Speaker I do not know
will be better than the President I know but he will have to be pretty good to
fill that niche. It is with some regret that I leave this place. It is
with pleasure that I see you ci tting here to make it, and all your Parliaments,
a better place than it was before you came here.
And that is why I have pleasure in declaring this
Conference open. Thank you.
L 



FOR PRESS-: LIB R P I PM. No. 13/ 1968
SETTLIEMNT OF POSTAL DISPUrE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator Ljohn Gorton
The entire community will welcome the return to
work. It Is a win for common sense, which all concerned should be
able to regard as a gain. It Is certainly a gain for the nation as a
whole. For my part I will see that claims advanced through
the arbitration machinery are processed, as I have promised, with
no deliberate or undue delay.
I express my deep gratitude to those Australians who
have helped to keep the mails collected, sorted and moving, and have
given me support in a course I did not relish but which I felt was
essential In the national Interest.
CANBE RRA,
23rd January, 1968. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 15/ 1968
AUSTRALIAN COMMISSIONER -G ENERAL FOR
EXPO ' 70 OSAKA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
Rear-Admiral T. K. Morrison, CB, CBE, DSC., Flag
Of ficer-in-Charge, H. M. A. Naval TE'stablishments, East Australian
Area, has been appointed as Australian Commissioner -General for
EXPO Australia's participation in EXPO ' 70, which will be
held In Osakca, Japan, between 15 March and 13 September, 1970,
is regarded as being of considerable importance and the Government
is pleased to have obtained the services of Rear -Admiral Morrison,
who will be in charge of all activities associated with Australia's
participation in the Exposition. He will take up his new position on 4
March, 1968. Rear-Admiral Morrison has had a long and distinguished
career in the Navy. He served on H. M. A. ships " Australia" and
" Hobart" and was Captain of H. M. A. ships " Melbourne", " T obrukt"
and " Quadrant", subsequently holding a succession of senior staff
appointments. CANBERRA, 26 January, 1968 



MARGO: NOT FOR RELEiASE BEFORE IMNIGHT 25/ 1/ 68
FOR PRESS: 8, PM. No. 14/ 1968
AUSTRALIA DAY
Message from the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
This is a day of special significance for us all.
It Is our day, chosen to commemorate the arrival of the First Fleet
one hundred and eighty years ago when the settlement of the colony of
New South WIales began. It is a reminder that we are a very young country
in terms of history, but it is also a reminder that, in so short a time,
we have come a very long way.
WAe have every reason to be proud of our achievements.
We are an independent, sovereign nation of nearly twelve million people,
loyal to the Crown as a Federation of States which achieved its status by
constitutional means. We have strong allies and many friends. Wie have
made great strides in national development aid we have an almost limitless
prospect ahead of us. Today we are caught up in historic changes of
tremendous importance to us all. The challenge to populate this continent
and develop Its vast resources Is Insistent. It Is everybody's task, and
In pursuing our objectives of peace, security and prosperity, we cannot
stand aside from the wider world.
The historic events which are changing the defence
and security pattern in South-East Asia, and the prolonged conflict in
Viet Nam make this a testing time for us all. The road ahead will not
be easy, but we are equipped to make the journey, provided we make the
effort. National development In the broadest sense is the
first of our priorities. This gives us the capacity we inust have to pull
our weight in the community of nations. This gives us the strength we
need, and the pace of our development is the measure of that strength.
We must not rest on our past. We must look forward,
we must be energetic and we must be adventurous.
CANBERRA, 26 January, 1968 



FOR PRESS: -8 FEB 1968
LIBRAg FM. NO. 16/ 1968
MORE FLCOCD AID FOR NEWV SOUTH VWALES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government has agreed to a
request from the 1Nlew South Wales Government that it join with the
State in providing $ 50, CX on a dollar-for-dollar basis for the
relief of personal hardship and distress suffered by people in the
North Coast and North-WVest regions of New South Wales as a result
of recent further major flooding in those areas.
It will be recalled that in June last year, the
Commonwealth agreed to provide $ 5C, CC0 on a dollar-for-dollar
basis with the State for this purpose, and an additional $ 20, CCC was
made available in Auguct following further flooding.
In addition to the immediate relief of distress, this
total Commonwealth assistance of $ 120, OC0 may be used for making
essential repairs to houses and for repairing and replacing essential
items of furniture and equipment to the extent necessary to provide
reasonable living conditions for those who, due to lack of adequate
financial resources, would otherwise suffer personal hardship.
In accordance with the constitutional division of
responsibilities, provision of relief following natural disasters is
a matter which falls within the province of the States. However,
in recognition of the need on humanitarian grounds to take special
action for the quick alleviation of individual cases of hardship,
successive Commonwealth Governments have adopted the policy of
assisting State Governments in financing relief schemes where the
damage has been severe or widespread, but the initiative in setting
up these schemes rests with the State concerned. The Commonwealth
participates at the request of the State and on the basis of matching the
amount of money which the State customarily makes available.
CANBERRA, 31st January, 1968. 



. c FES 1968
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 17/ 1968
VISIT BY CAMBODIAN FOR'S IGN MINISTER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
The Foreign Minister of Cambodia, His Highness Prince
Norodom Phurissara, will shortly make an official visit to Australia.
He will be accompanied by his wife. Detailed arrangements are still
being made, but the Prince will be a guest of the Australian Governent
and it is likely that he will arrive in Australia towards the end of
February. I am very pleased that hie is making this visit. It will
be recalled that Prince Phurissara paid a visit to Australia In December
as the Cambodian Government's representative at the Memorial Service
for the late Prime Minister. This greatly appreciated gesture by the
Cambodian Government provided the opportunity for useful discussions.
Further discussions covering a wide range of matters of interest to the
two Governments will now be possible.
I hope that on this occasion the Prince will also be able
to see something of Australia, its people, development and way of life.
CANBERRA, 1st February, 1963. 



\% STER IS
FOURTH ' S'UMMEER SCHOOL OF P? CF-ESSIONA( L ~ 8 FEB 1968
JOURNALISM N
Held in the Haydon-Allen Building, Australian
Na~ tional University, Canboerra 2ND FEBRUA. RY, 1968
Theme: " COMMUINICATION KEY TO. GOOD GOVERNMENT
O-pening Speech by the Prime Minister, the Hon. John Gorton
Mr Chairman and Ladies-and Gentlemen:
There are -Perhaps three things I'o ught to say to you befcre I
really get launched into opening this Conference,
The first one is that I have spent a great deal of time over the
last two or three years in openin~ g things like science blocks and things like
technical schools and things of that kind generally, and It has been an experience
of mine that at the end of having delivered the address that always goes along
with these activities, one is so delighted to have got through, one is so relieved
at having finished, that one tends to forget entirely to open whatever it is that
one came to open. If this should happen on this occasion, would you please
remember that at the very beginning I indicated that the object of this was to
open the conference, and just take It as read If I forget, which I hope I won't.
The second thing that I would say to you is that I understood
that tonight this was not a " heavy" night, this was not a night of real work for
you such as will occur when people read you the carefully-prepared papers on
various aspects of communications which you will then, in the course of the
seminar, discuss and dissect and agree with or disagree with. This was, as
far as I was concerned, more an opportunity to come along to speak for perhaps
twenty minutes or so, not deeply, but as a mark of respect for the work which
you do I won't say for each one of you but for the work you do, and perhaps
to put forward some few views of my own on its importance.
The keyn ote of this, I gather, is " Communication the Key to
Good Government"; this is what the seminar is about. I don't know that this
is a sufficiently accurate title because of things which I will now endeavour to
develop. It is possible to have good government without communication,
but it Is far less likely that there will be good government without communication,
but of course it Is possible to have very bad government with very efficient
communication. You will remember that one of the first things which any
totalitarian government seeks to do, whether it be of the right or of the left,
is to control communications, and having controlled communications, having
controlled the media of the press and television and broadcasting, then the
most lavish technical facilities can be poured Into communications so that they
will permeate the whole of a society and will allow only those views and only
those arguments which a government in power wishes to allow, and that they
will suppress all dissident opinion and prevent views which the government in
power does not wish to have presented.
Well, then, you can have and have had examples of communication,
but they haven't been the key to good government because they haven't been
uncontrolled communications. So I would define a little bit the theme of this
. Io.* 9/ 2 
-2
conference and say and I may even be a little wrong in this perhaps we
should say " Free Communications: The Best Insurance Policy to See that
Good Government Continues", and with that I would have no quarrel whatsoever,
an insurance policy to see that it continues.
I did query a little the suggestion uncontrolled communications
because there Is a tendency, or it seems to me that there is occasionally
a tendency for a certain lack of control In communications, just as It seems to
some of those who don't agree with me politically on occasions, that there is
a certain lack of control. I am not speaking now of the reporting of political
matters, but there are some papers which, of course, one wouldn't dare to
name, but there are some papers who occasionally tend to be verging on the
uncontrolled, particularly wihen they make the best af both worlds by taking
a high moral line on how extemely bad vice and violence and things of that kind
are and in order to drive home the point of how bad they are, they fill half
their pages with careful reporting of the particular things. This of course, I
am sure, on the behalf of the owners is designed to attain a moral end!
But occasionally it might seem to be verging just a little on the uncontrolled,
so that Is why I chose the word " free".
Well, how are we going to get free communications, and
how ought those free communications to be used by you, because there is a
responsibility on government to see that information is supplied to enable
free communication properly to function, and there is a responsiblity on
Journalists and on the owners of newspapers and on the editors of newspapers,
and, not particularly, but also on those who write the headlines for stories
and cut out the middle of the story from the people who wrote them, there is
a responsibility on them to see that that information is properly presented In
a balanced way. Well what is the responsibility on government? I think it is
pretty heavy. I believe that governments ought never to seek to suppress
news or Information, whether those governments feel it is for the moment
to their advantage to do it or not to their advantage to do it. I not only
believe that this is useful to enable free communication to functlon but I
believe it is a sensible policy and one which Is to the advantage of the government
which uses it. Now, I remember my present Press Officer joining me when
I was first In the Navy and we put this to the test. It's a long while ago now
and -you won't remember, but we had two naval ships steaming along, one of
which was firing at the other with such good effect that it hit it, and a shell
went through it fortunately, it was a non-explosive one just above the
water line. Well this is an unusual occurrence in a well-run Navy, and tie
question arose of what one should do about it so of course what one did
about it was immediately call a pre-ss conference and tell everybody and send
them down there and they could interview everybody and they could see the
hole and they could take pictures. After they decided that there it was and
there was nothing to hide, okay, the story was there and there was no more
speculation. And similarly we did it in other things that happened.
This Is not only In my view a prop~ er way but a payable way
for a government to behave, and therefore there is not only a rspnsbility,
but if it has got any sense, a government behaves In accordance with that
responsibility. Now there must be some limitations, to this. There are some
fields of information which are tied up possibly with national security. There
are some areas of information which it Is not desired to make public for ./ 3 
3-
perhaps another week or so for various reasons because negotiations are
going on and haven't reached a point of complete fruition. These kinds of
things, where there is a particular reason, I think one Is justified In not
announcing, and In fencing if one Is asked about them. But those are, roughly,
the only reservations that I would have.
It is therefore, In my view, the purpose of a Government Information
Officer attached to a Minister or to a Department, not to protect his Minister
or his Department In the sense of protecting him by stopping the dissemination
of Information for which his Minister or his Department can be criticised, but
rather to protect him his Minister or his Department by going along and
saying, " This has happened" or " Some r-eospaper Is interested In this"....
" These are the facts. These facts ought to be made publc and so
protect him in that way. Then It is up to the Minister, and if he has got any
sense, he will make those facts public.
Before I leave this area of where I think Government responsibility
lies,, where it should be used I would like to touch on something which has
been a matter of discussion from time to time, and that Is the dissemination
of Information by public servants as opposed to the dissemination of Information
by governments, by Ministers, by people working as journalists In Departments
or for Ministers. You have all seen It suggested that, really, public servants ought
to be able to make pronouncements on policy, ought to be able to make
announcements as to fact.* I find this Impossible to accept, You have public
servants who are there to carry out a policy decided on by a government or
decided on by their Minister. Quite often, before that policy Is decided upon,
If tt Is a properly-run Department, the Head of It, or the second In charge
of It or third Is~ charge of It will be talking to the Minister, and he will say,
" Look, I don't think you ought to do that. I think you are quite wrong. I
think you are an absolute clot If you do this. You shouldn't do It. Sometimes
he writes it on a piece of paper and sends It in. Then, again, If It Is a
properly-run Department, most of the time they are right. But not always,
and so a Minister will say, " Well, all right. I have taken into account what
you have put to me. I have thought about It carefully. I think you are wrong.
I don't accept your advice, and this is the policy I want you to carry out.
And in a properly-run Department, then a public servant accepts that and carries
It out. If you had a situation arising out of those sort of circumstances
where that public servant would immediately rush away and say publicly, " I
think the Government or the Minister is quite wrong. I told him he was wrong
at the time, and these are the reasons I put forward to him," well, It would
be a very good news story, but It wouldn't be very conducive to good government,
and It wouldn't be very conducive to the stanfflng of public servants. One of
the safeties that public servants have Is that they do carry out a policy, either
devised or accepted by their political government, and if mistakes are made In
policy or In practice, It is their political government and their political head
who takes the blame, even though they may not necessarily directly be
responsible, and that they, themselves, as public servants are not to be
subject to criticism, because If they are, then they must have a right to
answer and It Is better that they should follow the course of not entering Irto
public controversy and therefore na bcig teto beheld responsible and
attacked in public. For those reasons, although I know there are arguments on the
other side, I do feel that in the discharge of a responsibility to provide e 6 / 4 
-4
information by a government, that It Is the government and not its servants
who must accept that responsibility.,
Well, what about the responsibility that then devolves on those
who work for the communications media, those who take that Information
either freely offered or ferreted out and then disseminated through the
country? This is of vital Importance, of just as much Importance, of just
as much responsibility as lies upon a government to make the Information
available. I don't speak only of Information as to fact. That Is fairly
simple. Almost any course that Is adopted In a country such as ours Is
a course which Is arrived at as a matter of choice. There are a number of
things a government can do, and there are quite valid arguments in favour
of all those things. If you walked up on to a hill here in Ca~ nberra, and you
looked down from Red Hill, and yoi saw spread below you the myriad
twinkling lights of this city, and you said to yourself, " Each one of those
lights, or nearly ev~ ry cm of those lights is a light In the window of a house
where an Australian family lives. What do they want? You would have
to answer yourself in this way. They would want to have a perfect system
of education; they would want to have a system of defence which would make
this country so strong that not even a major power would attack It; they
would want to have development proceeding apace not only in the country
but In the city; they would want to have x per cent of GNP spent on providing
scientific advancement; they would want the States and the Commonwealth
each to be able to do all that they feel that they would like to do; they would
want taxation to be reduced. They would not want a deficit because with a
deficit there tends to be too much Inflation. In fact they want everything
which is quite reasonable because as individuals we would all like to have all
these things we would want to have too. But you can't have it all and ne ither
can a country so in spite of the fact that valid arguments can be made for
every one of these and a myriad other things, you come down to making a
choice priority which Is the most Important, which of things that are needed
shall we take. Then It Is necessary to explain, for a government to explain why
they regard these things as the ones of most Importance. What arguments
have led them to say, " Well, we'll take this field rather than that at the
moment. Vie will defer this until some other time". There will always be
arguments for and arguments against, and It Is essential for a well-informed
community, a community that can make a proper judgment on whether to
retain or dismiss the government, that these arguments should be presented
first by a government and then presented In a balanced way by the communications
media throughout Australia. If they do that, if they don't make a
snap judgment, If they don't make a biased judgnent criticise of course
but present the arguments for and against say " These i-re the arguments
which are advanced for It; these are the arguments which are advanced against
It", then whether we are Individuals writing a column or whether we are a
newspaper or whether we are broadcasters, we say we don't agree with what
Is being done for these reasons, at least the debate has become public, and
become public in a way which enables a democracy to form an Informed
Judgment. This Is the ultimate test of whether you gentlemen and ladies are
doing your work properly: That an Informed judgment can be formed by
the public. Well, I know the immense difficulties that you are under In
doing this, particularly those who work for newspapers. You have a deadline
for one thing. I have always believed, I have been told it Is true, I don't 9 e 9 9 
know; you can Inform me if it Isnt; that one of the cries of the editors of
all major newspapers Is " You've got to get It on by a certain time; you've
got to get It Into to us by five o'clock. If you car;, get It right, but if you
can't get It right, at least get It written". That, I think, shows up, neces arily
shows up because there isn't time. This is a difficulty which one understands.
It seems to me there are also difficulties some times with those who happen
to own newspapers because they happen to have particular beliefs In one ' W'ay
or In another and they may be prepared to publish matter which supports the
particular beliefs or policies which their paper Is at the moment advancing,
and not report anything which Isn't supporting that or at least slant itono-way
or another. This is, I think, a bad thing. I am not saying this Is on any,
one particular side of politics. It Isn't. It Is on both sides, but I do think
It is not a proper use of communications.
I am not so disturbed about it really, because If It goes on
long enough, then people say, " All right, -that paper, X, we know what it Is
like, what line it is going to take on any particular matter. That paper, Y,
we know what line It is going to take on any particular matter" and It doesn't
have a very great effect on forming public opinion. But that Is another
difficulty that you, as working Journalists, have to overcome. You can
overcome it, even when the unforgiving minute doesn't allow you to devote all
the time and all the arguments that are necessary on a particular matter.
There are always special articles that can be written If your editor can provide
you with the space. There are special talks which can be made over
broadcasting networks, There are a number of smaller publications In which
these things can be discussed in a more leisurely way, weekly publications and
things of that kind. And so the way Is there though It may be difficult.
However difficult it may be, It is necessary If we are
properly to use the media of communications, for a government to do what
I have said it ought to do, and for those who then take that information to use
it or to attempt to use it In the way that I have suggested to you I think It
ought to be used. There is only one other thing, I think, that I wish to say,
and that Is that though It seems to me it is occasionally being lost sight of
today, there Is also a need In using the media, particularly the written
media properly, for some consideration to be paid to the use of good English.
It is not always apparent that this Is happening.
I do remember reading In a newspaper I am not making this
up a story that was written that so-and-so saw Mr Smith " standing there
being sick in his underpants". Now, they didn't mean he was being sick in
his underpants any more than he was being sick In his hat. What they meant
was he was wearing smalls while he was being sick. This may seem a small
point, and it is In that particular context! But that lack of complete precision
can lead to quite serious misunderstandings from time to time.
The stories in military history where tbis kind of bad writing
has led to disasters are legion. There was the Charge of the Light Brigade,
for example. It was a complete mistake and came about because the general
at the time used bad English when he wrote the order which was carried down
to the Light Brigade. I could go through many other military despatches which
were written with such conciseness that they were quite unable to be understood
and therefore everybody did the wrong thing. I am not suggesting that you should
do that, but I am saying the English langunge can be a method of expression so / 6 
-6-
which probably embodies the greatest precision of any le~ nguage since Latin,
and I include French. Or it can be a really sloppy sort of language which
doesn't really mean anything from which Smith can draw one inference
and Jones can draw another.
I really ought to apologise for talking to you so long about
this, but It does seem to me that allied with what I said to you and It is
not often I get a chance to tell the Press what they ought to do; it Is nearly
always the other way round allied with what I have said to you of the
proper use of the media Is the really proper use of English. It probably
means going back to learning parsing in the schools, but I don't want to get
into trouble with the Education Department at the present moment.
Sir, I told you that this address was not one that was going
to go deeply into matters, and It doesn't. It was an address designed to
indicate the importance which I attach to your deliberations and more
particularly to your work anid the way in which you carry it out. If I have
touched upon some feelings. of my own about how a government ought to
provide information, how those charged with disseminating It ought to use
the information that Is used, I have done It because I feel it is of vital
Importance to the proper running of a democracy4 It Is easy enough for a
political party and indeed we all tend to do It In the House to argue to a
brief, to put forward only the good points In favouir of some course, and to
ignore the bad, not mention them or try and pretend they don~ t exist. I hope
that thic will not grow In the political field. I hope it won't take root at all
in those who disseminate it, because It is essential when cases are put, all
the good points in favour of it should be put and all the bad points against It
should be put If a balanced Judgment Is to be made.
You are the people who will enable a balanced Judment to
be made by the community. It is a heavy responsibility and I am sure you
will discharge it well. I declare this open,: 



BACKGROUND BRIEFING GIVEN BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, FOR THE HEADS
OF SERVICE, PARLIAMENTARY PRESS GALLERY,
CANBERRA 2ND FEBRUARY, 1968
PRIME MINISTER : I called this because I thought it might be of interest to you,
n ot because I have anything specific to say, but rather there might be
a number of questions in your own minds that you might wish to ask
at this stage. So I thought this would be an opportunity for you to come
here. More particularly did I think this because I will be going to
Melbourne shortly to put in my nomination for Higgins and then coming
back and then on Saturday I am going down to Sydney. On Monday I
have got a lunch-time talk in Sydney in connection with the New South
Wales elections, and after that, as far as you are concerned, I am going
into smoke for about five or six days and as far as anybody else is
concerned I hope. Anybody up here will know where to get on to me
I mean, the Department of Defence, the Department of External Affairs
if anything comes up they will know where to get on to me. I don't want
the -press to get on to me. I want four or five days off after what has been
rather a strenuous two and a half or three months, so I will be out of
circulation and I thought, right, now is the best opportunity for you to
ask any questions that might be in your minds.
Q. This break is just a bit of a rest, is it? It's not
PM: Yes it is a rest.
Q. You are not going to cook up something big?
PM: N0. Oh, no. There will be a certain amount of work to be
0 done, a certain amount of thinking to be done. It really has been pretty
strenuous. I had this Leader of the Senate business for a time, Harold
disappearing and then the campaign, then various crises since. I just
want to try to get four or five or six days before we really get stuck
into it again.
Q. PM: How many reports are you taking with you?
Pleas e.. you don't know where I'm going, but if you find out
don't reveal it' / 2 
Q. Prime Minister, will you release the correspondence to Sir
Henry Bolte on the tax?
PM: Yes, I will, but so far I haven't had Sir Henry Bolte's reply to
our letter to him, and I would like to get his reply and release both
together.
Q. We understand you have to pay this tax?
PM: I don't know whether we have to pay lis tax or not. This would
be ultimately a matter for some other decision. But we are not
collecting from our Commonwealth employees the tax which he has
imposed on wages and salaries.
Q. As the Member for Higgins, you are subject to this tax?
PM: Oh, me personally? Yes, while this legislation is in force,
it will probably cost me about $ 10 a rear or something like that.
Do you intend to pay it?
14: Yes, of course I do.
Q. Willxj~ a compensatory deduction at the next Premiers'
Conf erence?
P0M: I think all I can tell you is this. We have expressed our opinion
to Sir Henry Bolte on this general taxation that he has imposed. We, as
a government, have no quarrel with a stamp tax, a turnover tax, a tax
on receipts. We feel that a tax on wages and salaries, even though it
would be a flat rate tax, in fact, in principle, is a tax on income, and
we could not accept that as a principle. This does not necessarily mean
any immediate action on our part, but it does mean that we are not going
Ito cdilect it, and we regard it'. in principle as a tax On income and therefore
a breach of the Uniform Taxation Agreement. Now, while I am waiting
for a reply from the Premier of Victoria, we don't want to have any
I confrontation on this sort of matter, any sort of violent quarrel There
are a whole lot of things connected with it that will require discussion
and ultimate resolution, but there is no violent hurry about the thing.
Q. In your early observations, do you see this as a real threat to
uniform taxation? Do you see a collapse? / 3 
PM:
Q. Again, at the moment that would be my intention but again I want,
as a matter of courtesy, to confer with Mr McEwen and Mr McMahon
MR EGGLETON: so again, they could understand that without quoting you.
PM: Yes.
Q. When do you expect to get the " Voyager" report?
PM: I've got it. I got it yesterday. I got a copy. The Governor-GeneraI.
got a copy. I am told that it will be about a fortnight or possibly three weeks
Well, let us put it this way. I don't regard this imposition of
one cent on one dollar in itself as a threat to uniform tax ation After all,
the Western Australian Government has been imposing something of the
kind for some time. but if the principle were accepted and ultimately to be
expanded so that it became ten cents or fifty cents or something like that,
then that would then reach a stage where it would be a threat to uniform
taxation. You haven't proposed anything in the nature of what might be
cal-led reprisals, and are going to cut Sir Henry's ground from underneath
him? No, I haven't. I have presented to Sir Henry our views on this
matter. I am awaiting his and his Cabinet's reply to our views on this
matter, and have been suggesting that we might all get together and have
a talk about this matter before it blows up like a pyrotechnic or something.
Does that mean the next Premiers' Conference?
Well, it could be one before, it could be the next one. Other
Premiers are interested in this too....
It is not just a Liberal family matter.
Oh, no.
Have you fixed a date for the meeting of Parliament, Prime Minister?
Of Parliament?
Yes. This is not for attribution. For myself, I would like the Parliament
to meet about the 12th March, but I would like, as a matter of courtesy,
to talk to the Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party
which I have not yet done. I don't think we can meet before that, which
gives us twelve days or so after the 26th February.
Are we right in understanding that it is likely to be that date?
Yes.
PM:
8Q.-PM: Q. PM:
Q. PM:
0. PIM: 
PM ( Contd.) sufficient bulk printing for distribution it is then my intention to release it
so that all concerned could study it before the Parliament, if there needed
to be anything to be done in Parliament, rather than waiting met and
tabling it, because it is a pretty bulky report. It is about that thick.
If we waited until Parliament met and put it down on the table, people
could, I think quite rightly, say, " We have hardly had time to study this
before some debate or other comes on" so I would be intending to release
it
Q. Will Cabinet have to examine it first?
PM!, No. Why?
Q. I just wondered.
Q. Will this be part of the work you will be studying during your
period in smoke?
04: Oh, I spent a long time last night reading it.
Q. The broad findings, Sir?
PM: The broad findings oh.. dear.... do you want this
for publication?
Q. Well even " understanding" as background, Sir.
PM: Off the record background. I really think I had better not go
further than that. I haven't spoken to the Governor-General who has
got his report about-it, and the only other one it has come to is me.
Other Members of my Government might want to have a look at it before
I sort of did anything more than off -the--record background stuff. From the
0 reading I was able to do yesterday afternoon
Q. May I interrupt, Sir? There is a confusion between' 6ff the
record" and " background" I think in your mind, Sir. Background'Is
0something you can use without attribution. " Off the record" is
something that we must not use.
MR EGGLETON!' I think the PM means " off the record" in its purest sense.
PM: I think I do on this one.
Q. Can you assist us a bit more? Does it upset, say, the original
finding. Something we can use for background just in a broad way. 
MR EGGLETON: I think the PM has explained that he has to talk to his colleagues
about this, and for them to read it in the papers....
PM: That one we leave for the moment. But off the record what it says
and I use my own words is this. Cabban didn't tell anything that was
untrue in his own mind as being untrue but he dramatised a helluva of a lot.
He saw himself as the centre of all sorts of things that came along. He
exaggerated. When you sifted his evidenc out, it became quite clear that
Stevens wasn't a drunkard, a chronic drunkard or subjected to alcohol or
anything of that kind, and indeed, when they questcned Cabban about it, he, Cabban,
agreed that there could be no allegations against Stevens' seamanship and there
could be no allegations that Stevens was an alcoholic or a drunkard. But on at
least two occasions in port during the 184 days' voyage, Stevens had been
affected by alcohol, but he had probably been affected by alcohol because he
had an ulcer, which with a small amount of alcohol was upset. The report
recommended that before anybody with a record of having had an ulcer was
appointed to command, they should have an extra specially severe medical
check befor e they were appcfnted. I can't quite remember the terms, but it
said the Naval Board obviously didn't know there was anything at all wrong
with Stevens, couldn't have known a couple of the medical officers hadn't
done their duty by filling in the appropriate forms when Stevens went to
see them about having an ulcer. That's the guts of the report.
Q: Sir, have you made any assessment yet of the current si tuation
in Viet Nam? No because it is such a fluid situation. It is changing syjfapidly.
WI have been speaking to the Minister for the Army this morning. You make
an assessment of something which is in such a state of fluidity, it is daabtful
whether-it is worth a very great deal. There has been some suggestion that
W our own troops have been moved into a northern area of combat. Well this is
not so. Our contribution was to the Third Corps area, and I can show you a
map of what the Third Corps area is, if you are interested in seeing it. Now,
this is the area in which our troops have always been intended to op erate,
although when we have only had two battalions there instead of the three, we now
have, the operation through other parts of that area have been very inhibited.
Well we have got three battalions now and one of them is operating. I think it
is about thirty miles away from the main base, that's all. It is not sort of
way up on
Q. Still in the area.? 
PM: Yes, still in that area. We have had some casualties in the
last couple of days but the next of kin have n ot yet been properly
informed. We have had casualties heavier than we have in the past been
having.
Q. Is this off the record, Sir?
PM: No, you can say this. We'll have the whole of the relatives of
e verybody up there upset if we use the casualties one I think we
must keep that off the record.
Q. Can we understand that, without attribution?
PM: No, I think we had better leave that off the record. But they are
not operating more than thirty miles away, this battalion we have been
speaking of. Again off the record, we have had six or seven killed in
the last couple of days. But everybody with any relatives up there will
be so upset in thinking it's theirs that we have got to let them be notified
first.
Q. Can you tell us, Sir, what progress has been made in surveying
the general future of defence in South-East Asia.
PM: Malays ia/ Singapore? Only, a's you already know, Paul Hasluck
is leaving, lie is going to talk to Harry Lee, he is going to talk to the
Tunku, to see what their views on this are. It's an exploratory r~ ji~ g
more than anything else, to see what they see for the future, what they
have in mind as to anything that might come out of a Five-Power pact
meeting.. And then he will be talking to New Zealand, and he will, I am
delighted to say, be speaking to the Indonesian Government as well during
the course of this visit. It is essential that anything we do. if we
do anything in the future is seen not as directed against any country
in that area.
Q. Will yMxx he be seeking to set a date or fix a time when a
meeting might be held?
PM: No, he won't. We will be leaving that to other people. But what
he will be seeking to do is to find out..... he's going to Harry Lee,
he's going to the Tunku and saying " You have been talking about Five-
Power Pacts, you have been talking about what might happen when the
British pull out, what do you have in mind, what do you see, what sort
of contribr-utions do you imagine could come from other places 
PM ( Contd.) for what purpose? If there are some Australian troops in a base which
had been previously occupied both by British and Australian troops and
logistic supply has been provided to that base, what do you see for the
future of the logistic supply? Do you expect to take it over yourselves,
Singapore/ Malaysia? Do you expect us to take it over? If so, why?
just what, in detail, you see as the future in this area".
Q. Coming back to Viet Nam. In view of these latest developments,
is there any suggestion that Australia will increase its commitment?
PM: Australia won't increase its commitment.
Q. Have we been asked to?
PM: No.
Q. Is that a permanent statement, Sir? Or the position as it.
As far as I am concerned it is.
What about the visit to South-East Asia.
PM: With the best of intentions, and really wanting to do it, I can't
it coming up before the end of April ci May. If we meet on the 12th, if
we meet having prorogued and having the Speech from the Throne, it
looks to me as if the session would go on well into May, anyway. I
suppose it might be posbeithr) eicfai uisg would'b'ebreak over Easter to rort
off and have a quick run-round. I would prefer, if possible, to wait until
the first Session is out of the way, and you can go at more leisure and
spend more time and talk to more people without so much pressure.
Any countries in mind? Any particular countries?
Oh, clearly, the places I would want to go to would be Indonesia,
Singapore, Malaya, Thailand, South Viet Nam, Japan, and if there were
time.... now, I had better not say that in that way the United States.
Are you including a trip to New Zealand, Sir?
PM: I would hope it might well be fitted in. As you probably know,
I think the first Prime Minister that I spoke to from any Commonvml th
country, after I was appointed to this position, was the Prime Minister of
New Zealand, and he extended an immediate invitation to go there as
soon as it was possibly convenient for me to do so.
Q. Have -you had formal invitations from W ther places?
PM: Not as far as I know. Not formal. They have all sort of said...
you know their Ambassadors and people.... have all sort of said " For 
PM ( Contd.) invitations as yet. I would have thought you can correct me, you
people who know more about this than I do that the normal way this was
done was to have the External Affairs Department to say to their External
Affairs Departments: " Our Prime Minister is interested in going around"
and get a reaction from them.
Q. Sir, you omitted Nationalist China from the list of countries
you would like to visit. Was that accidental?
PM: It was neither deliberat~ fior accidental. But they don't seem to
me to be ( interjection:; Important?) I didn't say that.' They don't
seem to me to be ones that are involved in this particular visit.
Q. South Korea is involved in the Viet Nam dispute.... i( China?).
PM: Yes, I know it is, but surely neither South Korea not\ Viet Nam,
important as they may be, are so immediately we are not surely so
immediately involved with problems there as we are with Singapore or
Malaysia or Indonesia or Viet Nam or Thailand or the United States.
Q. Sir, does this mean that if the fighting blew up in -Korea, there
would be no question of sending an Australian troop commitment there?
With what we have got in Viet Nam and in Malaysia?
PM: This is what President Roosevelt used to call a terribly " iffy"
question. We've got an ANZUS pact with the United States which says
that if the forces of either country are attacked in specified areas, then
the other country will act in accordance with its constitutiona. processes
or words to that effect. ftikf If you want a personal opinion, I believe
that with what we are doing in Viet Nam, if we retain our present le vel
of forces in Singapore and the Malaysia area, that is abont all a country
of our size could reasonably be expected to do. But this is all an answer
* to a terribly " iffy" question; tethnhgs haven'tcome up
yet. Fighting hasn't broken out. We haven't been asked. No-one has
approached
Q. We are usually available to go into a United Nations force, aren't
we?
PM: Yes, we usually are, but how much we could divert to a United
Nations force now we've got an awful lot doing right here.
MR EGGLETON: That last one. Was that for attribution?
Q. Wjich one?
MR EGGLETON: The last one on the use of forces. fma The " iffy" question and 
PM: Well, I don't mind that " iffy" question one being
used. Well, look, use it, but use it " not for attribution".
MR EGGLETON: If I might say PM, if we want to get to Melbourne, I think perhaps
just one more question....
PM: Oh, we'll get there in time.
Q. Have you given any more thought to your new Minis try?
PM: Oh, forget that one.
Q. Are you at all apprehensive about what is going on
with the APWU as a result of their wage claim being knocked back by
the Public Service Board. Have you given any thought to taking the
Postal Unions out of the Public Service proper?
PM: Well, the second part of your question has nothing
really to do with the immediate problem because they are in now. They've
made an approach to the Public Service Board and they have had a reply,
and as you will have noticed, I have asked the Public Service Board to take
all the steps it can. It is not completely in control because the Public
Service Arbitrator is a quasi-judicial chap who makes his own mind up.
But I have asked them to try and see as best they can that there is no delay
in the hearing of an appeal from the Public Service Board, and I would hope
that these processes of arbitration which, if I understand it correctly,
could if the Arbitration Court itself agreed, finish up in the Arbitration
Court, would not be delayed, so that the steps are open all the way through.
Therefore I hope that these steps would be taken. Now you have gone on
from that to ask a real policy 14uestion. All I will say in reply to that
policy question, to use the words that you used to me has any thought been
given to it? Some thought has been given to it, but that is not to be
construed into any suggestion that something will be done or might be done
or is likely to be done. It is just that the matter hasn't escaped attention.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, are you about to have talks with people
like the Commonwealth Police and Attorney-General's Department about this
vexed question of personal security for yourself?
PM: I have been told I ought to have t alks with somebody
in the Prime Minister's Department on it. I don't mind a reasonable
amount of personal security but I don't want guys following me around all
the time.
Q. You have been seen to have been giving them a bit 
PM: Is that right? They have lost me a couple of times?
Q. Sir, there has been talk of growing Australian interest
in the Indian Ocean. Could we expect defence talks to take place with
India, South Africa and other countries interested in this area?
Q. I have heard no suggestion of that from the Defence
Department nor have I thought about it myself.
Thank Y'ou. 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
B Town Hall, Sydney, NSW FEBRUARY, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr President, Mr Osborne, Mr Premier, all those gathered behind
me and all those in this hall
I begin to make the first speech that I have made as Prime
Minister, dealing with political affairs. The speech that I am going to make
to you is the first of many because there seem to be elections coming thick
and fast in the immediate future. Firstly we have the election to choose once
again Mr Askin as the Premier of New South Wales, then on the same day
we have an election which, I sincerely hope, will choose me as the Member
for Higgins. Early in March, there is an election in South Australia, and
soon after that one in Western Australia.
It is my hope and my belief that you here will see that on February
24, this Stat e sets an ex ample for the rest of Australia to follow by choosing
once again that man, whom I think you will agree, has led this State since
19.65 with distinction, with vitality and with success. Certainly it is an h-rtour
and a pleasure for me to stand here with him on this platform today supp'i.. ing
him at the time of his election, not only because of what he has done in tl_-' s
State, but also because of the meetings I have had with him in the last mco . th
or so, meetings where it became perfectly clear that what he ha(, done he
had done against difficulties, in that he had to take over the running of this
State at a time when one of the greatest droughts Australia has Iknown hit the
capacity of this State to look after itself as it has hit the capacity of other
Eastern States, and that in spite of that handicap, he has been able to do what
he has done. I can assure you of this, ladies and gentlemen, that he has proved
himself to me to be a most persuasive and a most dedicated advocate for the
State which he represents and has provided all the arguments concerning
drought and other disabilities which could be put on behalf of this part of
Australia. Therefore it is a happy augury and a rieasure for me to be with
him, beginning what I hope will be a continuing partnership with ourselves in
the Federal sphere and Mr Askin in the State sphere and other Liberals in
other State spheres, so that together we can, each according to our fashion,
each according to the Constitution, see that Australia is developed as a whole,
and that each part of it is run by those nearest. to the people in that part of it.
I don't mean by this, ladies and gentlemen, that in such a partnership
and it will be, I know, a close partnership there will not be from
time to time differences of opinion as to priorities, differences of opinionas
to proposals. This is inevitable in any partnership if it is to run properly, it
is inevitable in any Federal system, and particularly inevitable in a Federal
system in which one or two States have much greater development, much
greater population resources than have the other States of a nation. But while
these matters in the future can be the subject of discussion, can be the subject
of initial disagreement and then of resolution I would go on to say this that
if those discussions are family discussions, as they would be between us in
the Commonwealth and Mr Askin in New South Wales, if they are discussions I2 
between governments having the samye ' general eamplexion-and the same general
approach as to the place of the individuial Jn. s ociety, then those matters will be
more susceptible of resolution, more susceptible of amicable arrangement than
could be possible were there to be a different complexion of government in this
State, or indeed in others.
I have spoken of possible differences of opinion not to emphasise
it but as a lead-in to problems which face both a Commonwealth Government and
a State Government in the years ahead, for this much is certain. Neither a
Commonwealth Government nor a State Government in the years immediately
ahead will have the resources to do all that they would like to do, or to do it as
quickly as they would like to do it, because consider what it is that people in
Aua tralia really want.
Imagine yourself on the top of some high hill, looking out over a
populated valley where the lights twinkle below you at night, and thinking each
one of those lights is a light in the home of an Australian family. What is it
they seek to build their country into; what is it they wish for them selves, and
how best can we try to achieve what they wish for themselves and what they
wish for their nation. You can imagine yourself in that position. You would
answer your question in what is perhaps a contradictory way.
You would say, I think, or I would say for yo6u: What Australians
w ant is to see that the aged needy, the ill needy, those really suffering from
unfortunate circumstances through no fault of their own, should be adequately
proAded for by the nation, but that this should be done without destroying the
incentive to save, and without destroying the incentive to self-reliance. r~ his,
in itself, requires I think, some rethinking of our policies in these matters,
and requires some significant effort from Governments and from the people
from whom Governments gain their revenue.
And they would say, we want in this nation the capacity for every
individual to be able to develop to the utmost his own inherent capacitijes
through education, whether it be conventional, or technical, or whatever it
may be. And that requires enormous resources.
And they would say we want defence for this country, we want
defence sufficient to make sure that we are true allies of those whom in the
ultimate our future may depend, our future existence may depend, that we can
help those countries nearest to us towards stability, that we can save In our
own country sufficient in the future to take the first shock of any attack that
might ever be made upon us in the future, until such time as the allies whom
we have supported and helped could come to our help, as I am sure they would.
And that requires enormous resources from the people.
And they would say we want development of this nation. We want
to see resources which now lie unused be utilised so that throughout the whole
of this country we will have not only employment opportunities, not only new
industries, but the new industrial muscl'es which they will bring to us, and which
in their turn will build us into a great material nation, and help, in their turn,
the development of ourselves towards the future which is possible if we reach out
to grasp it with sufficient effort. And this requires enormous resources.
And they would say, and rightly say, while we want these things,
we also wish that the burden of taxation upon individuals in this nation should
not be raised to such heights that the incentive to produce, that the incentive
to strive, that the incentive to save is removed from those individuals in the
private sector, upon whom' " in the last resource, the final growth of this nation
s. 3 
must depend. wish t, 6 see not only-tkiAñ hese -national
objectives I have outlined are -t tT-VZ&amp;. us parts of Australia those
Governments more directly in touch with the peoplo-should have resources
to carry out the responsibilities directly laid upon them by the Constitution.
I could go on, I could go on expanding this list of that which you
r equire, of that which our nation requires, but I thinkc I have said enough,
have I not to indicate that all these things cannot at once be done, that they
are to some extent contradictory, and that therefore th~ ere must be a choosing
of priorities, a decision as to which of these progranres it is that will most
advance this nation and most provide a happy existence lor the inhabitants of
it. And so if there is to be a choosing of priorities in'these fields, as there
must be, then that will be a choosing of priorities taker I hope and believe,
by a Commonwealth Government which is a Liberal/ Country Party Government,
by a State Government which is a Liberal/ Country Party Government, and
while there may be discussions as to the relative importance of particular
priorities, at least it will be a ' s I have said before, a famiiy discussion, and
one between people with the same ultimate objectives.
And these objectives, apart from those goals which I sketched,
and sketched so briefly to you this afternoon, are objectives which we feel
that we must reach within a certain framework. We do not think that we can
attain those aims I have set beforeq you by handing everything over to a
government and to officials and say: " You attain this. We will bow out as
individuals". We feel, and it is undoubtedly true, that a government must
create the climate for the achievement by individuals of which I have spoken,
that in many fields the government must take social action for the good of the
community as a whole.
~ let me expand a little on that social action because we hear a
lot, and sometimes an unthought lot, I think, about socialism and how bad
socialism is, but we have got to define what, we mean by this before we come
to any meaningful conclusion. After all, it is not so long ago since the
participation of government in any field was classified as socialism, and yet
who here would object to the Governme~ at entering into the field of providing
railways or roads or electricity. or Water supply for irrigation, or water
supply for a city, or many of t fiese other public utilities. So while
governments must enter these fields, it rhust~ always be the aim of a Liberal
Government to see that they enter only thote lields where it is necessary,
that they leave within the framework they lay down the greatest amount of
possible area for individual achievement, unhampered by bureaucratic
intervention. PAnd that having done that, having cre ated that climate, they
can then look with confidence, as I believe they cqn, to the men and women
of Australia, to make use of the opportunities provided by the Government
according to their own bent, according to their own iiate) igence, according
to their own effort, according to their own will, and that if men and women
do that, they deserve any reward they get as a result of what they have done.
This is a common approach, and this is an approach upon which, I think, will
be built a great nation.
We have got facing us at the moment grievous and hetavy burdens
in overseas affairs. You will have seen sorre thing that I have said in relation
to Viet Nam, perhaps the most grievous burden we now have to bear. You
will perhaps have noticed that I said we feel that we as a nation of 12 million,
a small nation, a nation with a population of Greater London or Greater
New York, and with enormous calls upon us in these other fields I have
mentioned, are doing all that can reasonably be requized from us. I want to 
-4
elaborate on that. I want to make this.-clear. You will forgive me, I hope,
if at this point I read a little, so that what * I say to you will be what I have
written to say to you and to others outside this-ball.'
On this problem, one which is the heaviest facing Australia,
our own policy is clear. We believe that the late President Kennedy sent
United States troops to South Viet Nam to help the Government of that country
to resist armed attacks upon it and that those attacks were instigated, controlled,
supplied and maintained by the North Vietnamese Government which supplied
regular troops to assist and command the insurgents.
Since that time more and more North Vietnamese regular army
troops have been deployed in the South and the fighting has assumed the
character of an invasion of South Viet Nam by the Government of North Viet
Nam. We believe the United States, under President Kennedy, was right
to take, and is right to persist in its resistance to this aggression not
because it is communist aggression but because it is aggression, and such
aggression, whatever the reason for it anywhere in the world, is a threat to
the ultimate peace of the world. If it is successful, it is likely to be repeated
again and again until, as we have seen in our own lifetime, it eventually must
be stopped at a cost of pain and blood' and treasure infinitely greater than if
it were stopped at the beginning.
Because of that belief, and because of our adherence to and
reliance on the United States alliance, we are pla~ ng our full part in assisting
the military resistance to that aggression not only by providing ground
troops, tanks, aircraft and naval vessels, but by bearing the full cost of
arming, maintaining, munitioning, supplying and provisioning all those forces
which we send to assist the alliance.
We shall continue to do this for as long as is necessary to attain
our objective of preventing aggression's success. At the same time, we have
always realised that the military effort in Viet Nam is, although absolutely
necessary, only one of the components required to win this kind of war.
The other component is the raising of standards of everyday living
in the areas where military forces provide a shield for the civilian population.
And so, from the beginning, one of the tasks of our Army has been to provide
civil aid in the area in which they serve to provide not only money -and
materials but man power to assist in the villages in providing grass roots
assistance medical aservices of a medic kind, schoolrooms, wells, small
bridges and culverts, and matters of that nature.
To sum up, our objective is to prevent, or to make increasingly
difficult and costly, the operation of enemy troops whether regular or guerrila
and steadily to improve the living conditions of the villagers and townspeople
in the area. Whether this is successful or not will depend on the will of those
engaged. But it can be successful, and our will to play our part towards this
objective is firm,. continuing and will not be changed. But wit h such a mighty
choice befcre our country, with that being what your Government seeks to do,
I believe the time has come when an alternative policy ought to be advanced, if
it is going to be advanced, by an Opposition.
What the Opposition' s alternative policy is I do not know, and I
doubt if anybody knows. The governing body of the Labor Party has laid down
a policy which requires specifically 
That all bombing of supply routes from the North. should immediately
and unconditionally be stopped.
That allied troops in Viet Nam should remain in their present
positions and cease fighting except to repel attacks upon
themselves and this was described as a holding operation; and
That if the United States or the South Vietnamese will not agree
to these conditions, then we must immediately abandon the United
States alliance and withdraw Australian troops from Viet Nam.
That is the official policy of the Opposition, and one I believe they are bound
at present to carry out. But it is one which the Leader of the Opposition has
sought to blur, and to conceal from Australians so that we hear vague talk
and unspecific suggestions from the Leader which appear to slither away from
the policy by which he is constrained.
Ladies and gentlemen, don't you think the time has come when
Australians have the right to know exactly what the Opposition policy on Viet
Nam is, and the Opposition have a clear duty to explain specifically what it
is, that there should be no more attempts to deny or conceal or misrepresent
it, nor further examples of different spokesmen advancing different policies.
We have a right to know what the alternative choice is, and we have a right to
know now, and I ask that we should be told now on this matter of such great
importance. Lord knows, ladies and gentlemen, the one thing that I find grievous
is that we should, at this point of time, according to our own judgment of what
is right, be rcquired to expend so much upon an insuranc~ e policy, upon defence,
when there is so much required to be done for our own people and in our own
country. Don't think because I have spent some time on this matter that I
regard it as of more importance than our own growth and our own development,
and the care of our own citizens. I do it because it is a matter which strikes
to the root of Australia's survival, and we ' Ought to know what alternate parties
think. Having thought that, then we hope that having achieved peace there, we
can turn to an examination of these other matters I have raised with you, and
that having made this exami,~ ation, not we, the Federal Government, not Mr
Askin the State Government, but our Governments with you. We, in that sense,
can attack and overcome our internal problems, and together build that nation
which I know it is in our capacity to build and which I know it is in our destiny
to achieve. 



\ 9 ER'Sr
FOR PRESS " 1 PM. No. 18/ 1968
COMPETITION TO WSELECT NATIONAL GALLERY DESIGNER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
A competition will be held to select an architect to design
Australia's National Gallery in Canberra.
It is intended that the competition will be among architects
practising In Australia including some of the younger men In the profession.
The entries will be assessed by:
1. Eminent architect and specialist in creative arts, Mr Robin Boyd
2. Chairman of the National Capital Planning Committee, Sir John
Overall.
3. Vice President of the R. A. 1. Mr J. H. McCon nell.
The aim of the Government and the Assessors is to obtain a
vigorous and Imaginative architect with a touch of adventure. It is very
Important that the design of the Gallery should reflect the most modern thinking
of the present day, that it should be particular to Australia and be an
expression of the national character.
The limited competition Is for a design approach. The winqer
will be commissioned to submit the actual design of the Gallery.
A site has been nominated for the purposes of the competition,
but the final site for the building is still to be determined by the Government.
The services of a Gallery Director of world standing will be
sought to assist in the preparation of the final brief for the appointed architect.
The competition should enable the designer of the National
Gallery to be chosen by June this year.
By that time, the governing body of the Gallery should have been
appointed and be available for the necessary consultations to enable the
detailed design work to proceed.
Planning for the project is directed towards having the building
completed early In the 19701s.
CANBERRA, 6 February, 1968 



*' 1c ti
FOR PRE~ CS: 20 FEB1968
/ RA P. M. No. 2C/ 1C63
ADDITICNAL FINANCE FOR THE SCTATES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, announced today that, in
resp onse to requests from the States, the Commonwealth had agreed to
provide special revenue assistance totalling $ 13 million to be distributed
between the four Statec still being affected by drought. The Commonwealth
had also indicated that it would be prepared to support an increase of
$ 23 million in the approved Loan Council borrowing programmes for Ctate
semi-government authorities. The States would thus have access to
additional funds totalling $ 33 million in 1967-68.
The Prime Minister said that the additional grants this year to
the four drought-affected Ctates would help them at a time when drought
had affected their revenues. Through the procedures of the Grants
Commission, such assistance would also help the budgets of the other two
Statec of V'estern A ustralia and Tasmania. Mr. Corton pointed out that
this assistance was in addition to that being rovided to meet the full cost
of State expenditure on drought relief measures; co far the Commonwealth
had , provided over $ 44 million under these arrangements and by the end
of the current financial year it was expected that the total amount made
available would be in excess of $ 50 million.
The Prime Minister indicated that the special revenue assistance
of $ 13 million, which would take the form of a non-recurring grant, would
be distributed between the four States concerned in proportion to their
chs. res of the 1967-60 financial assistance grants under the grants formula.
These had not yet been finally determined but, on present estimates, would
provide the following amounts:-million
New South V. ales 5.1
Victoria 3.3
Queensland 2.4
South Australia 1.7
13. C
As regards the proposed increase in the Loan Council borrowing
prcgramme for semi-government authorities in 1967-68, the Prime
Minister said that the Commonwealth had offered to support an increase
of $ 20 million notwithstanding the large increase from $ 268 million to
$ 311 million approved at the June 1967 Loan Council meeting. Conditions
in the loan market ap. eared to make it possible to raise additional
amounts in the current financial year and, in these circumstances, the
Commonwealth had agreed that advantage could be teken of this situation
to enable State authorities to seek loan funds to carry out additional / 2 
2.
programmes of work which could include such important areas as
electricity, water and cewerage and roads. The Commonwealth had
advised the States that as this additional borrowing authority had a
special character deriving from conditions in the current financial year,
the Commonwealth would not wish it to be taken ac forming part of the
bacis on which the cemi-government borrowing programmes for 196C-69
would be determined. The . tates had agreed to the proposed increase.
The Frime Minister went on to say that the Treasurer, as
Chairman of the Loan Council, had obtained the approval of the Loan
Council to the additional borrowing allocation of million being
distributed as follows:-million
New South ales 6.36
Victoria 7.15
Queensland 3.97
South Australia 1. C
V/ estern Australia 82
Tasmania G. 64
C1: Meb3 RR
9th February, 1968. 



FOR PR ESS: OFFICE 01F TH-EE PRESS SECRETA. RY
TO THE PRIME MINISTER,
PARLIAMENT HOLE E,
CANBE RRA.
VISIT 3Y TEH. R. H. THE DUKE Or-DINBURGH
It was announced in London last night that the Duke of
Ir Edinburgh, who is to visit Australia in May to attend the Third Commonweath
Study Conference, will also visit New Zealand.
Background Note on Visit to Australia
The Duk-e of Edinburgh will open H. R. H. The Duke of
21dinburgh's Third Commonwealth Study Conference in Sydney on
Monday, 13th May. His Royal Highness will also attend the Closing Session
of the Conference in Melbourne on Monday, 3rd June and will leave
Australia on the following day ( Tuesday 4th June;,.
It Is within this period that the visit to New Zealand
ios tkeplaeA programme of engagements in draft form is being
prepared for The Duke of Edinburgh's Australian visit, and an announcement
of these details will be made after the proposals have been submitted to
and accepted by His Royal Highness.
CANBERRA, 9th February, 1963 



HIGGINS BY-ELECTION CAMPAIGN
OPENING SPEECH BY THEE PRIME MINISTER, N BR&gt;
JOHN GORTON
Caulfield Town Hall, Melbourne 13TH FEBRUARY, 1968
Mr Ch~ airman, Mr Premier, Wr Anthony, Mr McMahon, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I come before you tonight as a candidate for t he seat of.
Higgins, seeking the endorsement of the electors of Higgins, and asking
them to place me In that situation which was previously held by a great
Australian who led this country for two years. This is, in essence, a
by-election, a request to the electors of Higgins in particular that they
should think me worthy, as I hope they will, to fill that place so tragically
vacated by Mr Holt. I would try and fill it as well as he did.
I must say to the electors of Higgins tonight, and to those
people In Australia who may be outside this hall or outside the electorate
tonight, the attitudes which I would adopt, the approaches which my Government
would adopt, towards the future progress of this, our joint country. But
there is something I must say to you at once, and that is that this is not
tonight, this speech, and I think it ought not to be, a policy speech in the
sense that policy speeches are made at general elections. This is no
time at a by-election, being held two-thirds of a way through a financial
year for which a government has budgeted, for which it has struck a rate of
taxation, for which it has assessed expenditure and income, to launch out
into new promises involving new expenditure, and either new rates of
taxation or increases in deficit.
Indeed, I think that a mini-policy at this time could well
be held to be irresponsible. Rather, I think, is this a time to express to
the electorate and to Australia, our approaches to the needs of Australia,
the goals which we will set ourselves to try and attain as and when we can,
the course on which we will seek to steer our country towards the future
years of greatness which lie in store for us.
And so I shall talk to you tonight of the settled policies
which we have adopted and will continue to adopt on defence, on foreign
affairs, on relations with our neighbours, for on these things, indeed, may
depend in the ultimate our capacity eventually, acting as a free people, to
work out our own destiny and to decide what our domestic progress will
indeed be. Having spoken of these th ings, this touchstone which may
decide the future of Australia as an Independent nation, then I shall seek to
put before you certain domestic matters, and the approaches and the emphasis
which we would put on these domestic matters.
First let me talk to you on the question of Defence.
I have said that on our efforts here may well depend our capacity in future
years to decide our own destiny and to run our own affairs. This calls now,
In the state of the world as it is at present, for a significant and an onerous
effort from the Australian people, and an effort which all of us would wish,
were circumstances different, could be put not into an Insurance policy but
into the kind of development for which our effort in defence could do so much. ./ 2 
-2
However great the effort we make In defence and it is
becoming great In no future that I can foresee can we In Australa rely
on ourselves alone, or remain secure without alliance with some friendly
and significantly powerful ally, having the same approach to life as we
Australians have... ( Interjection " The same old line") and a true old
line and a line on which Australia has depended for more than a century
and a half, from the United Kingdom.
For us, though we can look to, and though I am sure we
would in a crisis be given military assistance in time of need by the United
Kingdom, who for over a century and a half has been our shield and our
buckler, and to whom, if blood be the price of protection Lord God, we
have paid in full, but who has for that period of time protected us, and to
whom we could still look for protection, yet the changing years have
ordained that In the ultimate, the security of this small nation now depends
on its alliance with the United States, and on protection from the United
States. No small nation such as ours can, in the world as it is today, I
suggest to you, iive with happiness and security and safety without
protection of that kind.
This Is a fact which places on us, as I believe, a duty of
being an ally, when we think the United States Is right, in the fullest sense
of the word, of being prepared to contribute, as we have been prepared to
contribute In the past, and not merely to receive and give nothing In return.
That, as a basis for a defence policy for Australia is, I believe, essential
for our future security. That is why the expenditure on defence In this
country has risen until it is this year 118 million, and with commitments
we have already entered Into and which will flow from the commitments
we have already entered into, will in the two years ahead Increase above that
figure. It is not a sum which alone can afford us security but It Is the
smallest sum which, I suggest to you, we can with honour expend, and as
a result of it, expect that protection which may be necessary for our future
progress. ( Interjection " Not for my son, Clive)
Well, I don't know where your son, Olive, is sir, but there
are a number of other sons of a number of other Austraan s in the past, now
and in the future who no doubt would be prepared to back what I have said
for the sake of their country.
That, Mr Chairman, leads me to a discussion on the
position which past governments have taken up and which this government
will sustain on the matter of our involvement In Viet Nam. I believe our
policy In Viet Nam, the policy of the Government, ought to be stated, or
rather, re-stated clearly, and I shall try to do this.
Firstly, we believe that the United States was right, uni er
President Kennedy in the later half of 1961, to accede to the South Vietnamese
request for military assistance to counter a military Incursion from the
North. And we believe the United States Is right, under President Johnson,
to have continued and to continue the courg-efirst mapped by President
Kennedy in this matter. We believe that when the original decision was made armed
attacks were being made on South Viet Nam, and that those attacks were
Instigated, controlled, supplied and maintained by the North Vietnamese o 9 / 3 
-3
which provided regular troops to assist and command the insurgents. We
believe that in spite of the terrorist activity carried on since that time,
local support has so fallen off In South Viet Nam that more and more North
Vietnamese regular armed troops have been deployed in the South, and that
the fighting has assumed the character of an invasion of South Viet Nam by
the Government of North Viet Nam, just as there was previously an Invasion
of SoUth Korea by the Government of North Korea.
It is true thts is aggression by a communist govenment
seeking to Impose its rule by force, but the prime reason for preventing
It succeeding is not because of its source, not because it stems, as it happens
to In this case, from a communisat country, but because it Is aggression.
That Is the reason for opposing it.
For I believe, and I suggest to all you Australians that
what best promotes our national security and the national security of other
small States, what best guarantees our national survival, along with the
survival of other small powers as truly Independent nations, Is that we
should havo a world in which aggression by one nation or part of one nation
against another is shown to be unsuccessful and does not succeed In whole
or in part. For if it is seen to succeed, then It Is likely as our history
has shown " as the history In tbe lifetimze of inumy people in this hall
has shown -if it Is seen to be successful, then It Is likely to be repeated and
repeated and repeated until eventually it must be stopped at a cost greater in
de~ truction, In pain and in loss of life than would have been required had it
been stopped at its Inception.
That is why Australians fought against the aggressions of
Hitler which succeeded one another until they had to be stopped... ( Cheers)
Sir, If you are prepared to cheer Hitler, I am not, any more than I am
prepared to cheer a communist dictator or any other governing power which
seeks to impose its wish by force upon some other independent nation.
That Is why Australians fought with the United Nations in
Korea against an attack on South Korea by North Korean naked aggression.
That is why Australians opposed the militant expression
of confrontation between Indonese-a and Malaysia, opposed it In conjunction
with the United Kingdom. And that is why we are right, as I believe, to
help our ally, the United States, In South Viet Nam.
We shall continue to take the action we are now taking
for as long it is necessary to help attain the objective of preventing the
success of North Vietnamese aggression. At the same time, we have always
realised that the military effort In Viet Nam, although absolutely necessary,
is only one of the components required In this kind of war.
The other component is the raising of standards of everyday
living in the areas where military forces provide a shield for the civilian
population a shield which can, of course, be pierced but which can prevent
the destruction of what Is sought to be done to raise living standards.
Let me, ladies and gentlemen, at this time, put to you an Illustration of
what I mean by that. I', t one stage, I was in charge of running the Colombo Plan 9 / 4 
-4-
for Australia, and in an attempt to help the people of South Viet Nam, quite
some years ago, we sought to take over we did take over a tract of land
of a kind which was not being used in that country because it was thought that
it could be in no way productive. By the introduction of special kinds of
legumes, of a manurial programme, we were able on that land to grow and to
show surrounding farmers there could be grown pastures on which cattle
could be grazed, and were able to set up a dairy farm at Ben Cat which provided
for the first time in history for the children of Saigorl pasteurised milk groyni
in that experimental farm and sent to the city.
This was an illustration to the people of that region of what
could be done. You can, from your own minds, Imagine what would have
happened there to inlcrease living standards had this been permitted to succeed,
but it was not permitted to succeed. It was not permitted to succeed because;
that farm was attacked, those cattle were slaughtered by the Viet Cong
regulars who did not wish living standards to be increased, because if they
were so increased, then it would show that we were able to provide a better.
standard of life than they themselves could do.
This is why there is a need for this protection of this civil
action. An d that is why from the very beginning, our army In Viet Nam has
been provided with money to carry out its own civil aid programme in the:
villages, to help with the medical treatment of the villagers, to help in the
small matters which mean so much to them the construction of a school.
house, the construction of a small culvert, the construction of a small
infirmary and the provision of village industries. These are the things which
go hand in hand with what we are trying to do, and the things which must.....
dyooue s suagnygbeostdiyn gd itshaagt rtehee? s e Itsh itnhgesr em suosmt en omt buer mduonr e, o f tdhiasta gwree emmuesnt t? n ot sAereek* to
build up the living standards of the villagers and the townsfolk? Because if
you do suggest that, then I can understand why you would oppose the policy
which we adopt. But If you dont, if you believe these should be built up and
should be shielded while they are being built up, then you must support what
we have done. To sum up our policy, Mr Chairman: We believe it right....
( interjections) Oh, yes, I think these policies should be summed up, don't
you? There has been a marked reluctance to sum them up In some quarters
on this matter. We believe It right to maintain the elementary right of the
South Vietnamese people to determine their own future, as they showed in.
recent elections they were capable of doing. We will continue to provide,
as we are providing, significant and effective military assistance to the
allied effort to achieve this aim, and we will provide it for as long as we are
called upon to help achieve this aim.
We will support, as we have supported, the many efforts by
the United States and the United Nations for discussions seeking a negotiat ed
end to the war and a settlement which provides the South Vietnamese with a
just and an enduring peace under which they can determine their own future.
The United States has amply demonstrated Its desire for such discussions,
the United Nations has sought to help the United States to obtain such discussions,
but so far every such proposal has been rejected, whether it came from the
United Nations or the United States, by the North Vietnamese.
But, TMr President, there is one thing we will not do. We will
I 
not urge on the United States that there should be discussions designed
solely to negotiate methods of surrendering the South Vietnamese to thie
rule of the North, which Is a course which sometimes seems to be suggested
in this country. Nor will we urge on them that bombing designed to. impede
the flow of men and materials to the South, as distinct from bombing on a
civilian population men and materials travelling down to kill Australian
ca~ d Ameri1can troops -should be ectopped as a condition Imposed by the Viet
Cong for possible talks with no compensating conditions as to holding up the
sending of such men and material.
We will, insofar as we can, continue to seek to Improve the
economic lot and the living conditions of the villagers in the area In which
our troops operate, for we coneider this to be a vital and necessary task and
one which must, as soon as possible, be tackled through out the whole of
South Viet Nam. We will do it by continuing and expanding what we are
already doing.... ( Interjection If you hadn't Interjected you would have heard.
I will repeat It: By providing to the villagers the simple medical treatment
there required, by building school houses in the villages, by fostering
co-operatives In the villages and providing fertilisers so that their crops
can be yi by providing wells for pure water. Not by vast overriding
ioV% 49ab~ n approaches, but by getting down to the grass roots,
as we have been getting down to the grass roots In our area. That, sir, is
how we will do It, and that, sir, Is something I believe the people of South
Viet Nam understand and will appreciate, now want, and will want In the
future. I was seeking to spell out, before I was diverted, a policy
which we are going to implement, and I have sought to spell it out In simple
words, and words which can be understood by all, as I hope they will have
been. But this thing that I am discussing Is one of moment to the present
and to the future of Australia, one of moment to the association between
this nation and the United States, and therefore It is a matter of great public
concern. That Is why I have sought so carefully to try to put before* you,
whether you agree with It or not, what we are doing and what we will continue
to do. I bd ieve that on matters of this moment clear statements of
policy ought to be made.
But I do suggest this. Australians are denied or have so far
been denied any clear statement of policy on this matter by the Opposition.
It is true that last year the Federal Labor Confcrence, by resolution
( Interjection) adopted a policy which you clap which requires that the
United States should cease bombing North Viet Nam e~ n conditionally
( Cheers' Fine, fine, you express your opinion. This is what the Federal
Labor Conference adopted, and no doubt those who applauded agree with it,
as Is your right. They adopted a policy that the United States shctild
recognise the National Liberation Front the Viet Cong as a principal
party to negotiations ( boos... I don't know who you are booing, but I takce
it you are booing the Viet Cong. They adopted a policy that the United
States should transfcrm operations In South Viet Nam Into holding operations,
which means staying where you are and repelling attacks and allowing attacks. to
be concentrated and mounted against you and just pushing them back but not
doing anything to prevent them from materialising, or to move out Into
country surrounded by the enemy.
Now that is the policy that was adopted, I agree, by the
Federal Labor Conference. A further policy adopted was that If the United
States-did not accept this ultimatum on all these three points, then the / 6 
-6
Australian Government must withdraw Its armied forces' ( Interjections)
which, of course and those of you who clap, if you are Intellectually
honest must admit this means abandoning the expression of the United.
States / Australian alliance In Viet Nam.
Now these were resolutions adopted at the 1967 Conference
of the Australian Labor Party, and the Rules and Standing Orders of that
party state " The Federal Conference shall be the supreme governing
authority of the party.. : XInterjector " Hear, hear")
Well I think there is at least one man in Australia who disagrees with you,
f I heard him properly on
0 and its decision shall be binding upon every member and
every section of the party.
So it would seem, would it not, that this policy of presenting an ultimatum
and withdrawing all Australian troops, if It is not accepted, is the policy
of the Opposition, one would think.
But the present Leader of the Opposition refuses either to
confirm or to deny that this is the policy by which he is bound and which he
and his supporters are bound to carry out, and indeed, has Indicated that
no matter what the Federal Conference says, he is supreme and not bound
by It. I don't know whether that is true or not, but the people of
Australia ought to be told whether it Is true or not, because I think it fair to
say that there is an attempt here to blur the issue, to slither away from
questions and to be evasive. And further, I think it fair to say
( Interjector " Where Is your policy?) Where's my policy? I stated
it in explicit terms we are continuing to do what we have decided to do
because we think It right. Now that is clear, explicit and cannot be
misunderstood. I think It fair to say that if the Leader of the Opposition
is bound by the official policy, as I believe he Is, then carrying out that
policy would severely damage our relations with the United States and would
weaken, If not destroy, that Australian/ United States alliance on which our
future security could so much depend, and which the Opposition policy pays
is so important that they are going to withdraw Australian troops unless
the United States accepts an ultimatum in order to maintain the alliance
they regard as so important.
There is, therefore, I do believe, In the Interests of
proper ly-informed democratic debate, an obligation on the Leader of the
Opposition clearly to state whether he is inund to adhere to official Labor
policy, and whether he will do so, and if not, how he can avoid doing so,
assuming he wishes not to do so. And that ought to be a question which
could be answered In as simple terms as I have spelt out our policy tonight,
and is a question to which the Australian people have a right to an answer,
when forming a judgment, even In H-glns where there is an opponent
adopting some sort of policy I don't know what against the Government.
They ought to know precisely what that policy is if they are to form a
considered judgment in the way a democracy should do so.
Mr Fresident, moving on from that particular matter, I come
to another area which is of great import ance to this nation and to the future / 7 
-7
of this nation, and that is the effect of what Is happening now, or what
Will happen in the future, in Malaysia, in Singapore, countries so close to
us; indeed, the closest countries to our shcv., s, I think, except that of our
closest neighbour, Indonesia.
In this field, there are questions of maintaining a military
presence in Malaysia and Singapore, and of assistance in raising the
economic activity and helping the economic progress of that region.
Why? Because we hope that by assisting the economic progress of that
region we will see, and we must see if this assistance Is to be fully
effective, that that assistance leads to an incmiase in the standards of
living of the people In the villages, the hamlets and the towns of those
countries. That is the end result that we are seeking.
On the military side, Great Britain has for long maintained
In Malaysia and Singapore naval, air and ground forces and the bases from.
which they can operate, and has maintained them as a stabilising force'In
that area. They have been Intended to prevent, and they have prevented
with Australian forces participating, local armed insurgency and attack~ s by
one country in the region on any other. And so they were Instrumental
in preventing the communist insurgency Irn Malaysia when it took place,
supported at the time by many of the people who now support the same sort
of insurgency elsewhere, and the Australians helped In that. They were
able, If not to stop it, to discourage it to the extent that It ceased, the
armed expression of confrontation of k1donoin against Malaysia.
Now for some time, It has been planned that these forces
should be run down, and should be withdrawn at the end of 1975, and we
in Australia knew that and planned on that. At that time, it was envisaged
when these plans were made, that British ground troops would have left the
region by the end of 1975 but that there would be still instantly availa1le
and earmarked for the purpose, a British Air and Naval capability able
swiftly to return and to bring back ground troops should a situation require
i t. But more recently, on what I understand are economic
ground, it has been decided that the withdrawal of British Forces will be
completed not by the end of 1975 but by the end of 1971, some four
years earlier. At the same time as this decision was made known, the
swift availability of that naval and air capability which was previously
planned is clouded by doubt, and we do not know what its composition will
be, what its capacity to fill the role previously planned for it will be,
what time will be necessary for it to be available, and whether it would
indeed be available on the decision of the United Kingdom alone.
This has put into this situation entirely new matte is for
discussion which were unknown to us until the recent visit of the British
Cabinet Minister. There has therefore been not merely a quite cons ider able
alteration of the date by which withdrawal Is to be completed but also
what appears to be a significant difference in planning for the situation
which will obtain after withdrawal.
It is clear to everyon e, of course, that Australia and New
Zealand cannot step in and fill the role which Britain has vacated. But the
Prime Minister of Singapore and the Prime Minister of Malaysia have both
indicated a strong desire that there should be some continuing Australian
military presence in the area after 1971. They wish this, they have asked
e a / 8 
8-
for this. They see it as a contribution to stability In their region, and
their wishes must, of course, have great weight with us.
For these reasons, the Minister for External Affairs has
recently been on an exploratory mission to Singapore and Malaysia to discuss
In more detail what those countries are able to do to help thernselvqs, what
contribution they see Australia making, what role they see for a contribution
Australia might make, and matters of that kind. This will be followed by
further technical military discussions and Five Power discussions at a time
to be arranged. Many of the military factors in this matter are as yet unknown.
They are not known clearly enough for final decisions to be taken now, but
it is clear that the rulers of Malaya and Singapore have indicated that they
wish a continuing Australian presence after 1971, and It Is the feeling of my
Government that these wishes having been so expressed, we should seek
as far as possible, according to our own resources, to fall in with them.
We have, of course, provided other aid to these countries.
We have provided already, and earmarked funds already, to provide
million in aid to Malaysia and to Singapore to enable them to help
defend themselves. But still the matter does remain that it will be there
a different situation than that which existed before, that in that situation
we are asked by our neighbours to contribute, and that we must pay attention
to the wishes which our neighbours so put forward.
But it must be made clear, and it has been made clear,
that any Australian military presence In these countries is not in any way
directed against Indonesia, that other great country In our immediate region
and our nearest neighbour. Indeed what we would lik1e to see and what we
would seek to bring about, insofar as in our power lies, is a closer and
closer association of Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and New
Zealand not necessarily militarily, but In the fields of economic,
co-operation, technical assistance and common action on regional grounds.
This is an objective we should like to see attained and which we shall do
all in our power to see attained. ( Sustained applauset
These are two of the important matters facing this piation
In the years ahead, but of course, again outside our borders before I turn
to problems Inside it, are matters not military but matters of helping
insofar as our resources and requirements permit, the world comm~ unity,
and particularly that part of that community which is in our region and
closest to us. That is the provision of economic assistance, of technological
training, of what we can do to help to build the economies of those countries
outside of this. We will this year, as Australians, contribute in foreign
aid, including aid to New Guinea, something like $ 143 million or about
$ 12 per head for each Australian. ( Interjection) Well If you don't think it
is enough, give me another dollar and I will see it goes there.
In the field of helping to develop the trade trade as
distinct from aid of less developed countries, a field which in the long
run can be of more significance and more assistance than mere aid we
have as a country, taken Initiatives through the Department of Trade, and
through Mr McEwen, which have been acknowledged and appreciated
greatly by those less developed countries which seek outlets for their trade
because they wish to help themselves and can only do that in this way. / 9 
9-
We shall continue our efforts, particularly in aid directed
to the countries In our region and to other Asian countries not directly In
the region, for we are not only in, but of, a region where all our neighbours
are Asian neighbours. The aid should be designed, except during disaster,
not for consumption but for capital formation anft the imparting of skills arid'
knowledge and technologies which permit the end benefit of the original aid
provided to be many times multiplied in those countries in which those sk is
and technologies and efforts are expended.
This we must and will contin ue, but here, as In the field Of
Defai ce, we should balance proposals for the growth rate of such expenditur e
with proposals for the growth and development of Australia Itself. What we
are doing, and what we are committed to do in the fields both of Defence-and
of Foreign Aid, is a clear indication that we are no isolationist nation, 4n d
we will not be, that we will not withdraw into ourselves and let Defence ' and
Foreign Aid take care of themselves. But the level of what we are doing,
and the rate of growth of what we are doing in both these fields must be
regarded In the context of our own resources and our own needs, again and
all the time, and the requirement so to grow ourselves that we will be able
In the years ahead to be able to provide more and yet more into our own
protection and into the development and help of the countries so close to us.
I have spent some time on these matters of great Importance
to this nation in Its place In the world. We are, I think, providing all that
a nation of 12 million, a nation with a population not Mch~ i greater than tINt of
Greter New York or Greater London can be expected to provide towards
Defence and towards Foreign A-ssistance.
We will continue to expand what we are doing in these fields,
as indeed we must, but we will test each proposal against the requirements
for the peaceful development of our own nation and the production of
industrial musci s in our own nation to enable it to become great, to do yet
more In the world in which it finds itself.
I turn now to questions which are more domestic. What Is
it don't all answer, please, because I am going to tell you the answer
what is it that Australians throughout this nation would want to see done in
the domestic field. I will tell you what I think it is they would want to see
I believe that what they would want first to see is that there
should be maintained, as has been brilliantly maintained for 18 years for
Australians, the opportunity for full employment of all those who are willing
and able to work for the advancement of their nation. And if I may say so
to somebody from the back who called out something which sounded to me
like " Our Henry", in no State has there been more jobs provided and les s
unemployment than there has over the years been in this State of Victoria.
This, I think, is what Australians would want to see maintained and maintained
with it, I suggest, they would want to see that rates of taxation already
significantly high should not be so increased, that the incentive to work
harder or better or to earn more should be reduced, because not only would
that be bad for the Individual but bad for the nation of which the individual
is a living part. And they would want to see, I suggest, that rates of
inflation were kept to a level where they could be absorbed without d~ s comfort i/ 1c. 
ic
and without leading to that kind of bust and lack of employment and industrial
chaos which can occur if they get out of control. These are the frameworks,
I believe, that Australians hawe had and would want to keep, and these are
constricting frameworks.
( Interjection " What about ccwz~ icting profits?")
Do you really want to restrict profits If somebody makes it legitimately?
If somebody invents something which benefits the community in which he
lives? If somebody discovers a better way and a cheaper way of producing
something, and is able to introduce that into a factory and to give to the
people of this country something at a cheaper ; rice while yet he makes
higher profits? Do you want to stop him making profits so that this better
article at a cheaper price is not a vailable? Because that is not Liberal
philosophy. That is the direct antithesis of It. ( Applause)
But this background which I have put to you which It is
essential to keep and which the people of this country would want to keep,
I think is restricting when we consider all the things that need to be done
both by Commonwealth and State and local governments throughout
Australia. There Is a tendency to suggest that the solution to this Is just
to make more money available here, there or the other place, and yet you
know even you who are Interjecting know If you put your mind to it that
this is true If you have your manpower fully employed, and if you have
your materials and resources fully employed, then injecting further amounts
of money does not get more things done, it only gets either a smaller amount
of things done or the same amount of things done at a greater price, unless,
of course, you take action to prevent some field of activity from continuing.
And so these are restricting matters, but within the levels
of those restrictions I should put to you what my Government will seek to do
as and when it can In these fields, and indicate the matters we think of
significance in this all-embracing word " development". I have used this
be fore, of course, " development", and It has been rightly pointed cut that
this Is a word which covers a vast area of Australia's activity. Too often
It Is assumed to be merely that kind of development which takes place In
country areas by the building of dams or the building of beef roads or some
other activity of that kind. Essential as these forms of development are,
they are not the only meaning of development even in that kind of context,
for we have here developing in Australia, cities which are going to be at
least twice as large as they are now, and cities In which the congestion of
traffic Is going to pose really vast economic problems In the future and the
beginning of studies by Commonwealth and State Governments which I would
hope would take place, which I would seek to see did take place, Into this
mater and how it could be overcome, must take Its place with development,
alongside the development of areas outside the ci ties.
This is governmental development, of course, but side by
side with It must go, as we have seen happening lately so much, development
which takes place because of private initiative, because of individual
willingness to risk, because of willingness to go out and seek and find and
develop which we have seen happening, and which Is happening now for the
benefit of all of us throughout the whole of Australia. Again, It is necessary
to see that the public sector of development, necessary though It Is, is not
so expended that no Incentive is left, that no ability Is left In the private
sector to take their share in development which ultimately Is the basis of
a nation's life. But these are material things. These are the developments 
11
of industrial muscles as I have said before, and these are not in themselves
enough to make a nation great. But no nation can be great unless It seeks
not only materially to progress but also to take care of the weaker within
it, the aged within it, the ill within it.
Now this, too, must be a goal for any nation seeking to
attain greatness, and this will be the examination of these problems,
one of the first matters to which my Government would direct its attention.
Indeed, it has begun to do so already in the field health, and i-ndeed there
has already been some indication of that in announcements just recently
made. Wle have here, and I expand on this matter only as an
example of the way in which we would approach these problems, we have
here in Australia a health scheme which is good, which is amongst the
best in the world, which permits choice by the patient of the doctor,
which does not ration hospital or other accommodation. But it is a heafth
scheme which still suffers from disabilities. It ic tending to become rather
too dear for many people for them to be enabled -Lo insure themselves for
all the benefits which they should be able to achieve.
And It suffers from the further and I think crippling
disability that It does not cover those who have long-continuing illnesses
br a year or two years or three years, and does not prevent the fear not only
of that illness but the fear of the economic hardship, indeed in some cases
the economic ruin which can flow from such long-contin ued illness. This
will be a first matter to which we shortly will be directing our attention and
which wle will seek, and I believe successfully seek, to overcome.
( Cheers and applause). Mr President, I have sought at this by-election to put befcre
the people of this electorate and those who may be listening in, unequivocally
our approach to the problems of Defence, of our involvement in Viet Nam
and Malaysia, of the course we would seek to follow in Foreign Aid, and I
have Indicated, and only indicated by example what it is we would wish to
see happen at home. I cannot tell you, and no politician of any party standing
here could tell you exactly when and exactly how quickly these goals we've
set before us will be achieved because there are so many unknown factors.
We don't know what those things we produce will be sold for abroad. We
don't know what rate of capital inflow there will be. VWe don't kiow what
is going to happen in many other fields. But we do know this that t! l ase
things, as a government, are cf importance to us, and that we wffIL, i.-ying
attention to the constricting things which I said to you at the beglin:, seek
to overcome them and the first amongst them, areas where there is
injustice I won't say Injustice areas where there Is need, real need
amongst our people. This is not simple, even in the field of health of 1'. r I
have spoken to you it is not simp' e. VWe don't yet know and i. i~ c 11eve
nobody yet knows exactly what area of geriatric treatment ought*. to be
provided in existing-type hospitals, exactly what would happen we sought
more to provide visiting nurd ng assistance for the aged aa eldclerly so
they could stay in their own homes.
All these things are matters which the Department of 
12
Health and the Minister for Health has been examining for weeks, and
is examining now and about w hich you will hear from us as soon as may
be. There will always be left areas in which we are not able to
provide what we would wish to provide, and you are not able to get what
you would wish to get. Right now, we are in what I call the tantalising
years. We can see coming into this country 1970, 1971 and thereafter
huge revenues from tae mineral and oil resources, and other resources
which have been discovered and which will by then shed their full benefit
on the people of Auctralia. But they are not here yet; we can see them
coming. Even when they do come, while we will be able to make great
advances, I think it probable, that as has been the case In every nation
throughout history, neither the central Commonwealth Government nor
any State Government will ever have the capacity to do all the things It
would want to do as quickly as it would want to do them and still leave
In the hands of individual citizens that which should be left in their hands.
But we are moving towards it and we will move more rapidly
towards It, and we can see coming up a time when great movement in
that direction can be made.
May I, Mr President, mention one more matter? Somebody
called out about, I thinkc, and that Is the question of education. I mention
it, of course, because it is something with which for some years I have
been personally quite concerned, and a matter for which, should you wish
to do so, I could be properly blamed if you thought it right, or I could be
accepted if you thought it right.
I want to put before you, both as an indication of what has been
done and as an earnest of what could be done in the future because of
what has been done in the past, as an Indication again of the approach of
this Government, what has gone on In this field, a field traditionally
that of the States.
I was first appointed as the Minister Assisting the then Prime
Minister In Education and affairs in the financial -year 1963/ 64. In that
year, we were expending from the Commonwealth $ 57 million. The
next year that went up to $ 94M. In 1965/ 66, it went up to $ 104 million.
About that time, I became a full Minister. In 1966/ 67, it went up to
$ 127 million, and this year, ladles and gentlemen, it has gone up to
$ 175 million. ( Interjection " Not enough"). Of course, someone wiV
" tnot enough", but in four years from $ 57 million to $ 175, with -S3tate
contribution Increasing too, with a doubling of enrolments In univ:; r--il-es,
with the introduction of colleges of advanced education, with the buil-t-n1g
within this electorate in some cases of secondary bvel technical schools
such as the one at Caulfield, these can be seen as monuments, they don't
have to be heard just as words from a platform, they don't have to be just
listened to as monetary figures. They can be seen as monuments throughout
this State and throughiout this nat ion, and I believe that if you w. 1l support
me in Higgins and I have the backing as I have the backing of the Coalition
parties to this Government that there will be throug-. out Austr alia
more and more monuments in more and more fields to the benefit of the
people of Australia, and built by co-operation between the Commonwed th
Government and the various State Governments as we have seen happen 
13
in the field of education.
No promises. No specific promises.......
( Interject ion " Why not?"
I have told you why not. But you will be able to judge by what we do
between now and the next elections. You have an indication of our
thinking and of our goals,.
Perhaps there is one specific promise that I can give you.
I will ask from you for all that you can give towards building this State
and this nation, and I will in return pledge to you all that I can give and
my colleagues can give for a joint effort to see that together we can
open the door of the destiny that lies before us. 



FOR PRESS: ixOL B, P. M. No. 21/ 16
EXPORT INCENTIVES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, today outlined a
number of changes which the Government has decided to make in
the two export incentive schemes which have been in operation
since 1961. " In the light vf the facts beñ forc it", said the
Prime Minister, " the Government is convinced that as a result
of the proposed changes these schemes will offer better and
more effective incentives to encourage the continued growth
of Australian exports".
" During the review of the schemes undertaken by the
Government we received many suggestions fr'om Ind~ ividual
e" lxIpn otrhteisrs reagnad rde xIp owrto uoldr gpaanyi sasptieocnisa" l, trMi7b uteo r to thceo nwtiohruke do. f'
the Export Development Council and the Australian Manufacturers'
Export Council, both of whom had made detailed submissions
which had been of great assistance to the Government".
The Prime Minister pointed out that, under the
proposed arrangements, rebates of payroll tax would continue
to be allowed in respect of increases in export sales and
income tax concessions would be available for eligible
expenditure incurred in promoting exports. However,
significant changes were proposed for both schemes.
Payroll Tax Rebates Scheme
So far as the Payroll Tax Rebate Scheme was concerned
the major change proposed was the introduction of a new and
simplified formula relating rebate entitlements only to increases
in export sales. The new formula will provide that the
entitlement to a rebate of payroll tax would amount to 10.5%
of the increase in exports. The increase in exports will be
calculated by deducting from the current year's exports the
average annual exports in a base period. The percentage factor
of 10.5% used in the formula will be reviewed from time to time.
The present base period will be replaced by a three
year period which moves forward each year but remains five years
behind the year of export. For example, in 1968/ 69, the first
year of operation of the new scheme, the base period will be
the three years 1960/ 51 to 1962/ 63. In the next year, 1969/ 70
the base period will be the three years 1961/ 62 to 1963/ 64.
Special provision will be made for phasing in new exporters.
Mi. r. Gorton explained that this five year " lag" to
the base period was designed to reduce the impact of switching
from the previous fixed base of 1958/ 59, 1959/ 60. He said that
under the proposed scheme most exporters would have a greater
incentive to increase their exports than under the former
scheme. 12 
2.
The Prime Minister added that a criticism levelled
at the present scheme was that many exporters achieved export
results which would entitle them-to greater benefits if the
rebate were not limited to the amount of the payroll tax that
they paid in that year. The new scheme would include a new
provision which will allow exporters to carry forward for up
to three years some of their " excess". In addition it was
proposed to continue the export certificate systemn under
modified conditions which should make the system more attractive
to both exporters and their suppliers of components or materials.
The scope of the scheme would be extended by the
inclusion in the definition of export sales of certain items
not included under the existing scheme.
Special arrangements would also be made to assist
exporters whose rebate entitlements were found to be materially
affected by the devaluation of foreigyn currencies lat6 last
year. The scheme would be directed to encouraging the
export of manufactures and primary products, where the need
for incentives is greatest. Exports of petroleum, petroleum
products, minerals, mineral concentrates and alumina will not
participate in the new payroll tax scheme.
Market Development Allowance
The main change to the Export Market Development
Allowance will be the allowance of a rebate of income tax of
42.5 cents in the in respect of eligible promotional expendituire
instead of an additional deduction from income. In the case of
a public company for example, the effective rate of benefit
would be increased from an equivalent of an income tax rebate
of about 37.5 cents in the S under the old scheme to a rebate
of 42.5 cents under the new scheme. The scope of the schemea
would also be extended to cover several classes of expenditure
not at present eli~ gible.
The Prime Minister said that the Acting Minister for
Trade and Industry, Mr. Anthony, would be issuing a mocrsL
detailed statement of the proposed changes in the two ince3ntives.
He emphasised, however, that a comprehensive explanation of
the two incentives could not be made until the Treasurer,
Mr. McMahon, introduced the legislation into Parliament.
He concluded by saying that both schemes would come
into effect from 1st July, 1968, and would continue to operate
for a period of 5 years from that date. The current incentives
expire on 30th June, 1968.
CANBERRA 14th February, 1968. 



CFOR
PRESS: P. M. No. 22/ 1968
AUSTRALIAN SUGAR FOR VIETNhM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Yr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Yr. Gorton, said today that
general agreement had been reached between President
Johnson and himself that Australia would supply refined
sugar to the allied lorces in South Vietnam.
The Prime Minister explained that most of the
food requirements ( including sugar) of the allied forces
in South Vietnam are procured on behalf of the allies by
the American Government. Australia has then reimoursed
the United States for the cost of Australia's share of
these procurements. Mr. Gorton said that although details of the
arrangement had yet to be worked out the quantity and
value of the sugar involved had been broadly agreed at
approximately 27 thousand short tons worth about SA6M.
As one of the world's largest sugar exporters,
Australia welcomed this procurement by the American
authorities. C. ANBERRA
16th February, 1968.
I 



FOCP PRESS!' PM. No. 23/ 1968
AUSTRALIAN BALLET TOUR OF ASIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Under the sponsorship of the Australian Government, the
Australian Ballet will leave Australia tomorrow ( 19th) on a tour of
Asian countries. It will give performances In Singapore, Malaysia,
Thailand, the Philippines, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, Cambodia
and Indonesia. The company will include some 64 dancers, and will
be accompanied by Sir Robert Helpmann, CBE, and Miss Peggy van
Fraagh, OBE. This tour will be the third which the company has
undertaken. It has already played to enthusiastic audiences and been
warmly praised by critics in Britain, several European countries, the
Lebanon, Canada and eight countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Its members won friends in many countries by their enthusiasm and
grace, both on and off stage.
CANBERRA, 18 February 1968 The Prime Minister has sent the following telegram of
good wishes to the Ballet Company's artistic directors, Sir Robert
Helpmann and Miss Peggy van Fraagh
" FROM ALL THAT I HAVE HEARD ABOUT THE
AUSTRALIAN BALLET'S PERFORMANCES AND
RECEPTION IN OTHER COUNTRIES TO DATE I HAVE
NO DOUBT THAT ON ITS FORTHCOMING ASIAN TOUR
IT WILL FULFIL THE EXPECTATIONS WHICH ITS
IMPENDING VISIT HAS AROUSED IN ASIA AND THAT
IT WILL IMPRESS NEW AUDIENCES BY ITS ARTISTRY
AND VIGOUR. I KNOW THAT THE TOUR WILL BE
ARDUOUS. I BELIEVE IT WILL BE REWARDING.
I WISH THE BALLET EVERY SUCCESS." 



This interview was recorded in Melbourne on February, 1968
TELE VISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON ON
GTV9, MELBOURNE
Interviewer Mr Tony Charlton 18TH FEBRUARY, 1968
MR CHARLTON: Facing your electorate for the first time as Prime Minister,
-how do you really feel about it?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I hope I will win it.
Q. And you are conifident that you will?
PM: I hope I will,
Q. But has the enormity of the job you sought and won really had
time as yet to register with you.
PM: I think it has. Let us examine the question you asked me
Has the enormity of it had time to impress me? It did the very first moment at
the time I won it. It has been impressing me since I can answer that yes, but
if you say have I sufficiently studied it to know how to overcome all the
problems which make up this en ormity, the answer is No. I doubt if
any Prime Minister ever would reach that position.
Q. I had the feeling, of course, that you could have had no notion
that one day you would become Prime Minister before the Harold Holt
tragedy. Then the race was on, you were involved in it, and maybe only
now you are sitting back and thinking, " Good Heavens, what have I done?"
PM: Oh, I was a volunteer.
And happily so!
Your predecessor, Sir Robert Menzies was critical of the
spectacle of the power struggle that the Prime Ministership became.
How do you feel about it?
PM: Well, I think that is a little bit of a conservative view. Personally,
I think it was not bad that the public should have had the opportunity and
I speak now from a party point of view that it was not bad for the public
to have had the opportunity to see four people appearing before them all
of whom, I think, were good, without any personal attacks the one upon
the other. From my point of view, I can see nothing that was reprehensible
about that. Indeed, as I say, I think it could well have been a good thing.
Of course, ever since 1949 untilS ir Robert retired, he having formed the
Liberal Party, he was outstanding. I really, myself, see nothing to object
to in what happened.
Q. Do you see anything to object to in some of the goings-on with the
opening of your Higgins b y-election campaign? There were a number of
arrests. Does the conduct which brought about that acti'on register with
you as being part of the game, or deep down are you really disturbed by it? / 2 
PM: Well, I have to rely on what I read in the papers this
morning because I didn't see any of the actual occurrences outside
the hall. Certainly there was nothing that I could see to complain
of inside the hall at all. I didn't see what happened outside the hail,
but I think I can answer your question perhaps this way. I think the
people have inalienable rights to co me to public meetings and to
interject and to ask questions. I don't think they have got. an i~ nalienable
right to come in force and make a constant barrage of noise so that the
man on the platform can't put his message to the Australian people
because that seems to me to be interfering with a proper method of
running a democratic country. Similarly outside the hall, or protest
meetings generally groups of people, as I said before, must have,* the
right to protest, but I believe their protests must not be allowed to be
carried to a point where they are in fact using force against people
with whom they disagree, such as trying to overturn cars, throwing
paint bombs, or even lying down in the streets to prevent other citizens
from using them. This is carrying the right to protest into an area
of licence rather xhan right.
Q. And even in the knockabout world of politics, what of the f'aunts
and barbs like " Liar" and " Murderer". Surely they would revile -any
decent man?
PM: Oh, I think you have got to take cogn isance of the quartet
from. which they come, and I am not particularly worried about the.
quarters that have lately been calling me either liar or murderer.
Q. As far as the hubbub your " enough is enough" statement on Viet Nam
has caused, do you feel on reflection that maybe this will be as prominent an
indisctftion as " All the Way with LBJ"?*
PMF' I don't think -the statement which Mr Holt made, and he made
it in a context which I think has been misrepresented, was an indiscretion,
although it has been so used that in the public mind it became to be an
indiscretion. I don't think that what I said was an indiscretion at all.
I believe, as I said last night, that we are making for our size and
considering all our other requirements, a very significan t contribution
in Viet Nam. I believe we are proving ourselves there to be an ally
in the real sense. I believe if we were to acdd 2, 000 or 3, 000 more troops
should we be asked to, or 4, 000 should we be asked to and we haven't
been asked to we would make a very minor additional contribution to
the military operations, but the expense of that, apart from other things,
could have a very major effect on things we would like to do in Australia
itself.
Q. Well, did you make that Canberra statement off the cuff, or as
one would thin k, after considerable thought?
PM: It wasn't a statement. It was in answer to a question at a press
conference. The answer provided was not provided just-sort of out of
the air but because I had thought about it beforehand.
Q. Nonetheless, it seemed to be modified a few days later in Sydney.
Now, was this as a result of indignation on the line from America? / 3 
PM: No, we have heard nothing from America, and with great
respect, I don't think the English language could be so used as to say
the statement was modified. One statement was: We are not going
to increase the forces that we have in Viet Nam. The other statement
was: We are going to maintain the forces we have in Viet Nam for as
long as is necessary to attain our obj ective. Now it doesn't seem to
me that they are in any way-contradictory or that one modifies the
other.
Q. Well, Mr Prime Minister, would it be reasonable to deduce
that what you said, in effect, means that being in Viet Nam is not the
vital be-all and end-all thing that your predecessor believed?
PM: I think that being in Viet Nam * is of immense significance to
us, but I believe that we have so much to do in other areas outside
Australia and inside Australia that we have to balance the overwhelming
importance of being in Viet Nam with more troops against the
overwhelming importance of building our country as quickly as we can in the
time we have.
Q. Can I put it to you this way? Did you mean that we can't do
more in Viet Nam or that we shouldn't do more?
PM: Oh, we could do more. We could do more in Viet Nam. We
could perhaps fill the place that Britain is leaving in Singapore anid
Malaysia, but if we did, we wouldn't be able to do anything else at all..
Q. The point about this line of questioning is: If the cause if
justified, why then stop at a commitment of 8, 000 men or, as you say,
a few hundred more?'*
PM: Because last October I think it was, only a few months ago
we examined the military requirements in Viet Nam from the point of
view of our troops, and considerably increased the forces that were
there. Nowit was worked out that to add another battalion to the two
that were there was not merely increasing its efficiency by one-third.
It was increasing it by a factor much more than that because instead of
having one battalion out and one battalion resting and in reserve, you
could have two battalions out and this could do far more than could be
done previously more than twice as much. This was the military
advice as to what we could do and this is what we did. Now, it would,
of course, be arguable that, all right, Viet Nam is so important let's
send another three battalions up there, but I am saying that I think the
other things we have to do, bearing in mind the significant task we are
fulfilling in Viet Nam, would make a judgment on my part that we are
doing all that can reasonably be expected from a country of our size.
Q. When you underlined your Viet Nam attitude the other night in
the Higgins by-election campaign opening, were you aware then that
America would throw a further 10, 000 troops into the Viet Nam conflict?
PM: No, I wasn't. No. / 4 
Q. Isn't it extraordinary that the Australian Prime Minister
wouldn't be advisedjin advance of such a step by our ally?
PM: Why? I don't think so. I can'. t imagine that the United States
would need to inform a Prime Minister of another country that it was
inceasngfrces that were already there. It may well be thAt on
military iscussions this was made known but I can't see any necessity
for it to have been made known.
PM: Overall, do you see Viet Nam as being something of a finger
in the dyke in view. of the festering problems in Canmbodia, Laos and
Northern Thailand?
PM: I have always felt that if Viet Nam were to be overrun by the
North let met put it that way that it would be likely that what people
call the domino theory would come into practice instead of being theory
and we would see the same sort of thing going on in Laos; ( indeed we've
seen it in provinces of Thailand) and perhaps in Cambodia. I think the
people in that area of the world also have that feeling, though some of
our opponents in Australia regard it as nonsense.
Q. is there right for thinking harki~ g back to that Viet Nam
statement which; as I say, has caused so much comment that there is
a revision of our Asian policy in your mind?
PM: Because we are not increasing the number of. troops?
Q. No. just generally speaking. The Asian situation you are
wanting to impress on Australia a revised Asian outlook?
PM: I don't think so. In what way... Could you explain that a little
bit more?
Q. I feel there was a parellel in your comment on Viet Nam with
a comment you made during your dealings with Lee Kuan Yew yes,
we should be involved in Malaysia but not too involved. Yes, we
should maintain our involvement in Viet Nam but not become-overinvolved.
PM: Ah, well I don't think there is any revision of our policy to
Asia. Asia is an awfully big woidd, isn't it? We are really talking,
both of us in our minds, of the countries of Asia nearest to us Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Cambodia and the Philippines, that
area of Asia. I don't think there is any revision there at all. We are,
as I said last night, not only in but of Asia, and we do need to give such
assistance as we can and-as we have been giving, and I think it is the
sort of assistance that ought to be so designed by imparting skills or
technological capacity or capital or factories which will not'just be
consumed as it is given but build up the country to which it is given.
This is the part that we have been playing and must continue to play.
In relation to the military involvement in Malaysia and Singapore which
was what we were talking about, I think, in my comments on Lee Kuan Yew, 
PM ( Contd. they have both asked and wish for us to keep some military presence
there. It is a matter still under discussion as to what role that presence
would be, whether it would be expected to be bigger that at present; what
the countries themselves could do. But they do express this wish, and as I
said again last night, this wish must weigh quite heavily with us. I think the
late Harold Holt paid particular attention to Asia, made us known'in Asia
better. than we have been known before. I think * this was one great achievement
of his, particularly the personal contacts he made to do it. This is something
I would hope to W~ ild on rather than revise.
Q. As he was keen, so are you keen to develop our relationship with
Indonesia?
PM: Yes.
Q. Now on this point, the F1Il was ordered at the time when the
situation with Indonesia., was anything but happy. Since then, of course,
Britain has cancelled its order. Do you feel it would be prudent for us now
to cancel ours with that as a background?
PM : I think it would be too late for us to cancel the order, leaving aside
the question of whether one should or whether one shouldn't. I think it would
be too late. I speak subject to correction, but I believe the first of these
aircraft is due to be delivered in July or very soon and that they are to follow
along later. I would think that apart from anything else cancellation at that
late stage, cancellation charges involved, would all leaving aside the
questio n of whether one should or shouldn't add up to the suggestion that it
is too late anyway.
Q. Personally, do you feel we should?
PM: Personally do I feel we should.. well, clearly we shouldn't
because it is far too late.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, a further note I had here concerning the home
front is: If there is poverty in Australia as indicated in your speech the
other night, is the Government going to investigate it? Will there be an
enquiry?
PM: I was speaking the other night on particular matters, paritularly
related to our health scheme.
Q. The health scheme and the need you hinted there for an overhaul
on the problem of the pensioners and the aged....
PM. Yes. I was trying to compartmentalise it a little, talking on the
health scheme. It is true, I think, that some of the charges for insurance
are getting a bit dear and people aren't therefore covering themselves with
insurance as much as they should. And, of course, there is this thing which
has always disturbed me and still disturbs me that long chronic illnesses
aren't covered, and that can cause immense hardship and economic distress.
Now, you asked Me if there was going to be an enquiry. We are still
compartmentalising. The Department of Heal th. has been examining how to
overcome this. There will need to be in some areas consultatbns, discussions / 6
L 
6.
PM ( Contd.) with State Ministers of Health. There is a kind of overlapping
field here. Their views would need to be obtained on perhaps the best way
of tackling the aged long-term -illness people should we seek as much as
possible to keep them in their own homes by providing nursing services,
should we provide more geriatric wards ' to our existing hospitals where
they might be brought back to'a situation where they could retuirn to their
own homes, or, should we just merely seek to build on to additional
hospitals. or nursing homes. Look, it's enormous I could make a speech
for an hour on it.
Q. I understand that, and I think these steps are desirable, but is
there a change in policy because at the time of the last Budget, Mr McMahon
made it known that as much as he would have liked to have helped pensioners
he couldn't., because of the size of the Defence Vote?
PM: I wouldn't put it as a change of policy. Budgets happen year by
year by year. You have asked me is there a change in policy. I would be
sure that we would be' doing something something and it may involve
some sort of enquiry as to the best way of going about it to see that what
we do is directed to ' the areas of real need without upsetting people and
stopping them saving and making them feel, " Well, I have saved for
myself and I am not being treated properly". This is not an easy problem,
to balance those two things. That would need to be investigat-ed not necessarily
by anybody but the Social Services Department, but examined by us. This
is the sort of thing we would need to look into, to do something in the coming
0 Budget. This need n ot necessarily be a change of policy. It is just that
something is going to happen in one Budget that didn't happen in the other.
Q. Do you feel on reflection that you were being a little over-optimistic
in saying that what happened in the Holt Government period could be. ruled off?
PM: Did I say that, that everything that happened in the Holt Government
could be ruled off?
Q. You are suggesting I have misinterpreted it?
P~ M: My recollection of that was t hat somebody asked me a particular
question bearing simply on Mr McMahon and Mr McEwen, and that my
answer to that particular question was that in the new Governent, I would
propose to rule off the book.
Q. A final question. How do you intend to go about correcting the
problems Within the Coalition if you are going to rule off the book and start
again with a new Ministry?
PM: Well, I believe that we will be able to work as a Coalition,
certainly as well as the Coalition has worked in the past. I would be most
surprised if that were not so. I admire and like Mr McEwen and I feel he
has a liking and respect for me and this is a good basis on which to start.
I have more than mere political associations with a number of his Ministers
as well. Now, in any Coalition there are bound to be differences of emphasis
from time to time, there are bound to be conflicts of ideas as to what should
be done in some particular field, but these can be settled, these can be
ironed out if the overall philosophy and the ultimate objective of the two parties
are the same. It is a disagreement on methods of obt-aining an overall 
7.
PM ( Contd.) objective, but if the overall objective is there and if confidence
is there, then those do not in my view break, or tend to break, a
working partnership 
IL4( A~ V kL~~ 0
9
I-Y4l6 '-V N N 0-2-, 7 C) 



FCR PRESS PM. No. 24/ 168
DEATH OF LORD FLOPRIY
Tribute by the Prime Minfiter, Mr John Gorton
Lord Florey was an outctanding Australian.
a great contribution not snly to the wellbeing of A ustralia but
world. He made
to the
H: tco. c ' remendous p-ride and interest in the Auctralian
National Univercity, and was a very effective Chancellor.
to the world. His death is a loss to the University, to Australia and
My deepest sympathy gces to his family.
CA NBERRA,
22 February, 1968 


Q: First of all, Prime Minister, congratulations on the result.
PM: Thank you very much.
 Q:  What is your reaction to the result?
 PM: It was such a good result, I think, that It makes you feel you really  must reinforce your determination to try and justify it to the people who  have expressed thair confidence in that result.  Q, Do you take it as a vote of confidence in the Government, Mr Gorton?  PM: I think it must be regarded as a vote supporting the Government's  policies, yes.
 Q. Would you care to comment on the DLP the fact that they didn't have  a candidate and you got an increased majority over the former Prime  Minister? PM: Well, I haven't been able to work the exact figures out on that. I  think it Is probable that part or may be all of t ' he increased majority  might be attributable to the fact that the DLP previously had a candidate  and this time they didn't. But I think until we analyse it, we won't know.   And I don't even know what the end result is going to be because there are  a lot of postal votes to be counted. I would like to just wait and see what  the final wash-up is.  Q. Now that you are a Member of the House of Representatives and have  virtually overcome the last obstacle, is there likely to be any change or  are you likely to make any kind of statement  PM: Any change?  Q. Any change in running the office?  PM: Oh, well, we will be saying all those sorts of things in the next few  days. I am making an announcement on Monday as you know, and will  be talking about administrative rearrangements and that kind of thing later.  Q: Are you going to have yourself re-sworn in as Prime Minister, Sir?  PM: I think . that is probably the way I would be advised to do it but it  depends a good deal on the advice of those who know all the constitutional  facets of this. But I gather that is the way their minds arc working.  Q:  You may not be able to answer this, but have you actually been in  the Chamber of the House of Representatives to have a look at it since  you became Prime Minister?
 PM: I don't believe I have  Q Have you been in it very often before that while you were a  Senator?  PM: Oh, from time to time. Very often. I have been a Senator for a  long time and I haven't counted up the number of times I have been in,  and divided it into the number of years, but I have had a look at it from  time to time.  Q. I thought perhaps you hadn't  actually seen it?  PM: Oh, heavens, yes.  Q. Will you be spending this afternoon on the phone to prospective  Ministers?  PM: Well, we will be going back to the Lodge and having some lunch and  then we will just be spending the afternoon.  Q. Will you make a comment on the New South Wales election result?  PM: Yes, I can. I can say how delighted I am that the Liberal Party  in New South Wales has been returned with what appears to be a  considerably increased majority. There were two elections, of course  on Saturday, and that, I think, reinforces my belief that there is support  for the Liberal Party and its policy rather than some personal support,  because in New South Wales in a State election they have done  extraordinarily well.  Q. Do you think this might be a rportent of things to come in South Austraiia and Western Australia?  PM: Cne thing I think you will agree with me about is that I never try  to forecast the results of any election. I always like to wait until the  numbers come up!



J
BACKGROUND BRIEFING GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON,
FOR HEADS OF BUREAUX IN THE PRESS
GALLERY, PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA 26 FEBRUARY 1968
PRIME MINISTER : I think you have all had the list, gentlemen, under embargo.
All I propose to do now in relation to this is to give non -attributable
background so that you can write intelligently about this or anything
you want to say about it. So I will answer any queries you have arising
from it, and if I think there are some points which might be covered
that you haven't asked, I'll mention those. But this is for backgroun d.
It is not attributable.
Q. Prime Minister, I notice Mr Philip Lynch's name appears in
the list. He is one of the newest of newcomers to the House. I was
just wondering what special abilities he had that came to your eye?
PM: Well, he is a comparatively young man, but not too young,
and I think he has had a long association with business and staffing
problems. and is a Member of the Association of Directors, or whatever
it is, and a fairly long commercial experience of manpower management
and work in business of various kinds. Also I have heard him make what
seemed to me to be one or two good workmanlike speeches, and I
thought I would like to give him a trial.
Q. Could you tell us, Sir, what has happened to your ideas of
amalgamating certain Departments and streamliring varbus Administrative
functions?
PM: Yes I can. We have been examining very carefully you
are thinking of Social Services -Welfare proposition? we have been
examining very carefully what is involved in what we were initially
thinking of doing, and that is get the benefits side of Health moved across
to Social Services. But there are very great difficulties indeed, there is
no question of that, in moving the benefits of Health across to Social
Services, and it looks almost certain that it would lead to a considerable
duplication of public servants. For one thing, you can mesh in things
like computers throwing up facts of doctors who prescribe a lot more
than they should or make a lot more visits than you can ask them questions,
but there has always been a requirement that judgments on these should
be made by people who are qualified medical people in the Health Department.
All right, you could move all those across, but at some policy-making
levels further up, it looked as if you would have to duplicate them quite
a bit. Then there are problems of what happens to something before it
becomes a benefit. A pharmaceutical benefit is something which costs
an awful lot of money by the time it becomes a benefit but an awful lot
of stuff has gone beforehand before it is declared to be something which
is a benefit. So there were some pretty considerable initial difficulties 
PM ( Contd.) there which may possibly, on some more detailed examination be able to
be overcome but which are there now. So I have left Health as it is and I
wanted somebody to really dig in to the Social Services side and come LP
with some ideas on the application of Social Services to try and get away
I don't know if one can from 75 cents or a dollar all round sort of thing.
I will be telling both those Ministers that they will have to work togethersubmissions
from one will need to be examined by the other to see if
there were things they wished to say about it before it came to Cabinet.
What one has in mind is a kind of Commi&amp; W,, Cabinet Ministers
concerned with Social Services who would7 or much more closely than
they do at present so that we can get some kind of integration in this
where it is at all possible.
There is an alternative which no doubt might have occurred to
some of you and that would have been to have the one Minister in charge
of both Health and Social Services, but again, at this stage, the work load
on one Minister in charge of those two Departments, both of which involve
pretty detailed administratioq affd seermto me at this stage to be a bit too
heavy for one man.
Q. You say " at this stage", Sir, does this mean it will be re-examined?
PM: I don't want to give the impression that this will be re-examined
and therefore people are expecting something to happen from it. But clearly
there is a need to get the Social Service things which touch a number of
Departments more closely together. We examined a Ministry of Welfare.
You know, all the others leading up to it. But at this time, again, that
looks like a new Ministry, and more public servants. I would like to have
a year or so just to see exactly how that sort of thing could be done. The
end result what we are aiming for is there but there all sort of problems....
Q. . I notice Mr Barnes is now Minister for External Territories.
Can you explain that in relation to Interior and Northern Territory?
PM: Yes. This is all non -attributable and for background.
I feel that the problems at present in Papua and New Guinea in particular
and in the Northern Territory are problems which are different in kind.
I feel that the end goal, the final conclusion for Papua and New Guinea
is likely to be different from the final conclusion for the Northern
Territory. The N orthern Territory, without question, must be heading
sometime in the future I don't know when towards statehood. There is
no question that it is an integral part of Australia and must be an integral
part of Australia just as much as Queensland is or Western Australia is.
This is by no means necessary in the case of Papua and New Guinea.
It seems likely to me that the development there and I put no time limit
on it would be more towards a kind of self-government, and then at some
time. in the future if that self -governing country wished to enter into some
kind of arrangement with the Australian Government on the basis of self
governent, not on the basis of being told by Australia that it is the sort
of thing it should enter into, then that would take place between the
Governments existing at that time. / 3 
3.
Q. This is just a hurrying up of that emphasis, Sir getting
towards selfl-government?
PM: No, it's not, but it is an indication that the two will probably.
be going on different courses.
Q So that the Northern Territory now goes to Interior?
PM: Yes, and we will be continuing to carry out Public Service Board
investigations and discussions with the Administrator up there for some
aspects which in the past in the Northern Territory have been the
responsibility of the Department of Territories but-which might not
necessarily be transferred to the Department of the Interior.
Q. You are thinking of Northern Dev elopment?
PM: Yes, that kInd of thing but national kind of development as
distinct from state kind of development.
Q. Will this mean more public servants, Sir?
PM: I don't think so.
Q. Aboriginal Affairs. Has that become a separate Department?
PM: No. It is going to remain you know there is an Office of
Aboriginal Affairs at the moment. That office will remain with the
Prime Minister's Department:. There won't be set up a Permanent Head
and that sort of thing. But Mr Wentworth will be Minister in Charge
of Aboriginal Welfare and Development in the same way as I was
Minister in Charge of Education and Science when that remained with the
Prime Minister's Department.
Q. Does this mean, Mr Prime Minister, that Mr Wentworth will
work very closely under your eye I mean with Aboriginal Affairs?
PM: Yes, but I would expect to leave most of it to him, except some
really significant policy.
It hesc ubelt ed hat oin a
Ihta s beVe~ aed raxx~ moia sd= big change. in the Head of your
Department, Sir, is that correct?
PM: No. It is not. We are ex amining the work load in the Prime
Minister's Department, whether there should at some stage be a Cabinet
Secretariat as well as the Department, which again, would mean more
public servants, but there is no hurry about that.
Q. Sir, are there going to be any changes in the PM's Department
you mentioned Aboriginal Affairs but is there anything like cultural
affairs or anything like this going into another Department?
PM: I expect they will. You can get a list of those probably from
somebody outside. But there is a thing called the International Radiation
Advisory Committee or something of the kind and that will go to Education and
Science. Therest the Commonwealth Liaison Office which is still there on the
1/ 4 
4.
PM ( Contd) paper. It is to do with Australia's liaison with countries of the British
Commonwealth in education. That is already being done by Education.
It will be just wiped-off the paper. Aboriginal Affairs will remain but
will have a Minister in Charge of it. The smaller things I want to get
other people looking after.
Q. What about responsibility for High Commissioner posts
abroad? It is that going to remain technically vested in your Department
or be moved to External Affairs?
PM: Well, I think Australia House is the only one in our Department.
j The other High Commissioner posts abroad they come under External
Affairs now.
Q. I thought they were technicafly under your Department?
PM: Wall, you have thrown me a bit, but I would be surprised. I
think it is only the UK that is still under PM's, and it will stay there.
Q. Prime Minister, who is going to be the Deputy Leader of the
Government in the Senate?
PM: Well, we went on for a long time there without a Deputy
Leader.,
Q. When Senator Anderson is absent, who would be the replacement?
PM: I imagine the next most senior, probably, but this is different
from at this stage designating a Deputy Leader.
Q. You are deliberately not designating one?
PM : No. Not at the moment.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, do you expect this Ministry to last for a
very long period or are you envisaging further changes in the next twelve
months or two years?
PM: -I think it likely that it would continue, up until the next election
anyway. Education in the ACT is to become the responsibility of the
Department of Education, and elements of education in the Northern
Territory are to become the responsili lity of the Education Department.
The Northern Territory is pretty mixed up you know there are mission
schools, aboriginal schools and schools which are part-aboriginal and
part-white and they are run in different ways, but elements of that.
Q. You would take it right out of Interior?
PM: We would take them both out.
Q. It is all the ones that Interior are doing not the ANU?
PM: No. It is the Education ones that Interior is now doing in the
ACT. 
Q. This wouldn't involve any alterations in the present arrangements
with New South Wales?
PM: No. It doesn't involve any alteration at all. At the present
moment people are supplied by the Department of New South Wales through
the Department of the Interbr and this could happen through the nex
Department. I think if one wanted to have pilot experiments and that kind
of thing run, it would enable that to happen more easily. And of course the
Department of Education deals with all the other State Governments put
it that way and it seems reasonable that it might deal with it here.
We would probably need to talk to the Council here you know, the local
Council. They might want to have an Education Department officer with
them because at the moment they have an Interior Department man with
them to answer all their questions and give them information, and we
wouldn't want to cut them out in any way from that.
Q. Are you planning a Cabinet, Sir, between now and the meeting
of the House?
PM: Yes. We will have the ordinary Ministry meeting after the
swearing-in, but we will be going on to Cabinet on Wednesday afternoon
and Thursday.
Q. Prime Mlinister, could you tell us what prompted you to promote
Senator Wright to the Ministry? After his record of debating against the
Government?
PM: Well, I wanted to get some significant debating strength on the
front benches of the Senate. I wanted to get legal capacity to present
a legal case and to tear a legal case to pieces on the front benches of the
Senate. We haven't got forceful people there but looking around for
reinforcing a forceful sort of a person, he seemed to fit the bill. And
I think that is the answer. You want somebody there who can fi ght and
who knows t-he law and can cope with legal arguments, and so many of the
discussions in the Senate do turn around legal interpretations and whether
something is against the law of 1863 or something you know, that kind of
thing.
Q. The fact that you have to look around and find somebody 63 years
old to promote to the front bench for the first time in his career seems
to underline the dearth of talent in the Senate, especially on this legalistic
side.
PMVL Well, I don't know of any other lawyers in the Senate on our side.
I can't think of one offhand at the moment. In the next Senate there will be.
Two new ones.
Q. Laught was one.
PM. Keith Laught. Yes, that's right.
Q. Do you think he will rock the boat any more now Senator Wright?
PM: No. 
j 6.
Q. Will this be a part of your ruling off the ledger, Sir?
PM: Oh, I hadn ' t thought of it in that way. I think if any of you
had been sitting around and thinking of how you could increase the
debating strength of the front bench you would have come to the same
conclusion, a lot of you.
Q. How do you feel about leaving South Australia and Tasmania
out of the Cabinet? This doesn't concern you?
PM: South Australia hasn't been in the Cabinet for a long, long,
time.
Q. No, but Tasmania was.
PM: Tasmania isn't in the Cabinet, but it is in the Ministry now.
I ' m not leaving South Australia out... . It. hasn't been in.
Q. You don't really feel, apparently, that the Cabinet should reflect
a Federal body, all States should be rep . resented?
PM: I think if that is possible to attain, within the framework of the
other requirements, that would be something to aim for, but I don't think
it is an overriding necessity that this should happen. In the past if
something t hat concerns South Australia has been the subject of
discussion, then Jim Forbes has always said, " I would like to come along
and speak on this, "' and without question, he always has. And, similarly,
that would apply in the case of Tasmania. They get the submissions, they
know what is being talked about.
Q. Will Senator McKellar be in this Health group who have to
exchange submissions for Cabinet?
PM: Yes, I would want him to be, yes.
Q. When will the swearing-in of the new Ministry be, Sir?
PM: Wednesday.
Q. At what time?
PM: Midday.
Q. Sir, to come back to the Northern Territory. I take it that
Interior wouldn't handle the general development I am not talking about
civic development, but the general development. Is this more likely
to be handled by Mr Fairbairn's Department? Is that what you had in
mind?
PM: Yes. This is the objective that one has in mind. There are
different kinds of development and it is not going to be easy to draw a
precise line, but clearly there are some schemes where development
I 
PM ( Contd.) taking place say in Queensland would affect development taking place in the
Northern Territory. Now at the present moment in that kind of development,
the Minister for National Development has got to make arrangements with
the Government of Queensland and then make arrangements with the
Department of Territories. That kind of thing. Now this would be an endeavour
to see that the Commonwealth Department who had this overall dey elopment
responsibility would just. have to make arrangements with the one, alority.
Q. Shipping and Transport have gone up into Cabinet, Sir. Does this
presage any development of their activities, Sir in the international sphere?
PM: No, but I felt this that the present Minister for Social Services is
extraordinarily competent. He also had a great deal of work to do as the
Minister assisting the Minister dssisting the Minister for Trade and
Industry which took up a lot of his time, and he went abroad and so on, and
I felt this Department was so significant, it really ought to have a full-time
Minister, a Minister looking after it, and so Mr Sinclair ceased to be the
Minister for Social Services and we had a full-time Minister instead.
Q. ' Mr Prime Minister, you have dropped Mr Howson and Mr Chipp.
Rightly or wrongly, people are going to get the impression Mr Howson
has been dropped for his role in the VIP affair. Could you tell us what
motivated in dropping these two?
PM: Well, I don't think that I could or should embark on saying anything
about people who are not in individuals who are not in or individuals who
are in. I think that would be a bad thing for me to do. I selected the people
I thought could do the job.
Q. You said, Sir, that you thought this could stay there until the
next election? Is this quite irrevocab le you will not want to change?
PM: Oh, no. No, no. It is not irrevocable at all, but I think the
implication of the question was I going to turn this over in a few months'
time sort of thing. It is not that.
Q. You mean there won't be a ruthless change, a great blitz before
the election.?
PM: No. I don't see that happening. I just don't see it.
Q. You said there was no hurry about the changes in the Prime
Minister's Department. Can you give us an outline of your thinking of what
you are after with the policy secretariat? / 8 
PM : Well, there has been a very heavy work load on the Head of the
Prime Minister's Department because at the same time he has been the
Secretary to Cabinet. There has been, and are, an awful lot of Cabinet
Meetings, and they go on late, and he has to sit in the room all the time;
he has to prepare for them before~ hand. He has to spend a day afterwards
looking after them. This really leaves with the other you know, with
the policy things that keep coming in to the Prime Minister's Department
a nd they tend to be growing this has, and I think has for some time led
to a sort of feeling that it was not efficient for one man to try and do both.
Q. So you are looking at splitting the functions?
PM: Yes That's right.
Q. You say there is no hurry, so I take it that at the moment MW
Hewitt stays in the Universities Commission?
PM: I just Said there was no hurry, didn't I?
Q. Do yc -Envisage having a full-time Secretary to Cabinet?
PM: I would think this seems to be the kind of thing that is developing,
yes; preparing submissions, indicating to me because they keep coming in
which ones seem suitable for a Cabinet Committee to deal with because I
would I am gding to try I don't know if it is possible but I am going to
try to use Cabinet Committees a lot more instead of full Cabinets because
we were spending a really terrific lot of time, we have been for years, and
it has been growing the amount of time one spends. It may well be possible
that some of that load can be removed by the use of Cabinet Committees.
This is the sort of thing that a Cabinet Secretariat would look into, and it
would serve us, and it would suggest how these things could be done
record the sitting, record the decisions, follow up the decisions after they
are made with the various Departments, this kind of thing.
Q. Would this also mean that junior Ministers might be appointed to
some of these Cabinet Committees? You mentioned difficulties with the
States. Might the same thing also happen where specific s~ bhisiom from
them to Cabinet might mean they would be on a Committee of Cabinet?
So in effect there is a breaking down of a strict 12-man Cabinet?
PM: Well, it would depend. What is in my mind is that Cabinet deals
with the higher policy matters, and a number of things aren't such as
whether you build a building'here or whether you build a building there or
matters of that kind. There are quite a lot of those. As it is now, there
are Committees on which junior Ministers sit the General Administrative
Committee, for example. On this there is a mixture of Cabinet Ministers
and junior Ministers. The Legislation Cominittee is a :. mixture of junior
and senior. That kind of thing might be able to be ex'ended, or we get
something of the Social Services sort of Committee Zh the Ministers
concerned with myself for a nominee, and we go through it. After that it is
possible it might go to a full Cabinet, but that confines discussion for a start. 
Q. on the machinery of this, Sir, does this mean the Permanent
H-ead of the Department the way you are thinking atr the moment
wouldn't be Secretary to Cabinet and wouldn't attend Cabinet meetings,
but you* would have a separate Cabinet Secretariat
PM: Well, these are the things we are working out. We are
discussing them at the moment. There are problems. arising....
Q. Sir, is there any particular reason for switching tourism to
go with the Work portfolio?
PM: No, but I thought Senator Wright does come from a State in.
which tourism bulks very largely. Of course it does in Queensland too,
but Tasmania..
Q. Mr Bury seems to have dropped down he's No. 9.
PM: Well he was No. 10 or No. 11 before.
Q. Sir, could you tell us about the " Voyager" report. IHas Cabinet
had a look at it yet or will it look at it this week? Will it look at
Captain Robertson's position
PM: We must discuss it this week. Yes.
Q. Will the question of the payment of compensation to Captain
Robertson be considered by Cabinet? should
PM: I think the report will go to Cabinet and we WM wait until
Cabinet has considered
Q. Can we have that bit on the record, Sir?
PM: What?
Q. That it will go up to Cabinet?
PM:. Yes.
Q. This is on Wednesday afternoon?
PM: Yes, or Thursday.
Q. When is the debate likely to be in the House, Sir? There will
be a debate?
PM: Oh, we will table the report in the House. I hadn't thought
whether we would initiate a debate or we would leave it to the Opposition
to initiate a debate on it. were
Q. At the same time as you me looking at the possibility of
amalgamating the Health group of Departments, did you look at the
Defence group? / 1l 
PM: No, I didn't. I know a lot of people think they should be
amalgamated. I have heard it argued " Look at what Mr McNamara
couild do over in the United States as a strong Secretary of Defence" but
I think we have got to remember that they also have a Secretary of the
Navy and a Secretary of the Army and a Secretary of the Air Force under
Mr McNamara as a strong Secretary of Defence It is the same set-up.
People point to is as if it were a different one.
Q. What is the chance of integration as in Canada, Sir?
PM: In Canada they have had integration. Well some people like
it and some people don't. In England, they set up the Defence thing
this is not attributable; entirely off the record it seems to have
resulted mostly in a very considerable increase in the number of civilian
public servants and very little else.
The course it seems to me one follows here becan~
if there is just one Minister for Defence,. I think an awful lot o~ le sMR
are not going to be made by Ministers, they are going to be made by
civil servants. They must be. Nobody would be capable of doing otherwise.
But there are things through the three Services which can be integrated. with
advantage. Mddical services is one that springs to mind. Certain, but
not all, methods of supply; intelligence. There are a number of things
which have grown up separately in Departments which could be integrated,
but I am not enamoured of the idea of wiping out Service Ministers. I know
there are an awful lot of them there, but there is an awful lot of money
bei ng spent too. And it is being spent in a way involving constant decisions.
Social Services, for example, spends a great deal of money, but by and
large it is according to the book, with a discretion not necessarily to go
along with the book. You know pension rates are set, and whether a
chap is competent or not to get it is set. It is more of a mo uting thing.
So there it is. No, I didn't look closely at that.
Q. So as long as you are Prime Minister, then Sir
PM: Oh, come off it. I was asked did I look at it, and I didn't it.
I have expressed a sort of approach to it but I am not to be regarded as
saying as long as I am Prime Minister something is immutable....
Q. You gave a pretty good argument why they should stay as they are.
PM: Well, somebody might come up with a better argument as to why
they shouldn't. I can't fore see that.
Q. Did you have a look at self-government for the Post Office, Sir?
PM! Well that's not down here anywhere.. I think no comment on
that one.
Q. Sir, could yoL~ ust clarify one thing more in relation to the
" Voyager". Cabinet on Thursday will look at the report or will look at the
report in relation to any injustice that may have been done to Captain
Robertson? 
PM: At this stage, I am just saying that the report is here. I haven't
discussed it, any aspect of it with my colleagues at all, but it will be
before us and the whole report will be discussed. I can't say anything
even non-attributable or off the record which would tend to bind somebody
when I haven't spoken to them.
Q. Coming back to the new Army Minister, Sir, you don't feel that
the Army fighting in Viet Nam requires a more experienced Minister
than a total newcomer?
PM: Well, that is something that was in my own mind, or that I have
turned over in my own mind. But I think a Minister in regard to any
sort of military operations . depends on hislaffi res, and the military
advisers are there. I have considered it but I can ' t see any way in
which the effectiveness or effic iency of the Army would be hurt by this.
Q. Sir, will Mr Howson and Mr Chipp go to the back benches?
Are they going to resign either one of them, or anything like this?
PM: They will be private Members of Parliament.
Q. There is no suggestion of, oxerseas diplomatic appointments?
PM: Not now
( Interjection Not in the near future!)
PM: No'
Q. One name not on the list is Mr Erwin's. Anything contemplated
at all for him?
PM: He's the Chief Whip.
Q. Will there be a Whip appointed in the Senate?
PM: The Whip is always elected in the Senate.
MR EGGLETON Except for that one small point made, everything was not
for attribution today.
Q. We Cl quote the PM as saing Cabinet will discuss the " Voyager"
report andill not anticipate wherher. the question of compensation for
Captain Robertson will arise?
MR EGGLETON. Yes.
Vi 



EMBARGO FOR PRESS NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA UNTIL
6.00 MONDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 1968
P. M. No. 25/ 1968
THE MINISTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
A new Ministry will be sworn at noon on Wednesday
next, 28 February. With the authority of His Excellency the
Governor-General, I release the following details of the new
Cabinet and Ministry.
1. PRIME MINISTER The Hon. J. G. Gorton
2. DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER ANiD MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY
The Rt. Hon. J. McEwen
3. TREASURER The Rt. Hon. William McMahon
4. MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS The Rt. Hon. Paul Hasluck
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE The Hon. Allen Fairhall
6. MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY The Hon. J. D. Anthony
7. POSTMASTER-GENERAL AND VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE EXECUTIVE
COUNCIL The Hon. A. S. Hulme
8. MINISTER FOR NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT The Hon. David
Fairbairn, D. F. C.
9. MINISTER FOR LABOUR AND NATIONAL SERVICE The Hon. L. H. E.
Bury
MINISTER FOR SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT AND ASSISTING THE
MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY The Hon.
Ian Sinclair
11. MINISTER FOR SUPPLY AND LEADER OF THE GOVERNMENT IN THE
SENATE Senator the Hon. Ken Anderson
12. MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SCIENCE The Hon. Malcolm Fraser 
-2-
13. MINISTER FOR AIR AND ASSISTING THE TREASURER The Hon.
Gordon Freeth
14. MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL TERRITORIES The Hon. C. E. Barnes
MINISTER FOR CIVIL AVIATION The Hon. R. W. C. Swartz,
E. D.
16 MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND LEADER OF THE HOUSE The Hon.
B. M. Snedden, Q. C.
17. MINISTER FOR HEALTH The Hon. A. J. Forbes, M. C.
18. MINISTER FOR REPATRIATION Senator the Hon. G. Colin
McKe liar
19. MINISTER FOR HOUSING Senator the Hon. Dame Annabelle
Rankin, D. B. E.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL The Hon. N. H. Bowen, Q. C.
21. MINISTER FOR THE NAVY The Hon. C. R. Kelly
22. MINISTER FOR THE INTERIOR The Hon. P. J. Nixon
23. MINISTER FOR THE ARMY The Hon. Lynch
24. MINISTER FOR CUSTOMS AND EXCISE Senator the Hon.
Malcolm Scott
259 MINISTER FOR SOCIAL SERVICES AND MINISTER IN CHARGE OF
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS The Hon. W. C. Wentworth
26. MINISTER FOR WORKS AND UNDER THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND
INDUSTRY MINISTER IN CHARGE OF TOURIST ACTIVITIES
Senator the Hon. R. C. Wright
The first twelve Ministers named will comprise the
Cabinet. I have proposed to His Excellency t~ hat Mr. Lynch,
Senator Scott, Mr. Wentworth and Senator Wright be sworn as Members
of the Federal Executive Council. 



" THIS, DAY TONIGHT"
INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR
JOHN GORTON FCkI'. AB. C. TELEVISION
Interviewers: Mr Frank Bennett
Mr Michael Vlillesee 06 F EBR UA RY 1 c,, 2
Q. Would you have li ked to have made more changes in a new
broom fashion if there had been more talent available In the Ministry?
PM: Well I think that anybody in te position of a Prime Minister
would always find that there were a considerable number of people
among the private members whom one would very much like to
provide with an opportunity, but one would also find that there are
people already carrying out jobs and have been carrying them out for
quite a long time and this creates a difficulty.
Q. Mr Gorton, some commentators have suggested that you
have been influenced by colleagues not to make greater changes. Is
this so?
FM: No, I don't think so.
Q. You are quit e happy at this stage with the extent of your
changes?
PM: This is the C1abinet and Ministry which I think and It Is
for me to think and to take the-responsibility can do the work at
the present time for Australia.
Q. Sir, Mr Chlpp, formerly the Navy Minister and Mr Howson
formerly with the Air portfolio have both been removed from the
Ministry. Can we ask you simply why?
PM: Wlell, I think I can only answer that by saying that In the
position where I am I have to select people, and I did want to give
a couple of newcomers if I can call one of them a newcomer an
opportunity, and there was no way of doing it unless a couple of places
were made for that purpose.
Q. Mr Gorton, wie don't particularly want to push this point
but are you concerned by the suggestions that will be made, in Mr
Hcvison's case, that he went over the VIP controversy, and possibly
in Mr Chipp's case that he went for supporting Mr Snedden?
PM: I don't know what sort of allegations would be made on these
matters. All I can say is I exercised a judgment which may be wrong
but which was a judgment which was necessary. WRell, it was a judgment
which I only could make in the way in which our party Is set up at the
present moment. s. / 2 
Q. Can you amplify, LSir, the kind of portfolio that you see
that you have given to Mr Wlentworth Social Services and Aboriginal
Affairs?
PM: I don' t want you to think that those are lumped together
he has got both those portfolios, that he has received Minister -In-Charge
of Aboriginal Affairs because somehow it goes with Social Services.
This was not the concept at all. I think It Is well known that he has had
a great and continuing interest not only in aboriginal welfare but In
aboriginal history. He has really made a study of this matter. This
will not be a Department of State. It will be something that he
administers In the same way that I administered Education once under
the Prime Minister. In Social Services, I am hoping that he will
bring to bear the talent that he has got for analysing and investigating
and proposing new steps. This Is something in which he might be of
considerable value. An Ideas man.
Q. Despite Mr WItentvworth's talent that you refer to, he has been
overlooked for about 18 or 19 years now. Why is It that he has been
in the back benches for so long and now you have put him In the
M./ inistry?
PM: I think the answer to that is something like the one I gave
you before that each Individual man who preceded me has exercised
his judgment in selecting those he wishes to work with him, and I have
done the same, and It has happened this time to come out differently.
Q. It would seem to go beyond the competence of Mr Wentworth
here. A lot of people would think that neither Sir Robert nor Mr Holt
trusted him. He sounds brilliant but sometimes he sounds erratic
in the House. Are you concerned about that?
PM: No, I'm not. Not In the least. He Is quite brilliant. All
of his Ideas of course, as Is the case with almost any brilliant man,
are not necessarily acceptable, and over the years he has put up a
number of ideas. But some of them have been extremely acceptable,
I think, for example, the unification of rail gauges in Australia owes a
great deal to this kind of approach.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, Senator Wright comes Into your Ministry
with Vorks and Tourism. Hero is a man who has In your mind no
doubt an unfortunate record of voting against the Government. How
did you justify his position under these circumstances?
PM: I felt that we needed In the front benches of the Senate
somebody with good legal knowledge, because a great deal of the
discussion that takes place in the Senate not all by any means but
a great deal Is centred around Committee discussions on Bills and
legal implications, far more than happens In the House of Representativeo
where it tends more to be on broad principles. I felt we needed
somebody with a legal capacity and, if I may put it this way with an
argumentative capacity, somebody with a force of argument, and I felt
that he would be able to fulfil that role. o. / 3 
-3-
Q. At the moment, you are a bit light on with QC's In the
Senate then?
PM: I think we had one other lawyer, '-enator Laught, but I think
he Is not a QC. As a matter of fact, Senator Wlright Isn't a QC either,
is he? I don't think he is.
Q. Could we ask on Senator Wright if you have come to some
agreement with him about ' his rather wayward voting habits?
PM: Oh, I am absolutely sure that Senator Wright fully realises
that when one becomes a member of a governmental team, one is a
member of the team and one supports the team, and that is a completely
different situation from being a private member, particularly a private
member in the Senate where t1Icels an idea that a thing should be looked
at a bit more closely by private members.
Q But despite this, you have left the Deputy Leadership of the
Senate open, when on capability Senator Wright would appear to be the
man to fill the job?
PM: Before I indicated agreement with that, we want to see how the
Soenate works for some considerable time.
Q. Mr Gorton, Mr Barnes Is now Minister for External Territories
only. Why this distinction?
PM: Because I feel that the problems In the Northern Territory are
different in kind from the problems in Papua-New Guinea, and I feel that
whereas the end result Mr H-asluck plit it that the end which the
Northern Territory must attain Is that~/ being eventually a State of the
Commonwealth of Australia, an integral part of the Commonwealth of
Australia. How far ahead that is, I don't know. But that clearly, Is what
the destiny of the Northern Territory Is. Now it is not at all so clear
that that is what is going to happen in the case of Papua-New Guinea.
Rather, I would see it developing towards a form of self-government,
and then perhaps after that, from the basis of a form of self-government,
whenever that occurs, if It wants a special association of some kind with
A., ustralia, approaching the then Australian Government.
Q. Mr Gorton, you have appointed Mr Lynch to the Army portfolio
at a very young age at a time when our Army Is fighting a war. Do you
have fears about this appointment?
PM: I don't think so. He's 34 or 35 and there Is -usually quite a lot
of energy and drive at this age. I feel he bas had considerable managerial
experience, personnel management experience, business experience,
all of which should be helpful in the administration of a Department.
Cf course, neither he nor any other Minister would affect the fighting
of the Department because that Is a military matter which is done by the
Chief of the Service. * 0a00a/ 4 
9 -4-
Q. Finally, Mr Prime Minister, what can you tell us about the
rumours that indicate a possible change at the Head of your own
Prime Minister's Department?
PM: Merely, that there has been, I think fairly clearly, too big a
load for one man to carry, in seeking to do all the Cabinet Secretariat
work snd be Head of the Prime Minister's Department at the same time.
This has been recognised for some time but we are now carrying out
fairly active sort of investigations as to just how this problem can be
over come.
Q. There Is nothing concrete at this stage?
PM:. Not now, no.
Thank you Prime Minister. 



LIBERAL PARTY SPEAKERS' GROUP DINNER
Southern Cross Hotel, Melbourne 27 FEBRUARY 1968
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, M4R JOHN GORTON
Mr President of the Speakers' Group, Mr President of the State Division of
the Liberal Party and Ladies and Gentlemen:
You know, Bob, when you spoke, you reminded me a little
of " old forgotten far-off things and battles long ago". Remember when you
were speaking of the time you were thrown out of the meeting and I was
quite unable to give you any assistance; It brought back to my mind an
occasion I think it was the Communist Dissolution Bill or the Banning of
Communists whatever It was way, way In the past when much the
same thing happened to me. But not quite the same because I remember
vividly in the middle of an Inspiring speech by the former Prme Minister,
Sir Robert Menzies, somebody was Interjecting rather annoyingly and I
was much younger than I am now and I remember approaching him and
saying I'm not going to say that I said this, but the newspapers next
day said I said this " Would you like to have It In here or outside, you
yellow rat! Whereupon I was grabbed by an enormously large policeman
and frogmarched half-way to the door, and the Prme Minister Interrupted
h is policy speech to say " Hey, you can't throw him out. He's one of my
lot" And he had much more effect than I had on you. But still 1 think the
spirit was the same in both cases In yours and in mirke.
You did say something very pleasant Indeed, too, about
my wife, and she has one enormous advantage. Most of the speeches that
she makes are made in Indonesian, and nobody five years later, or even
five days later because they don't understand them is able to say, " Yes,
but five days ago, you said this or you said that". At least, very few people
can, and probably those who really do understand It would not be able in time
to translate It and drift it back to Australia. This is something that most
politicians must regard as a promised land, where you don't get things
thrown back up at you things which I remember being thrown up to
me the television Interview with the ABC, that marvellous undertaking
which we finance but do not control. 1968 somebody said to me,
" Yes. In your maiden speech in 1950, didn't you say this?" Well, I did.
It is quite right. As a matter of fact, he was a very nice man. He wasn't
wrong. Anyway, what I said then wasn't much different from what I am
saying now. But at least she Is spared this risk, which Is an occupational
risk of most of the rest of us as politicians.
It Is here on this night, in this room of this hotel, a
most memorable experience for me to be able to talk to you on this occasion,
My mind goes back, as the minds of man y but not all of you will go
back, because not all of you are old enough, to the time when this party
which you have supported for so long was formed, and to the conditions which
prevailed In Australia and which led to the formation of this party, and to
the work which you and others have put Into it for two decades. It is worthwhile
at this point t o go back and remember, to go back and bring into
our minds what it was then which so motivated so many people that they
were prepared to leave the professions In which they were engaged, that 
2-
they were prepared to give up time which otherwise would be devoted to
their own entertainment, that they were prepared to take the risks which at
that time were real risks, In order to try to change the situation in which
Australia then found Itself, in order to try to direct it along a path which they
thought, and I believe thought properly, would be a better path for the nation
to which they belonged. just think what then was the situation. We had then In this
country an approach by those who were charged with directing the affairs
of this country, which was prepared to accept that It was reasonable that
there should be from five to eight per cent of unemployment, and If we
attained seven per cent that was pretty well full employment, as far as
any country could achieve It.
We had then people who were prepared to maintain that there
ought to be, not for any observed or reasoned process, but that there ought
to be constraints and restrictions of various kinds just because those
constraints and restrictions had once been Imposed, and having once been
imposed, ought to be maintained merely for their own sake.
And we had a government then which was prepared to suggest
that In the name of planning, although it ougit not to have been In the name of
planning, In the name of social action, although It ought not to have been in
the name of sccial action, governments ought to take action In order to see
not that an individual was able to express himself for his own sake and for
the sake of the nation to which he belonged; governments ought to take
action not to see that exploitation was not carried out as sometimes It can
be carried out by individuals, but which was prepared to go further and to
say not we think social action is necessary to improve matters, but we think
social action is necessary to prevent people from engaging In some particular
field of activity, to stop people engaging, for example, In banking activities
not in competition with the State but to stop them altogether; to stop people
from sowing wheat fields if they felt Inclined to take the risk of sowing wheat
fields; to prevent individual initiative. And that is what we then had.
I think because of the Impact of this on those of you In this
room who remember It and those of you in this room to whom the memory
of those days has been passed down, you were ready then to ta-ke risks,
you were ready then to give effort and to give work to change that approach,
to throw out that kind of government, to put in something which fitted more
In with the beliefs that you had as to what you wished to see.
You were prepared to reject entirely the Idea, which was an
Idea Inherent In a government of two decades ago, that you existed, and the
rest of the Australian citizens existed to serve a state, and you were prepared
to put In the place of that idea, an Idea that a state existed to control, yes,
but existed for the sake of the Individuals that lived under It, and not for its
own sake, demanding from Individuals complete support.
This was a watershed, I think, In Australian development
and Australian history, and because we were successful then, and because
under two great Prime Ministers we have since then, with the application
of the principles they then set out, so far advanced this country that those
living twenty years ago could not have envisaged the situation which we
are now In, so I believe you will support those approaches. If you do support
those approaches, then in two decades from now, we will be as far ahead of
our present Imagination as today we are ahead of the Imagination of two decades
ago. / 3 
-3-
. As the result of what you initially did, surely we
have transformed this nation to take the examples I used before transformed
It where Instead of five to eight per cent of unemployment, we believe and
have brought Into operation the belief that full employment Is possible and If
we have one or one and a half per cent unemployment, then this becomes
a matter of comment. Surely over the last decades we have built up In thip
country Industrial muscles which have enabled us to take In the Immigration
which In that period of time has taken place.
How often do I remember members of the Opposition saying,
" T~ hat are you going to do next year when x thousand school-leavers come on
to the market?" Year after year have I heard it said, and year after year
have x thousand school-leavers been absorbed into the industries and the
opportunities which have been created because of the climate which has been
made by the government not because of what the government has da2 bit Oemase
of what the underlying philosophy which motivates the government
has enabled you and the other citizens of Australia to do.
Surely we have transformed our whole approach from one
which at one time said " VIe don't want to encourage In this country home
ownership because that creates little capitalists" into an approach which
says we wish people-to hold their own homes and to have other ownership
and to have a stake in the development of the country In which they live,
and which has been successfully, I think, translated Into action so that here
In this country In these two decades we have created a society in which more
people own their homes and have a stake In their country and have other
owinership of material things than has ever been dreamed of In this country
bef ore. Here, surely, In these last two decades, we have grown from
some small, relatively unconsidered nation, a nation shielded through Its
whole existence by the shield and buckler of the British Navy, into a nation
which yet still needs shielding, but which has become not a great power in the
world, because of course as yet we are not, bu t a power, the voice of which
has some significance In the councils of Asia, thanks particularly to the late
Prime Minister, Mr Holt; and to which so many of the peoples near us, and
I think some of the peoples of the great powers further away, look not now
as some significant world force, because we are not, but as some potential
world force, because if we go on In the way in which we have been moving, we
will be in two or three decades In the future some really significant world
force. as long as the roots are not cut by a reversal to that kind of approach,
which two decades behind us we left.
People say and it Is a proverb which has some significance
that the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Now those of us who are in
this room, and those of us who over the years have contributed In one way or
another to the pudding which now Is before the Australian people, will I think
agree that sa far If the proof of the pudding is in the eating, then the proof on
the record Is a good proof, even though there has been in these two decades
behind us, as there will be in the two decades in the front of us, even amongst
us in this room, even am ongst us with a general political philosophy, and
as there must always be amongst such people, differences of opinion as to
particular facts, differences of interpretation as to particular approaches,
arguments, because it Is of the very lifeblood of a political party that there
should be arguments inside It, solved inside it, and agreed by all in that
political party after they have been solved by it, even though that should be so
as it has been In the past and as It undoubtedly will be in the future, yet that
play and Interplay has brilliantly justified Itself under the two great men who
v / 4 
-4
for the last two decades have led Australia.
And now you, and many others like you throughout
Australia, have asked me for a while to try to continue to advance that work
which has been so well begun. I know, as I have said before, I cannot do
it without you and others like you throughout Australia, arguing, contesting
agreeing, if you don't agree, being told to go aloft In a particular way, to try
and continue this. And believe me, Indeed you know, we have before us
in the next two decades problems to be overcome which are perhaps even
more difficult, even more Intransigent than the problems which already
have been surmounted. There is nothing wrong with this, because this is true of
a mants life, any man's life, any woman's life, and any nation's life that
you don't by removing a problem, remove all problems. You merely, by
overcoming a problem and a challenge, provide yourself with a new problem
and a new challenge, and if you overcome that In turn, another one after that.
But each one that Is overcome is a new step up the ladder to the destiny which
I believe we can together bring to this country of ours.
I have made, In the election for which I have just stood, on
behalf of the Government which will shortly be sworn In, no finite promises
to you or to Australia, except that we will continue, as best in us lies, to
follow the paths which have been blazed before.
And yet all of us can see the problems which do need to be
overcome. We must and this I put highly, not overwhelmingly but highly,
because I regard it as the test of the success of any society, not just the
material success of any society, but the success of a society as a group of
people In which individuals are looked after an-asisted we must re-examine
from top to bottom our social services systemr 7f that Is what you wish to
call It, our welfare system.
WAe must seek to Isolate to examine and Isolate those cases
In which real need exists and In which real poverty prevails, and seek to see
that this is not something which crushes the human spirit of those under real
poverty or under real need. But this is not enough of Its own because we must
seek to make at the same time after all, we are all going to contribute to
this to make more efficient the methods we adopt in order to try to eliminate
this poverty and this need, and to see that there is no waste in the way In which
we attack that particular requirement of a really advanced community.
In doing this we must seek to try and not destroy the Incentive
of people during their working life to save and to provide for themselves, not
to sq uan der their savings In order to get more assistrance from the community
at the end of their lives. All these in this one matter a matter of great
Importance to us If we are to hold up our heads and say this Is a country which
Is not only materially but spiritually great all these are the bread and butter
which must be looked at, which must be closely examined, which must be
analysed, on which work must be put in to see that we attain the goal which
I have briefly outlined to you.
And in doing It, as we must and will do it, we have got to
steer between Scylla and Charybdis. Ie must avoid the approach so
prevalent in England under, I think. the thinking of a socialist government
that all Is provided without cost q rclatively shoddy way to everybody a 
at in fact a final cost which prevents in our case, or would, a growth to
greatness which has In its application, as I believe, In the United Kingdom
led to some decline from greatness, not because of the United Kingdom
people whom I believe to be as great in themselves as ever they were, but
because of this imposition which two decades ago, thank God, we got rid
of In Australia. These things and I have presented one problem to you
alone are not done over-night. There have been propositions easily thrown
around " Let's Integrate things. Let's have a Minister of Social Wlelf are
and an Assistant Minister for Social Services and an Assistant Minister
for Health and an Assistant Minister for Housing, who all come in to the
point of the Minister for Social Welfare". Indeed, tbis has an attraction,
but It is also an attraction which has a very difficult objecdion, because you
can't have Assistant Ministers under the Constitution under which we live.
Well you can, but you can't pay the m anything or else they lose their seat
In Parliament. So these easy approaches, and they are easy approaches,
are not necessarily to be accepted at face value. But what is to be accepted
Is that there does need to be an overall look at the whole of this field and
somebody whatever they are called, to correlate these to see that waste
does not occur, that duplication does not occur, that the areas In which
assistance is required are the areas to which assistance goes, and that we
do not destroy that self -reliance on which, really, Australia's future depends.
This, I promise you, we will try to do. It Is not done
overnight, but If it takes months to do, what of it, because If It Is done
properly, then It will for decades after it has been done, justify the expenditure
of those months and help our children and our grandchildren In this country.
That Is and I have expanded on it mo re than I meant to do
an indication of one of the problems which now lies before us. It is one of
many because we must, in these decades ahead as well, continue to bring Into
this country the immigrants which Mr Sne" den has been bringing In and must
continue to bring in, in order to see that we become not in terms of numbers
because In terms of number, no matter what our immigration policy is, we
will never catch up In terms of numbers with the countries nearest to us, but
to bring In sufficient to see that the technological advantages we now have,
and the technological advances we will mae, which we call Into the balance
to redress our lack of numbers, will have sufficient numbers to ensure that
those advances will keep us in the forefront as we have been In the forefront
in our region of the world.
Bringing these people in I s not easy, Is not a matter of
waving a wand, and is not inexpensive. Wle need, and we must do our best
to ensure that In meeting these two problems I have already mentioned,
in meeting the need for providing defence for this country which relatively,
for the first time in its history, finds Itself, of itself, relatively defenceless,
so to try to direct our efforts, that while we realise that we ourselves, by
ourselves, cannot stand against some great world power, yet we can and
have a responsibility to provide sufficient In the way of defence, to contribute
to the stability of our neighbouring countries and to be able to take, ourselves,
the first shock of any attack upon ourselves should it in the future come. I am
not saying it will, but should It in the future come as In the past it has come,
and as in the past It might have come much more seriously to take the first
shock of that. And to believe, being able to do that, and having contributed e / 6 
-6
to the alliances to which we are contributing that we could depend that
having taking that first shock, we would be able to require, not as of right,
but as of decency that those powers with more significant capacity than
ourselves would then come In, should it be necessary, to help us. This is
not cheap, this Is not inexpensive, this Is not easy.
' ie have a requirement, of course, In our Industrial
areas to try to see that we remove ourselves from the dependence that we
have had In the past almost completely, and still for four-fifths completely,
on primary produce to provide our overseas exchange; and so to foster
not to denigrate primary produce but to foster alternative methods of
exporting manufactured goods from this country to such countries as will
take them. This Is not inexpensive and this Is not easy and this requires
effort. I would If I had time, but I would weary you if I did,
expand that list to Indicate the other things in the public sector which we
need to do to expand the areas of education which today are such that if
someone two decades ago had looked Into the future, they would have thought
completely unattainable; to endeavour to see that the research already
encouraged in Australia Is encouraged more so that we, and not some other
country, get the benefits of inventions and of patents which come from within
our own community; to try to endeavour to see that scientific activity
generally In this country is directed towards an end which will quickly and
immediately solve some of the problems in any field In which you care to
look. This Is not cheap and this Is not inexpensive.
These are just some, just a random grab-bag I put
before you of the problems which now lie ahead of us, but problems which
in great part have been created because of the advances we have made, you
have made, and therefore not matters for despair, but rather matters for
exhilaration because it is a growing nation which has these problems, not
a stagnant nation, The fact that we have them indicates we are not stagnant,
we are growing, we are moving into a future which, If we approach it In
the way we approached it twenty years ago will, I believe bring benefits
not just in arithmetical progression but in geometrical progression over what
we know and what we grew up with.
You may think, and If you do so, you are wrong that In
presenting to you these problems which are before us, I present them in
some spirit of worry. I do not. I merely put them before you because I
believe It is possible, though I do not think it is so, but I believe It t3 possible
after two decades of government, people may look back only to the problems
which have been overcome, to the advances which have been made, and may
lose their enthusiasm for attack on those which now exist and those which are
still to be overcome. You would not be here, there would not have been, I
think, so much support for the Liberal Party as there Is now In Australia if
It were not true that most Australians are looking to the same approach as they
have had I don't mean exactly the same approach the same principles
as they have had applied. Perhaps some of them are looking for them to be
applied in a new and imaginative way to overcome the uew and different
problems which lie before us. It has been most encouraging I believe,
certainly to myself, and I think to nearly all of us in the Federal Parliament
to see this resurgence of Liberalism which will continue to have arguments,
as an underscoring of the fact that the Australian people still want to advance
and still want to advance with the same dynamo, with the same avoidance
of the other side which has led to advances so far. 
-7
Let me conclude in this way; just as we attacked
problems and overcame them before, so we will attack and overcome
them in the next twenty years not as a reactionary party, not as a
conservative party, but as a pragmatist party which examines problems
and sees the best way to overcome them, and applies those approach es,
and If those approaches don't work, then applies some other approach In
order to reach the required objective.
WNe are not and In spite of what has sometimes been
said never have been a party which, using the word in Its proper sense,
has been opposed to socialism, because socialism, using the word in Its
pzoper sense, means social action for the benefit of the community as
a whole. We have been prepared, of course, to apply social action for
the benefit of the community as a whole, and you only need to look at the
hospitals which are provided by social action, at the Irrigation systems
which are provided, the roads which are provided, the railways, the post
office, all those areas through social action, that Is through a government
taking money from you and using It for social purposes that are applied for
the benefit of the community as a whole. There are none of us, I think,
who would object to this.
What we do object to, what I believe we will fight to the
death against is that conception of socialism which brought this party to
Its first great success, the conception which said unequivocally The
State does not exist to serve the IndtIvual; the S1tate does not exist to try
to provide a climate In which the Individual Is able to expand himself In
any way in which he sees fit, provided he doesn't exploit his fellow -beings.
No. T1he individual exists to serve the State, which was the underlying
concept of what was previously overthrown.
W~ e object to that concept of socialism which says not:
" Yes, we will use social action for the benefit of the community,' but" We
will use social action to deny and prohibit and prevent an individual
engaging in some particular form of activity in which we think he should
not be allowedto engage. So we will stop him engaging In banking activities."
We are prepared to compete with him In banking activities, but they say,
" No. We will stop him engaging In It. Wle will stop him sowing wheat.
We will stop him doing anything which our planners say he shouldn't do."
This we oppose, and this would be the kiss of death for this country if ever
It were accepted again. To me the great encouragement, and to my colleagues
the great encouragement Is that all of -you here have come tonight as I
believe, with the same general approach as the one I have sought to put
before you, with the same willingness to work and sacrifice for that same
general approach, and that you are multiplied outside this room, as I
believe by a majority of Australans with that same general approach and
with that same willingn~ ess to work for that general approach. Because If
this impression of mine Is true, as I think it is, then I have no doubt
whatever that we will In how many decades I don't know but we will
become the Queen Continent of this Hemisphere, that we will have the
material strength of the United States and the spiritual strength of Europe, and
will be able to be a shining example of people who came to a harsh country
and by effort conquered it, because only by effort can things be attained,
and that we will In time not only see'the vision splendid of the sunlit
plains extended", but attain'the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended"
together. 



FOR, PRESS WS DEP4A~ r
-3
_ 3 PM6No. 26/ 1968
PRIME MIINIST3R TO VISIT NEV! Z3ALAND
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, has accepted
an invitation by the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr Keith Holyoake,
to visit New Zealand next month. He plans to make the visit at the end
of March and to be in New Zealand for about three days.
This will be Mr Gorton's first visit outside
Australia since becoming Prime Minister and will satisfy a wish
had to take an early opportunity to make a goodwill visit to New he has
Zealand.
The visit Is a further expression to mark the close
and continuing bonds of kinship and common endeavour existing between
the two countries and the desire of each to see intimate relationships
preserved and developed. It will provide an occasion for discussions with
Mr Holyoake and his colleagues on matters of mutual interest.
Mr Gorton has accepted an invitation to open the
New Zealand Easter Show at Auckland on 30 March.
CANBERRA, 28 February 1968
Background Note The late Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt, visited
New Zealand in February of last year. This was the first visit to New
Zealand by an Australian Prime Minister since 1954. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 28/ 1968
AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION AT EXPO 70 OSAKA
Rear Admiral T. K. Morrison, CB, CBE, DSC, took
up his position in Canberra todly as Australian Commissioner-General
for EXPO 70. Admiral Morrison will control the preparations for
Australian participation in EZPO 70, the first category Universal and
International Exhibition to be held in Osaka, Japan from 15 March to 13
September 1970. The Australian Exhibits Crganization for EXPO 7C,
which is attached to Prime Minister's Department, will be located at
Casey House in State Circle.
The Government is in contact with the Exposition
Authorities in Csaka to secure a desirable site for the Australian
pavilion. The Commonwealth Department of V! orks, which designed
the successful Australian pavrlion at EXPC 67 in Montreal, will be
responsible for the design of the Australian pavilion for EXPO
Negotiations are proceeding for the appointment of an exhibits architect
to design the exhibits and interior layout of the building.
CANBERRA, 4 March 1968
BACKGROUND NOTE: The postal address for the Commissioner-General
is Commissioner-General,
Australian Exhibits Organization for EXPO
Prime Minister's Department,
CANBERRA. ACT. 260C 



FOR PRESS: PM, No. 27/ 1968
ZTAMF RECEIPTS DUTY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Prime Minister today released the text of correspondence
( attached) between the Commonwealth and the States on the question of
the Victorian State Receipts Duty legislation as It applied to incomes.
The Prime Minister said that the Commonwealth did not
object In principle to the extension of State Taxation into the general field
of business receipts or business turnover provided this was not carried to
the point where It could significantly affect the carrying out of Commonwealth
policies or revenue collections.
But he emphasised that the Commonwealth believed that
State Receipts Duty should hot be collected on wages or salaries and had
reached this belief after careful consideration of possible effects on I
taxpayers and on the economy should this form of taxation become established
and Increased. He said It was true that a State Tax on wages and salaries
at the rate of one cent in ten dollars Is not, In itself, a major impost but
it Is inconsistent with the principle of uniform income tax, Is contrary to
the conditions under which the Commonwealth is providing general revenue
grants to the States, and could be extended to lead to a situation where this
type of income tax might be Imposed by the States on a significant scale.
He said the Commonwealth could not stand by and permit
this to happen because the Imposition of income tax, and the rates of Income
tax imposed, have major implications for national economic and social
0 policies applicable throughout the whole natiork and the Commonwealth
could not allow them to be Impaired.
He said he was sure that the majority of Australians had
no wish to return to the dual Income taxation system which existed before
the introduction of uniform income tax.
CANBERRA, 4 March 1968 



FOCR PRESS: F. M. No. 29/ 1968
P. M. G0. MOITOR DMiVRS' DispuTE,
Stat~ menv by* the Prime Minti6tek followifng talks with Wi. Monk
The Governknent expressed the view that the previous return
to work of the APWU drivers was the result of an agreement which
called for the placing of a case before thia Public Service Board, speedy
hearing and decision on that case by the Public Service Board, and, in'
the event of disagreement, subsequent arbitration.
The Government had facilitated a speedy hearing and discussion
by the Public Service Board, It understood that conferences had been
held before the arbitrator, and that the Board was prepared now and
had been for some time to proceed to a public hearing of the case
before the arbitrator.
The Government pointed out that It could not itself enter the
area of wage fixing since this was done, In the event of disagreement
between the Public Service Board and a public service union by the
system of arbitration established by law.
It hoped that this system of arbitration would be used and would
ask the Public Service Board, as a party to the dispute, to ask the
arbitrator to nominate dates for such public hearings as a matter of
urgency. C2ANBER RA
7 M'arch 1968 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 30/ 1968
INDI3EPENDENCE OF MAURITIUS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mvr John Gorton
Senator Dame Annabelle Rankin, Minister for Housing,
will represent the Australian Government at the celebrations marking
the Independence of Maurititis next week ( 12 March).
The Governor-General, Lord Casey, has sent a goodwill
message to the Governor-General of Mauritius, and I have sent a message
to the Prime Minister. The Australian Government will be presenting a painting
and a library of Australian constitutional, historical and literary works
to the Mauritian Government from the Government and people of
Australia. An Ink stand Is being presented to the Parliament of Mauritius
as a gift from the Australian Parliament.
CANBERRA, 7 March, 1968 



FOR PRESS': PM. No. 31/ 1968
DEEPARTMENT OF THE CflINET OFFICE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
His Excellency the Governor-General in Council has
today, in pursuance of Section 64 of the Constitution, established a new
Department of State of the Commonwealth entitled the Department of the
Cabinet Office. The new Department will have the function of servicing
the Cabinet and the Committees of Cabinet, which it Is planned to extend
in number, and of assisting the Prime Minister in the expeditious ordering
of Cabinet business and proceedings.
This decision means a division of the former Prime
Minister's Department between its Cabinet activities and Its non-Cabinet
activities with an e Xpansion of service t o the Prime Minister on each
side. As is well known, the servicing of Cabinet has hitherto
been a part of the functions of the Prime Minister's Department and the
Secretary of the Department also had the role of Secretary to the
Cabinet. Cabinet pressures have been steadily increasing because of th~ e
diversity and complexity of Government action In the Federal sphere, and
must be expected to continue to do so. At the same time, the other demands
on the Department have risen steadily, and these also will continue to do
SO. In the Government's view, the time has now come when
these two major activities should be separated If each I s to receive the
necessary attention and control required for the full conduct of the
Government's business. Sir John Bunting, C. B. E. has been appointed S-ecretary
to the Department of the Cabinet Office and Mr C. L. S. Hewitt, 0. B. E.,
has been appointed Secretary to the Prime Minister's Department.
Both Permanent Heads will be members of the Defence
Committee. CANBERRA, 11 March 1968 



STAT3ME-IFNT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. JOHN GORTON, MP. IN
THE HOULSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON
13 MARCH 1968
PAYMENT TO CAPTAIN ROBERTSON
In conjunction with its consideration of the Report of the
Royal Commissioners, the Government has given much thought to the
position of Captain R. J. Robertson. On his resignation in 1964, Captain
Robertson was ineligible for any pension from the Defence Forces
Retirements Benefits Fund and received only the repayment of his own
contributions to the Fund. As Honourable Members are well aware, no
Service Board, either in 1964 or now, has authority to grant pensions.
Provision for pensions In all three Services is made in the Defence Forces
Retirement Benefits Act 1948-66. The Naval Board in 1964 could only
ensure that Captain Robertson was aware of the consequences of his
decision to resign and this It did.
No officer of the Armed Services Is entitled to resign
and claim his f ull pensilon merely because he is dis satisfied With a
particular appointment. Howev--r, it Is widely felt that Captain Robertson
resigned as and when he did because of certain critical findings made by
the first Royal Commission and that, In the special circumstances of this
case, the second Royal Commission having accepted a different
reconstruction of the accident and having said that Captain Robertson was
free of any criticism, the Government should take some action recognising
the changed position. The Government has now decided that a payment should:
Sbe made to Captain Robertson * and In reaching this conclusion necessarily
had to take a broad view. Whilst paying some regard to the pension which
Captain Robertson might have received In certain eventualities If he had
not resigned as and when he did, the Government did not regard this as the
sole criterion. Other factors also had to be taken Into consideration.
' Having considered various ways In which this payment might be made the
Government decided that payment of a lump sum, as an act of grace, would
be the most appropriate and the Government has now decided to authorise
payment accordingly of 000 In reaching this decision, the Government
took Into account advice from the Commissioner of Taxation that he would
regard payment made in the form proposed as being free of income tax. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. JOHN GORTON, MP, IN
' oT. THE HCUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON
4* 14 MARCH 1968
-4
ERARJ MEMORIAL SERVICE FOR LORD BRUCE
Honourable Members may recall that in November
last, the Government agreed to the request contained in the will of the
late Lord Bruce that his ashes be scattered over Canberra.
It was also agreed that arrangements would be made
for a memorial service to take place at the same time and that the
ceremonies would be held on a suitable occasion after the resumption
of Parliament. This was to enable the Parliament to be fully
represented. I now wish to inform the House that a Memorial
Service will be held at noon next Wednesday, 20 March at All Saints'
Church, Ainslie and that in the course of the service the Royal
Australian Air Force will give effect to the wishes of the late Lord
Bruce by the scattering of the ashes over Canberra. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
Rt Hon. J G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
INTERROGATION IN VIETNAM
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 14 March 19681
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
[ 8.35]-Mr Speaker, at the conclusion of
the speech which he has just made the
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam)
quoted some words which he attributed to
me, and I think attributed rightly, to the
effect that it was proper that information
should not be suppressed and that facts
should not be withheld from the public. of
Australia. I suggest, Mr'Speaker, that the
statement which has been made by the
4inister for the Army ( Mr Lynch) tonight
eIars out completely that the Government
believes in that and is acting in accordance
with that because the facts of this incident
have been presented by the Minister for the
Army to this chamber.
r Clyde Cameron-What about
._ son's report. Let us have a look at that.
Mr SPEAKER--Order! I have already
warned the honourable member for
Hindmarsh earlier in the debate. If he
persists in interjecting I will have to deal
with him.
Mr GORTON-The honourable member
for Hindmarsh is quite eager, Mr Speaker,
no doubt. But what is it that the Minister
for the Army's statement has presented to
this House as to what has happened? Let
me recapitulate the situation that has been
presented by the Minister for the Armya
situation which has not been, denigrated
or attacked at all by the Leader of the
Opposition. That situation was that Australian
troops in Vietnam, having just been
engaged in one of the greatest engagements
13968168 fought by Australian troops in that area,
were being harassed. Their -patrols were
being reported upon. They were being
endangered by an enemy agent with a radio
set who was reporting on their movements
and reporting on what was happening in
their base camp. Is it not clear that this
would endanger the lives of Australian
soldiers? Is that not perfectly evident? That
was disclosed and so far has not been
rebutted. Then, Mr Speaker, what
happened? What happened was that the
agent so engaged was captured along with
the transceiver and the radio. set which she
was using as an enemy agent to endanger
Australian troops. Then she was taken to
an interrogation tent and,' Mr Speaker, at
this stage I must say that it is perfectly true
that having been taken to an interrogation
tent the. spirit of the Geneva Agreement,
which probably did not apply to this civilian
anyway-Opposition members-Oh!
Mr GORTON-AiI . right.. The Opposition'wants
to apply it. Apply it. I am speaking
in my own way..
Mr SPEAKER--Order! The honourable
member ' for Stirling will cease interjecting.
I have already arned him already in the
debate. Mr Webb-Oh!
Mr SPEAKER-If I have not warned
him* then I am Warning him now. I suggest
h should not continue to interrupt. 
Mr GORTON-To repeat what I was
saying, whether members of the Opposition
like it or not-and perhaps they do notthe
Geneva Agreement, as I understand it,
applies to prisoners of war, not to civilian
franc tireurs, but -the Australian Government
applies, and seeks to apply, the spirit of
the Geneva Agreement even to these civilian
agents and franc tireurs. But it is nevertheless
true no matter what brouhaha comes
from the other side of the House -that the
Geneva Agreement itself in these circumstances
is most unlikely -to apply. But the
agent was taken and the spirit of the Geneva
Agreement, I am bound to say, was exceeded.
To what extent? It was exceeded
to the extent that the interrogating officer
raised his voice and this is not allowed
under the Geneva Agreement. Honourable
members opposite should read it if they do
not believe this. Prisoners may only be
asked questions as to -their name, their rank
and their number. The interrogator is not
even allowed to ask for that information
in a loud voice. But this interrogating officer
did. He raised his voice. He shouted. Do
you know what he did, Mr Speaker? He
even banged on the table when he was talking
to -this spy who was engaged in activities
endangering Australian forces. He even
smashed his fist on the table. This is not
allowed by the Geneva Agreement, but this
is what he did. He went further. He sought
by threats and by intimidation, which are
not allowed by the Geneva Agreement, to
discover information. I do not know what
that information was, ' but could it not have
been-and if it were would it not have been
important-What were the last messages
you sent out as to where Australian patrols
were and where they were going?', s o that
ambushes could be -laid for them? I do not
know. But he banged his fist on the table
when he was seeking this information. He
raised his voice. He went further. He
threatened and he intimidated. This is all in
the report of the Minister for the Army. He
went further than that. He went much
further than that because he not only
threatened that he would use the water
treatment-or water torture as the Opposition
would call it-but he began to pour
water down the throat of this woman.
Mr Daly-What a scandalous thing.
Mr GORTON-Yes, a shocking thing.
But let me say this in response to something
the Leader of ' the Opposition said. He said that we would have ' little chance
-to complain if Australian soldiers were captured
by the Vietcong or the North Vietnamese.
If the worst that happened to Australian
soldiers was that somebody banged
on the table, raised his voice and poured
one cup of water down -their throats then
we would not have very much to complain
of. There are people in this House and
there are people in this country who know
what a water treatment or a water torture
really is. There are people in this House
hwahdo thhea vree abl eewna tperr istoonretursre , o fn owt arth isa nmd awtteho
applied to them. Those in this House anujthose
throughout this country know this-
Nobody walks away from that; no
walks out of a tent under his own pow,-Is'
photographed, poses and is driven away.
What has been disclosed on this? Let u
be clear that the spirit of the Geneva Agreement
-has been transgressed but it has not
been transgressed -to the extent to which it
is sought to be presented that it has been
transgressed. It has not been transgressed
to the point that any real torture has been
applied. Even so, in compliance with the
approach of the Australian Military Forces,
in compliance with the instructions issued to
the Australian Military Forces, because this
went beyond the bounds that were laid
down, therefore in spite of what I have sale~
the interrogator was removed from in th. I
future interrogating any other prisoners.
That I suggest clearly indicates the approach
of the Australian Military Forces in this
matter. It clearly indicates -that even in this
kind of circumstance the Australians
operating not only in an honourable
but in a way which in effect is dangerous
to them-far more dangerous to them than
what the Leader of the Opposition has suggested
that something which could come
out of this incident could be dangerous to
, them. Let me ask all members of the House
a question. We are--perhaps the Opposition
is not but -the rest of us are and the majority
of the people of, this country are-responsible
for believing that we should be serving
in Vietnam and for sending troops to serve
in Vietnam. Having done that, even members
of the Opposition, . I would have
thought, would want to see that the safety
of those troops was safeguarded.
Mr Bryant-Turn it up. 
Mr G40RTON-AUI right. Let me ask
them -this and see what -answer I get to this
question: If they were in charge of a military
camp in Vietnam and they discovered,
any one of them-
Mr Hayden-What about Archbishop
Strong's attitude?
Mr GORTON-You, if you like. You are
a policeman. If you discovered-
Mft Hayden-What are Archbishop
Strong's views?
C -Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
-member for Oxley is continually interjecting.
I ask him to restrain himself.
Ar GORTON-What I was asking the
honourable member for Oxley before he
ceased to restrain himself was whether if
K. he were in charge of a military camp in
Vietnam -and he discovered in that camp
a civilian who he knew had set booby traps
throughout that camp, he would regard it as
such a terrible thing to raise his voice when
he asked that person where those booby
traps were, or to bash his fist on the table
when he said: ' Did you put them in these
tents or those tents?' Or would he-perhaps
he would-say: ' Well, this is just too bad.
We will let the Australian troops find out
where the booby traps are by falling over
them.'
C. Mrt SPEAKER-Order! I warn the
honourable member for Mitchell, who is
interjecting. Mir GORTON-Would he only say to
Qthiisr civilian: ' VWhat is your name? What is
rank? What is your number?' and let
-L. ings go. It is not to be assumed for one
minute from what I am saying that the
Australian Army does not apply the Geneva
conventions because it does. It is not to be
assumed for one minute-and the actions
of the Army authorities underline thisthat
they believe even the departure which
this interrogator made should be condoned.
But we do need, I think, as a House of
Parliament and as a nation, to realise this:
We are engaged in armed combat. There is
talk of bringing people out-flying them
out. After all, people spoke about what was
attributed to me and it was not attributed
to me in my name and I can do the same.
This talk, which I have no doubt is well
based, of flying out this enemy agent to
put her in a box somewhere in Australia, under safe conduct, to be examined by a
Judge, to say anything she liked, to make
any kind of propaganda she liked, to make
any kind of lying story she liked, is an
impossible approach to a situation in which
we in Australia find ourselves today. Let us
draw the lines perfectly clearly here. We are
not going to be put into a situation where
the morale of our armed forces is going to
be attacked by this kind of imputation. We
are not going to be put into a situation
where our intelligence techniques are laid
open to an enemy by some open inquiry
such as is suggested by the Opposition. We
will not do it. If they want to do it, let
them say so. We say we will not. Let us
fight it out on that line, if it takes all
summer. That having been said, I now go on to
this, Mr. Speaker: There has been some
attack upon the Minister for the Army,
some suggestion that he has been improper
in what he has done. He has not been
improper in any way at all and the statement
which he presented to this House
makes this abundantly clear. He was under
the impression and given the information
that there had been an investigation in
Vietnam which had said there had been no
ill-treatment. Because he felt that needed
further investigation he said that he would
set up a court of inquiry. Subsequently,
because he then discovered-not having
been told before-that there had been an
investigation in Vietnam which -in fact had
discovered this degree of ill-treatment, it
became perfectly abundantly clear, surely,
that there was no point in setting up a court
of inquiry to discover whether the facts
about an incident should be investigated
when in fact the facts about that incident
had already, by the first investigation, been
made clear and been presented to this
House. In relation to this incident there
can be no requirement -for any further
action. The facts have been presented.
There has been some ill-treatment of a
degree which the Australian people in their
own commonsense and their own judgment
will judge. It has gone beyond the strict
letter of the Geneva Convention. It has
gone beyond it in circumstances of not calm
legal discussion-not an atmosphere of
courts of law-but beyond it in a situation
oA' fighting and of strife and of violence
and of life and of death. I would like to
say, Mr Speaker, that this kind of thing 
will never happen again, because we do not
believe it should. But it would be a wrong
and stupid thing for me to say that this
kind of thing could never happen again.
Men are engaged in war. Their lives are
forfeit. It is an astonishing thing to meperhaps
not so. astonishing considering some
of the experiences we have all had-that
in this kind of circumstances there have not
been allegations of real substance made
about mistreatment,-not of prisoners-of-war,
because that does not happen, but of
civilian spies-that there have not been real
allegations of substantive mistreatment, that
there have not been more instances of this.
I think it says a great deal for the Australian
Military Forces and for the instructions
which they are given and to which
they adhere, that in this kind of warfare,
that in the circumstances of espionage and
reporting to which they are exposed, there
has come out of this conflict merely this one
incident which we deplore, which we hope
will not be repeated but which, . when it is
all boiled down, relates to threats, to
intimidation, to a loud voice, to bluff about
water torture and to the beginning-and
this we do not condone-of such torture.
At the end of it-
Mr Uren-Does the Prime Minister
support thuggery?.
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr GORTON-I cannot pick up a word
the honourable member is saying.
Mr Uren-I said-
. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The House will
come to order. Mr Uren-I said: Do you support
thuggery? Thuggery is a-
Mr GORTON-I can assure the honourable
member. that I do not support thuggery.
Indeed, I thought it was abolished in India
some 50 years ago by imperial decree. If
it has not been abolished then I would be
glad to help to abolish it. What I was saying
before I became intermittently interrupted
was that out of this incident has emerged
this: There was somebody endangering Australian
troops. That somebody was interrogated.
That interrogation did go beyond the
bounds of the Geneva Convention. At the
end-perhaps this'has something to do with
thuggery-of that interrogation the sub'r-t,
was able to walk out of the tent to
photographed, to pose for photographs.
Then Mr Cross--A bit wet perhaps.
Mr GORTON-Yes, a little vet, I agree.
Perhaps, Mr' Speaker, we could conclude
on that interjection. At the end of the interrogation
she was able to walk out. She was
able to be photographed. She was able to
be flown out in a United States aircraft.
But it must be admitted, she was a little
wet. Let me say this: This sort of interrogation
should not happen. But to put it in
perspective, how far did it go? Was there
real -torture of the kind that people in this
House know? In the stress and strain of
fighting this may happen again; but if it'
does it will be as it was on this occasion.
It will be because of an individual acting
aga'inst the instructions given . by the Army
arid against the instructions given by the
Government, and who, because he acted.;'
that way, was removed from the position
previously held.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS DE
2 2 IAR 1968
LBR PM; No. 32/ 1963
VISIT BY THE EMFP CR OF ETHIOPA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
It has been announced in Addis Ababa today that His Imperial
Majesty Haile Selassie of Ethiopia will include a visit to Australia as part
of a journey which he is soon to make to a number of overseas countries.
The visit is expected to take place about the middle of May and
to last about 4 days.
I am sure that all Australians will warmly welcome the
prospect of a visit by such a distinguished Head of State.
Consultations will now take place to prepare, in draft form,
a programme of engagements for those days when the Emperor is here,
and an announcement of these details will be made after the proposals have
been put to him and accepted,
CANBERRA, March, 1968 



OPENING OF THE PHILIP MORRIS FACTORY
MCORABBIN, VICTORIA March 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Thank you very much, Arthur. I say " Arthur" because it
is true we have known each other for very many years, and indeed not
closely, or he wouldn't be able to say with such conviction so many nice
things, but intermittently and fairly closely during all that period of time.
I am here to make a very brief speech and to declare open
the factory and to declare open whatever It Is that is behind that curtain.
( Laughter). I daresay that you, as I, are going to be quite Interested to
see what it is the little bits that I can see look as if somebody round
Sydney Harbour may be wondering what's happened to the Opera House.
And if so we won't let them know where they are.
It is quite true, Sir, as you said In the course of telling
those assembled what it was that I'd said to myself, and in the course of
doing that saying a number of things that I was otherwise going to say to
them, that we do, as a Government, have a 42 per cent or 424 per cent
Interest or whatever it is, I'll have to ask the Treasurer in the profits
of this company. But, of course, that's not the whole story, Sir, as you
know, because we also have an Interest in the dividends paid to the
Individuals and the wages paid to the employees and all these other
Incidental matters such as excise which helps the wheels of Government
to go around. So it Is really quite important quite important to us, quite
important to Australia, and we do see here, I think, an example of growth
but not only an example of growth, an example of growth made In the way
in which we in Australia would wish it to be made. Because here is an
example of development as a result of the inflow of overseas capital which
we need If we are to develop as quickly as we must. But also an example
where an inflow of that overseas capital married itself with Australian
capital so that a third of the capital Is owned by Australians and the benefits
that flow from It go to those equity holders as well.
And this Is an ideal situation. Well it might be nicer if It
was 50 per cent, but still it's a good situation that here comes the
requirements for development, here is an example where Australians can
take part in that development, here is an example where jobs flow from it,
employment flows from it, dividends flow from it and all the other things
of which I have spoken.
And we, I think, can be a little proud or we can be proud
of the achievements of others when we realise, as I am told is a fact,
that this new extension is the most modern tobacco factory if that's
the word, tobacco packing plant in the world bar none. Now, this Is
really something, and I am Informed that this Is In fact so. I can't tell
you how many million cigarettes a month it can make because I'm not
allowed to, but it's an enormous number of cigarettes.
When you come to think of it, of course, I suppose the
credit for all this really goes back to some completely unknown American
Red Indian, because you remember that's where they first discovered
tobacco and that's where Raleigh got It from. You may remember somebody
threw a pall of water over him when he first started to smoke because they
/ 2 
thought he was on fire when he got back to England and If he had really
put Raleigh out with that pail of water, there would not have been a tobacco
factory and there wouldn't have been the interest that we've got here.
But can I say this as well. That not only do the things of
which I have spoken become evident here financially, and to assist in a
secondary industry employment but they stem down the line too, to create,
or help to create, help to expand a primary Industry in Australia because
the tobacco-growing industry benefits too from what Is happening here and
will benefit, of course, from the five-year extension of the tobacco
stabilisation plan which has just been announced and with the additional
quotas for Australian tobacco leaf which will be going up to 284 million
pounds. Now, these things one stands on a platform and talks about
but in one's mind, and In your mind, think of the people on the banks, the
red shore banks of the Murray, or wherever It may be, In small farms
wresting a living from that land and being helped to prosper and to grow
by the kind of secondary expansion we see here. The whole of Australia
benefits from it. That I think, Sir, Is all that I should say. I do congratulate
all concerned with the development of this factory. I know what was It
you had when you started was it 3. 4 million capital somewhere around
3.4. million capital, of which one-third is American. I'm not quite sure
what's happened since but I think there's been a bonus Issue and I'm not
sure there hasn't been a split and this again points up the benefit of having
an Australian equity interest in a factory of that kind $ 11 million
today. Wlell, I do hope that before very long I will be able to, at your
request, come and open another extension and you will be able to say
million today because I'll know that that growth is partly a growth for
Australians as well as abroad. 



GOLD TALKS: CABIN'ET ARRAINGEUENTS*
The Prime Minister# Lr, Gwton, said this evening that he had
advenced the Cabinet meeting which would normally be held on
Tuesday to Monday so that as soon as the results of the Washington
meeting became known tomorrow, Ministers would be able to consider
the possible implications for Australia, if any,.
O Various approaches to the problem are being considered at
Washington but there is no point in trying to forecast in advance
what approach will ultimately be adopted*
~ oLr, Gorton stressed that tomorrow's Cabinet was not an
emergency meeting*
OCanberra* 17 March, 1968.0
I. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 34/ 1968
GOLD CABINET CONCIDRS WVASHINGTON
DECISION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Today's Cabinet considered the decision taken by
the participants in the Washington meeting.
The Government does not regard their decision as
requiring action by Australia at present.
with any further
of the decisons,
Australia. However, the Government will keep in close touch
developments overseas which might happen as a result
and which might in some way in the future affect
The implication of these decisions for the Australian
gold industry are now being closely studied.
CANBERRA, 18 March 1968 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 35/ 1968
MEMORIAL SERVIC3 FOR THE LATE LORD BRUCE
HALF-MASTING OF FLAGS CANBERRA
Flags will be flown at half-mast from all Commonwealth
buildings in Canberra on Wednesday 20 March 1968 from 8 am until the
conclusion of the Memorial Service at All Saints Church, Ainslie.
They should then be hoisted to the peak at 1 pm for the
remainder of the day until ounset.
PRIME MINISTER'S DEPARTMENT,
CANBERRA, 19 March, 1968 



EMBARGO:
FOR PRESS! NOT F OR PUBLICATION BEFORE
MIDNIGHT ( EST, FRIDAY,
22ND MARCH
hp 4\ SERs PM. No. 36/ 1968
2 7 MIAR 1968
/ 8 RA~ POM's VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, will leave on
Wednesday, for a three-day goodwill visit to New Zealand. This is his
first overseas journey as Prime Minister.
He will fly direct from Canberra to Wellington,
where he will have a full programme of official engagements on Thursday.
He will lay a wreath at the War Memorial, have meetings with the Prime
Minister ( Mr Holyoake) and the NZ Cabinet, give a press conference,
speak at a State Luncheon, and call on the Deputy Mayor of Wellington.
On Friday, he will go to Palmerston North where
he will inspect the Massey University and Dairy Research Institute.
After spending the night at Wairakei, centre of the
geothermal area, Mr Gorton will go on to Auckland on Saturday to
officially open the New Zealand Easter Show, returning to Canberra on
Sunday ( 3lstO. The Prime Minister and Mrs Gorton, accompanied by
the New Zealand High Commissioner, Mr J. Luke Hazlett and Mrs Hazlett,
will travel to New Zealand inanRAAF aircraft.
Full details of the itinerary are attached.
CANBERRA, 22 March 1968 
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA'S VISIT TO NVW ZEALAND
PROGRAMME
Wednesday, 27 March
4.45 pm
00 pm
( approx.)
Thursday, 28 March
9.40 am
10.05 am
10.30 am
Noon
12. 30 pm
1. 00 pm
4.30 pm
5.45 pm
8. O0 pm
Friday, 29 March
9.00 am
11. CO am
11. 45 am
1. 00 pm
2.45 pm
4. 00 pm
4.15 pm
Saturday, 30 March
11.55 am
12.55 pm
1. 15 pm
1. 30 pm
4.45 pm
Sunday, 31 March
10.30 am
10.45 am
11. 15 am
11.30 am Leave Canberra
Arrive Wellington Airport ( non-ceremonial welcome)
Brief informal meeting with PR representatives
at airport
Lay wreath at War Memorial
Call on Prime Minister
Meeting with Ministers of Cabinet
Formal meeting with news media
Call on Deputy Leader of Opposition
State Luncheon
Call on Deputy Mayor
Reception at Hutt given by Manufacturers' Federation
Buffet Dinner by Australian High Commissioner
Leave by car for Massey University
Visit Massey University
Visit Dairy Research Institute
Attend Civic Luncheon at Palmerston North
Depart by air for Taupo
Arrive Taupo
Arrive by car at Hotel Wairakei ( Stay overnight)
Depart Taupo by air for Auckland
Arrive Mangere Airport
Arrive E psom Showgrounds
Luncheon
Open New Zealand Easter Show
View Exhibits
Depart showgrounds by car for Hotel Intercontinental
( Stay overnight) Dine privately at Hotel.
Informal meeting with PR representatives
Leave for Mangere Airport
Ceremonial farewell
Depart from New Zealand 



REVIEW OF TROOPS OF FIRST BATTALION
RAR, HOLSVJORTHY, NSW 22 MARCH, 1968
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MNISTER, THE RT. HON.
JOHN G. GORTON, MP
It must have been a thrill to any Australian who today
saw you marching past and demonstrating the discipline, the training and
the ability which you have learnt.
I suspect, unless things have changed very considerably
since the time I once wore uniform, this has been-the result of some
considerable practice, of some -considerable rehearsals. And again I
suspect, unless things have changed, that sometimes these practices and
those rehearsals were a little dreary. But the end result has been, as the
end result of hard work and-application must always be, that you have today
put on for all of us here a parade which I do not believe would have been
bettered by any body of armed men from any country in the world.
You marched past-half of you, so I am informed,
Regular soldiers, half of you National Servicemen, and completely
Indistinguishable the one from the other as you will In the future grow even
less distinguishable, If that is possible.
A Regular -soldier or -National Serviceman is now, and will
be In the future, an Australian soldier and there is, and will be, no difference
between them. You will be going because your Government and your country
thinks It right, and for the safety of our nation that this should happen, to
fight some considerable distance away, ln terms of miles, from Australift,
but no-great distance away In terms of time. You have been asked to go, or
you have been told to go, b ecause in our judgment It is to -the safety of all
small nations to do what they can to see that other small nations are not
allowed to be overrun by force, or by subversion, or by terrorism, but
should have the chance to retain for themselves the opportunity to make , a
choice to build the kind of life that the Australian people have an opportunity
to choose. You will have before you, because this is a part of all
soldiering, many times of boredom, of heat, of uncomfortable conditions,
of tension, of strain, and I believe of fear, because I think that most men
In battle feel but conquer fear. This will be punctuated by periods of
action, but whether in action or in training, I would like you to know this.
No matter what some columnists from time to time may Indicate In what
they write; no matter what attitude some members of legislature may from
time -to time Indicate from what they say, your Government believes that
you are serving this nation i the highest way In which It can be served and
will stand behind you and guard your good name to the end to the best of its
ability. And -behind that, and far more Important than that, 90 per cent of
the Australian people are proud of how you bear yourselves, are proud of what
you are doing, In some cases what you have done and what you will do.
Never for a moment think that -this nation and Its people are not behind you
and backing you, because they are. ./ 2 
-2
Idon't want to keep you standing there for long,,. I will just
conclude by saying this.
Your grandfathers went to France and to Gallipoli, not for
themselves to try and see that aggression did not succeed, but to help to
see aggression didn't succeed. And for a while they were successful.
Your fathers went to the four corners of the world to try and see
that that great attack on human dignity made at that time by Nazi Germany
would not succeed, and they smashed that attack. You are carrying on in
that tradition. No man can say, and no generation can say, what I do now will,
for all the future, make life better. But a man can say and -a generation
can say, what I do now I believe will make it more likely that In the future,
life will be better for the people of the world. And when you come back,
and when you leave the Army, you will have this to retain for the rest of
your lives and nothing can take It away, and nothing can tarnish it.
You can say I have been one of a regiment, I have taken my place in that
regiment, I have borne myself as a brave and honourable man should.
I -have taken the risks that one must take. I have accepted that and I
have served my country well.
Good luck to you all. 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 37/ 1968
DEATH OF SIR WILLIAM ANDERSON
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The sudden death of Sir William Anderson the Honorary
Federal Treasurer of the Liberal Party is a great loss for the Party,
for me and for all of his many friends and colleagues in the political
field. He was a great Liberal, one of the architects of the
Liberal Party in 1949 which has done so much for Australia, and
organisationally was a key man in the party. He will be sadly missed.
To Lady Anderson, my wife and I and members of the
Federal Parliamentary Liberal Party extend our deepest sympathy.
CANBERRA, March, 1968 



ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF ASSOCIATED Q. 2APR1968
CH. AMVBERS OF COMMERCE f
HOBART, TASMANIA L/ RA
MARCH 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Your Excellency, Mr. Macklin, Ladies and Gentlemen:
it is quite important to me to see gathered here
in this theatre people from the four corners of this nation
and from other countries who are concerning themselves with
seeing that the needs of people in the nation are met, that
the wheels of commerce go round, who are carrying on, really,
the kind of trade on which civilisations were origiftally built.
It may perhaps seem a little far-fetched to you if
I say this, but it is not really as far-fetched as it may
sound, because going way back into the past of history, nations
were brought together because some region or some country
produced whatever it might be let us say silk which other
regions and other countries did not produce but which they
wished to have, and those other countries produced, let us
say, some kind of beaten steel which the first countries did
not have, and so the traders formed their caravans and they
went to fetch from places where it was available, the goods
which other countries wanted. They brought from those other
countries the goods the first countries wanted, and in that
way by enriching themselves it is true but by serving the
needs of people in both places it is also true, they also
managed to bring closer together gradually, through understanding,
those two nations through whom, either in small ships across
the sea, or in caravans across the desert, they carried on the
lifeblood of trade.
Now, of course, things have changed since those
far-off, romantic days, but it is still as necessary as ever
it was that there should be those spending their lives engaged
in disseminating that which is manufactured amongst the people,
engaged, I would hope, more and more in trying to see that
just as we are interdependent inside this country one on the
other, just as you are dependent on good seasons for primary
producers, on full employment, on good purchasing power, on
other matters, so you would see that we were interdependent
internationally, particularly with the countries in our region
and would, as I know you are doing, turn your minds to that
trade going back to what the caravanners used to do.
Together, governments and people build a country;
neither the one or the other can do it alone. A government,
of course, can help or hinder the building of a country and
the improvement of the living standards of those living in
it, but that is all it can do help or hinder, create a
climate or prevent a climate being created, and then it is
up to individuals to take advantage or to fight against a
bad climate, and in that context build together that which
is sought. This of course does pose some difficulties, because,
I suppose, in an ideal world government would be so light and
the requirements would be so small that the individual would
be left almost completely without burdens placed upon him,
able to retain that which his own industry and initiative was 
able to achieve. But it is not an ideal world, and indeed not
only does the individual engaged in farming, or in commerce or
in manufacturing or working in a factory or teaching or whatever
it may be, wish to retain as much as his industry and initiative
will allow, but he also wishes many other things, and therefore
requires that burdens should be placed upon him to provide those
other things. In the case of this country, I can enumerate some of
them and at once you will agree with me, I know. It is required
now, in a greater degree than it has ever been required before
in our history, that burdens should be laid upon us so that we
can provide towards our own defence. I think I hardly need to
remind you that for something like 200 years, we have existed
as a nation secure behind the shield of the British Navy and
the British people and that that shield has been removed and
that that changes the situation and the world in which we have
grown up and that that requires that we should be able, as we
have not in the past been able before, to provide sufficient
defence forces to repel any initial shock upon our own shores
should it ever come and to be a credible ally to those countries
to whom we look should we ever require help. This in turn
requires expenditures and burdens which even in the last few
years I speak of " few years" in the context of a nation's
history have risen from some general average of $ 400 million
to $ 1200 millior. and will rise more. The people of a community
want, and you want I know, that we should, if we are to hold up
our head as a civilised nation, pay full attention to the
requirements and the needs of the ill and the aged and the
unfortunate amongst us, and this too requires that burdens
should be laid upon and borne by the people and the nation.
You want, and I know that you want, that we should,
particularly in the world as it is developing today, devote
more and more of your resources to improving the facilities
for education of our youth, and particularly perhaps to improving
the facilities for advanced technological education of our youth,
because in the years to come, the results of that education and
that technological education will decide whether we are able in
this nation, with the other nations of the world, with those in
the forefront of the other nations of the w~ orld, to manufacture
those new things which are being invented and which will be
invented, and through that process of manufacture, see that
commerce does not stagnate, but has new tools with which to
work, has new things to trade. These too require that burdens
should be laid upon a nation.
And you want indeed I have seen your agenda and I
know you want that we should continue to build up our nation
by immigration at least as quickly as we have been doing it,
and quite possibly, if possible, more quickly. But no longer
can this be done or should this be done in the way in which,
for example, the United States built up its population by
immigration in the last century; no more can or should people
just be brought to Australia from overseas and told " Here you
are. You' re on your own. Make your own way". Rather, it is
necessary that they must be not just brought, but provided with
the employment which you help to supply, provided with the
facilities they expect to receive here as they have received
them from the nations from which they came, provided with those
other matters of which I spoke an education for their children,
health benefits and matters of that kind. This requires
expenditure of capital to maintain each migrant. Though we
get it back in years to come, yet at the time it does require
a burden. / 3 
All of these things, I believe the people of Australia
want, and you as members of the Chambers of Commerce want, yet
all of these things do mean that there is more interference by
government with, in some cases, the way in which matters are
done, with in all cases the right of the individual to retain
completely that which he has earned by -his initiative, or
sometimes by his luck. This I know you accept.
Yet there is a point where governments and peoples
must reach a balance in this, There is a point where, while
seeing what needs to be provided for you at your wishes by a
government, while seeing the goals to which we want to attain,
a judgment must be made as to whether should we seek to do too
much in the fields of which I have spoken to you, we would
impose such burdens o-n the individual that we would perhaps
damage or destroy the incentive to work, the requirement to
devote oneself to the business in which one is engaged. That,
of course, is self-destructive because in the long run all
those things I have spoken to you about that you require and
governments provide are only provided if there is incentive to
grow in the individual, if there is requirement to devotion to
one's business in the individual, because that is the basis.
So there is a balance required between those things a nation
wants and between the necessity not to take so much from an
individual's earnings that insufficient is left to him.
There is another balance that is required because it
is not only from things that are taken from money or resources
that are taken from you that a government provides those things
of which I have spoken, a government also, at any rate a central
government, also has the capacity in fact, as you know, to print
its own money, to provide through bank credit, or however it may
be, for some resaurces, and yet there, too, there is though
theoretically no limit, actually and practically a very real
limit because if that path should be followed too far,-then
we destr-oy that other requirement that you have and that a
nation has and that wage-earners have, that pensioners have,
and that is, that there should be relative stability in the
cost-price structures of a nation, relative stability in. : the
cost of living. I don't mean the stagnation, I don't mean the
lack of any general slight inflation but that there should be
sufficient stability to ena) le plans to be made by commerce
and to enable individual pensioners and wage-earners not to be
destroyed by inflation. So there too i~ s another mark which
can't be overstepped. And it is in the selection of priorities, and it is
in the judgment of what should be laid upon a people that the
people will judge a government. A government will, if it is
wise, if it takes the right decisions, provide to a people
those opportunities which., if seized, will make that people
great, and these are the tasks as I see them, on the one hand
for a government, on the other for an Australian people.
I want, before I declare the conference open, to
mention perhaps one more thing, and that is this. I suggest
to you that over the last two decades, if we look back on
them, we can take pride because we have seen this country grow
from a relatively small, relatively insignificant nation to
one which is still not great and which still cannot throw its
weight around in the councils of the world, but one which is
much greater than it was, one which is I think respected in the
world for its attitudes and its approaches, and one which has
within it the seeds of greatness which, if they are nurtured,
will lead, and if the paths followed in the last two decades
are followed, will lead to what I think you would have in your
minds as a picture of the nation you would like Australia to be.
9-s/ 14 
4.
If we follow those paths, we must follow them not
just within this country. I know again that I am echoing what
is in the minds of many of you and of those who are officials
of your organisation when I say let us particularly, let
commerce particularly pay attention, forge links, make trade
with those countries in our region closest to us, with as much
devotion as you can. We believe that it is necessary to try
by all means to build up the edonomies of those closest to us,
and by building up those economies to try to see that the
living standards of the peoples in-those communities rise.
This is humanitarian, but it is more than that. It is, if it
becomes successful, of self-interest to us and to you and to
them. As an example of what I mean, let me draw your minds
to what has happened in our trade, in our nation's trade with
the country of Japan. Only a mere decade ago, about 1955/ 56,
we exported $ 173 million worth of goods from Australia to Japan,
and now that scant time later, we export $ 591 million worth of
goods from Australia to Japan. Ten years ago, we imported some
million from Japan, and now we import close to 6' 300 million.
This is an example of how trade can expand if there is a country
such as Japan with rising living standards, with rising
requirements, with the capacity to buy and the capacity to sell.
As one more example in that country which has become
a country to us of the most significance in trading terms, there
has been a revolution caused in the everyday living of the
Japanese in that as the standard of living has risen, .0o the
requirements which were always there but were not able to be
satisfied have bean able to be met, and the wool which is sold
in such large quantities to Japan has become a fabric that the
Japanese wear, whereas previously they could not afford it and
they could not wear it.
Well, that is Japan, but there is closer to us Thailand
and Indonesia and Malaysia and the Philippines. In all those
areas, as the standard of living rises, so will the opportunity
for them to sell to us and for us to sell to them increase. As
that increases, so will people be coming from there to sell to
us or perhaps forming joint ventures with us in one way and
another and so will we, I hope, be going there to sell to them,
so will you and the manufacturers be going there, I hope, to sell
to them, because as the markets arise there, there will be no
substitute for the old-fashioned kind of salesmanship which we
used to know in Australia door-knocking, visiting, talking
to the buyer. There will be no substitute for this. And if
this happens and you go there, then inevitably, just as in the
past nations were drawn together and learnt about each other
and had mutual benefit because of those who drove the caravans
across the desert or the small ships across the sea, so will
nations the better understand each other, the better know each
other's problems, the better be able to provide technological
assistance, whatever may come back in return for it, and there
will be not only dividends in terms of firms' balance sheets,
but there will be dividends in human relations which will be
more enduring for the future and which because I think you can
and will help in this, is one reason why I camne to declare this
conference open this morning and why I now do so. 



HOBART JOURNALISTS' CLUB LUNCHEON
HADLEYS HOTEL, HOBART March 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Ladies ana Gentlemen:
It's nice for me to be able to be with the Journalists'
Club at this midday gathering. It's nice to meet the exjournalists;
it's nice to meet the wives; it's nice to meet
the guests; it's nice to meet the journalists, particularly
since one relies so much, in this situation which I somewhat
unexpectedly find myself, on interpretations made by journalists
whether they are writing directly for newspapers, whether they
are writing columns I suppose that's directly with newspapers
but every editor I know says it's indirectly; they haven't
got any control over it or whether it's commenting, or whether
it's on this new media, T. V. Because the opportunity for
presentation of personality in the political scene on all sides,
does, I think, give the public a chance to judge to judge
between arguments advanced for this or for that, to judge
between whether one believes what one is saying or is saying
what one is saying because a consensus of Party opinion wants
it to be done, to make an assessment and to present it to the
public which then accepts or rejects the assessment so made.
As far as I am concerned, the assessments that have
been made whether they are pro or con are not assessments with
which I have been able to find myself able to quarrel. If there
have been in my association with journalists those who are
critical, there has seemed to me that the criticism has been
based on argument. I might not accept the argument, I might
not accept the premise,, and therefore obviously I might not
accept the conclusion. But it seems to me to have been based,
at any rate in this brief period in which I have been so closely
associated, on assessment by journalists, on argument by
journalists, and not on prejudice by journalists. And this I
think is very important.
I suppose I can't talk to you today in the same way
as someone could talk . was it the Gridiron Club the
original Journalists' Club, the one in ' Washington where people
went who were oither highly significant American politicians
or visiting Heads of State and spoke off the record and thon
had everything they said reported on the next day? I suppose
this is quite different. But it is good to find, I think, and
I have only so far found it perhaps because I haven't been asked,
I have only so far found it in Canberra and found it here, that
journalists would form this kind of association, would meet
together for these luncheons, would have people come before
them and talk to them and subject themselves to questioning by
them. It may be that in-this assessment I have some nostalgia
because I am a journalist manque myself. " When I first came
back from England, as a very young man, I came back to be a
journalist. But my father died before I was in Australia more
than a couple of months and I had to take over a bankrupt
property and try and build that up instead of being a journaliist,
which is probably just as well because I expect I'd have been
a sub-editor or something by this stage. I might not have had
quite as much fun, although from all I have seen there is a
certain amount of fun in this occupation anyway. 2 
I think that rather than talk to you on any specific
subject of national importance, or state importance, that it
would be better for me to subject myself to any questions which
any of you here may wish to ask. I warn you I will answer them
quite definitely if I think I've got an answer that I wvant to
give and that it is satisfactory to me. If it is in an area
where I am not quite sure of the answer, I will say I am not
quite sure of the answer. If it is in an area where I think
an answer at this stage ought not to be given, I'll do my best
without you noticing, to answer it in such a way that I won't
be giving an answer and you won't notice I'm not. But at least
I'll be subjecting myself to something I know is of interest to
those who are in this room and this I will do in just a matter
of a very few minutes.
I have spoken this morning at an opening of the
Chambers of Commerce here and very briefly skctched in the
choices which have to be made in a community such as ours the
requirements of the community for defence, for social services,
for education, for technological advances, for scientific
advances, for development, for a million things rnnd also the
requirement that a government should not so take from individuals
so much in order to meet these requirements that the individuals
just stop working and you can't meet any requirements. The
balance I have spoken about there and some of you may have heard
it, some of you may wvish to ask about it.
Our role as a country in the international field, some
of you may wish to ask about. The future which is possible for
us, some of you may wish to ask about, because we are now and
will be for the next two or three years in a period that I call
for this nation the tantalising years. Soon, but not yet, we'll
be reaping the benefit of the mineral discoveries we have made
and we will be exporting in the way of nickel and of iron ore
and of alumina, things which will put the wool industry on which
we have previously almost entirely relied into a much lower area
of importance in our national life. Soon we will be replacing
those things which we have had to bring from abroad and oil
is tho great example with oil from Australian resources and
some of these things you may wish to ask about.
We haven't got those benefits yet, we won't get them
for a couple of years but they arc there), they are coming, they
are beckoning, and for two tantalising years we must wait for
those full benefits to come before we can get a great I don't
like to use this word, because it is used by someone with whose
political opinions I don't agree but the great leap forward
which I think faces Australia; there will be advances but the
great leap forward when these things come in. Now there it is.
I am here to be questioned. I am here to the best of
my ability to try and answer those things which are in your minds.
And so may I ask you, having thanked you for this function,
having thanked you for the opportunity to meet you, to put it
now to the best advantage by cross-questioning me on those
things which arc of interest to you.
Q. With the current.-American elections coming up, if the President
is ousted by either Eugene McCarthy or Robert Kennedy and radical
changes in Vietnamese policy are made by the United States, will
Australia~ make these changes as well? / 3 
PM. Well, if there were and this is an awfully what President
Roosevelt always used to call an " iffy"' question, but if there
were great changes in the United States involvement in Vietnam
I think the Australian people would be forced to accept those
changes. We cannot, as a nation of 12 million people, and a
nation making, I think, a very significant contribution for
its 12 million people, we cannot as a nation of 12 million
people hope, of ourselves, to achieve a result without the full
involvement of the United States and its other allies and if
there were, as you have suggosted, there might be a bouleversement
complete change in policies, then, since we could not, of
ourselves, hope to achieve things by ourselves, I think we would
have a decision forced upon us not to try to do things of
ourselves.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, is it possible to ostablish a minimum
standard of living in Australia and is it possible to work up
machinery to make sure that nobody lives below that standard?
PM. I think it is possible to establish a minimum standard of living.
I don't think that there will ever be a time when there will not
be arguments as to whether that minimum standard of living so
established is high enough or there is no room for argument
that that standard of living should not be improved. Indeed,
I hope there never would be. I hope that in a developing
community, such as we have been and will be, that there will
be argument as to whether those on the lower standard of living,
the minimum standard of living, should not be able to be provided
by the community with something more. But yes, I think there
could be a minimum. The argument would then be whether the
minimum was enough or wasn't enough.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, on the matter of the 20uropean Common Market,
do you in the future perhaps see an Eastern Common Market where
we can raise our own tariff barriers say against Europe in our
particular area?
PM. Well, I would rather not touch on the matter of whether we raise
tariff barriers against Europe-as such, because who knows what
the future of Europe is going to be. Yes, there is an EEC now,
but it doesn't cover all the countries of Europe. One wouldn't
want to say " Yes, we'll raise tariff barriers against Europe",
I think you would have to oxamine that country by country
according to what they were doing in relation to our own desire
to export and to their own involvement in the European Common
Market. But what I would think was a possibility was this. If
by our smallish efforts and they must be smallish ( always
remember we are not a great power), but for our size significant,
coupled with efforts of the United States, United Kingdom and,
for that matter, the European powers, we could improve the
economies of the Asian countries near to us and thereby improve
the standard of living of the peoples of those countries near
to us and thereby improve the demand for better things from those
countries near to us, then we could, I would hope, see that in
these areas the same kind of demand for our own products would
arise as has arisen in Japan because the economy has gone up and
the living standards have gone up and the demands have gone up.
If we could do that in these densely populated areas of Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines, Thailand these are the
countries nearest to us but you can fill in the others further
away then if that could happen, there would be an immense
market for what we could produce and we would benefit ourselves
by being able to sell from and buy from that market.
In the last ton years, in our Japanese trade alone, ( the figures
/ 4 
have gone out of my mind now) there has been an immense
expansion in what we have been able to sell to the Japanese
and what we have bought from them, to our mutual benefit with
Japan. Now, with the other countries around, that same sort
of thing could happen, it could bc to our common benefit.
Q. On 2 February at a Canberra Press Conference, it was reported
you said Australia would not increase the size of its Vietnam
force. You are reported as saying that as far as you were
concerned this was a permanent statement. But on 13 March in
the House of Representatives in reply to a question about your
previous statement, you opened the way for an increase in the
number of Australian troops in Vietnam. Was this a change of
policy; was it pressure from the United States which influenced
you, or was it, as Mr. Connor, Labor, New South Wales, suggested
in Parliament on Thursday night that " the back room boys got at
you". What is your present policy on Vietnam?
PD1. Well, I think that if I could answer that this way. First, it
wasn't a change of policy and the back room boys hadn't got at
me and it wasn't a result of any request from the United States.
I was asked at the Press Conference to which you refer which
was held at the time when the Tet Offensive was breaking out
you remember, and people were pouring into the Vietnamese cities
and so on, would this lead to an increase in the U. S. commitments
in Australian commitments, and I said no, it wouldn't. And in
the statement in the House to which you refer but which was not
a full quotation because you left this bit out, I said yes. I
said that and what I said stands. This was in the answer to the
question in the House of Representatives. But I can't look years
into the future. There may be completely unknown developments
which no man in charge of the Government could bind himself to
ignore, but I do not know what they could be and I think that
we are, as a nation of 12 million people, with unknown requirements
as yet to help in Singapore and to help in Malaysia, with known
requirements for developments of our own nation, providing very
significant assistance at the present level at which we are
providing it and that seems to me to be the answer to your
question.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, Sir Wilfred Kent Hughes has suggested that
there ought to be censorship on views coming out of Vietnam.
Now do you, Sir, personally support this view or does the Cabinet
support this view?
PM. WIell, the Cabinet hasn't discussed it and anything that I say
to you would just be a matter of my own approach to it. But
I would have thought that one should agree that when one's
forces are engaged in war whether declared or undeclared, there
ought to be some censorship, indeed I am not sure there isn't.
But there ought to be some censorship, for example as to where
one's forces are going to go,. where an operation is going to
be carried out, how many troops are engaged in that operation,
what sort of back-up there is. In other words, things which
could be of use to an enemy commander whether guerilla or
regular would not in any war of which either had been cognizant
been allowed to be freely published and to that extent that
sort of censorship I think really ought to be imposed although
it doesn't seem to be imposed by most of the people up in
Vietnam and they are not necessarily our o,. wn people. Well
if you were to talk about censorship in that sense, I would
say my predilection was towards it if it was able to be imposed
by Australians.
There are other areas of opinion to be reported where it's 
not quite so clear, to me at any rate, that censorship ought
to be put in, but my impression of' what Sir Wilfred Kent Hughes
was talking about was more about reporting of troop movements,
of operations which, if they were reported prematurely, could
prejudice those operations and the lives of Australian troops,
and I would have a predilection towards that kind of censorship
if we could impose it.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, last year, largely we understood through
the personal interest of your predecessor the late Mr. Holt,
there was a national fitness campaign programme introduced
through the Federal Government. Is it envisaged that this will
continue under the present Cabinet?
PM. Well, I haven't turned my mind to that but in my present state
of physical health, it is probably time I did.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, how do you see the future of the National
Shipping Lines? Do you see it going overseas? Do you see
that Australia will be penalised if it doesn't?
PM. Well this is a question of policy. Let me just say this in
answer to you. I would think that that was a possibility
that is the question of an Australian shipping line going
overseas or getting some overseas link or something of that
kind. It is a question of policy which ought not to be ruled
out as a possibility.
Q. Mr. Gorton, the Adelaide journalist, Ian Mackay, says that in
Vietnam the Australians are killing wounded Vietcong. Now
what are you doing to investigate this? Are you in a position
to say whether or not it's true and how do you feel in general
about these allegations against our troops?
PM. well I'm not doing anything to investigate it myself and if it
were brought to me on a third-hand report which I understand
is the kind of report, I wouldn't undertake to even think of
investigating it. What I feel about allegations against our
Australian troops are these, having been an Australian troop:
that there are some individuals who from time to time may do
things which the Australian nation or the Army as a whole would
not support and this has always been so in all wars. But I
would have the greatest reluctance and repugnance to holding
up a service to some kind of ( an investigation, legal investigation
by a judge and people of that kind, where any allegations can
be made by anybody without any backing, where headlines will
naturally be given to those allegations and where if at some
later stage those allegations are shown to be without any
substance whatever, the damage to the Service and the morale
of the Service will have already been done. Now that's my
answer to you.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, are our external commitments, Vietnam's
especially, hindering this great leap forward you spoke of
for Australia?
PM. Woll I think, taking together our defence commitments Vietnam
is one, requirements for assistance from Singapore and Malaysia
are others, our own need to maintain some defence capability
ourselves inside our own country and this changing world are
others nobody could say that the requirement to divert
resources to those things did not mean that there were less
resources to devote to other things. We have gone on for a
long time in the past with an average annual expenditure on
defence of around about $ 400 million, if my recollection is 
right. All right, now it's risen to $ 1200 million. W1ith
commitments already accepted it's likely to go up more, almost
inescapably, but I hope not too much more. Now this is a mere
matter of arithmetic, that if those resources are devoted to
that end, then they are not available for many of the other
things that we would like to see done in Australia and so I
suppose to take the words you asked me, it is limiting advances,
leap forwards in other fields. But on the other hand I think
it could also be said that it is an insurance policy to see
that such advances as are made may be maintained and may be
permanent, just as in the case of an individual, the payment
of a life insurance premium prevents him from getting more
household goods or providing better education for his students
but is something he thinks ought to be done for safety's sake,
as I think this should be.
Q. Mr. Gorton, the late Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, in the time of
the Palestinian W! ar made an offer to the Arab refugees of a
place-. in Australia. Since then there's been nothing about it.
Now, I don't want to know whether they want to come here or not
but is the present Government of a mind to allow people such
as these into Australia?
PM. I'm not quite sure, if you will forgive me, whether you stated
the question quite accurately at the beginning. I didn't think
the late Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, did say we will take Arab
refugees into Australia period. I thought what he said was, if
there was an international plan in which a whole lot of countries
will involve themselves and they will all take some portion of
these refugqos into their countries, then we would consider
taking part in that plan. But as far as I know, there has been
no such plan agreed to by other nations.
Q. If there was a plan would you consider it?
PM. If there was a plan I would consider it.
Q. We are about to finish a trial period on daylight saving in
Tasmania. I would like to hear your opinions on daylight saving
and whether you would like to see it introduced into other States.
PM. Well you know I haven't had enough time to talk to all the dairy
farmers, and apple growers and I would rather wait until I had,
before I expressed an opinion.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, I am wondering whether you feel there is
sufficient communication between Government and the people in
Australia through the press, television and radio, whether you
feel that people are well enough informed about policies and
practices of the Federal Governmcnt?
PM. That's an extraordinarily interesting question and a hard one.
We do our best tt as a Government we do our best to try and
see that people are informed but of course as you would well
realise, onc of the ways by which Government Departments do
this is by handouts as to what it is that they are proposing
to do and how wonderful it is that they are able to do it.
These get regarded with some cynicism, I think, after a while
by those to whom thce handouts are given. Perhaps more cynicism
than they should be, but I think they do tend to be relegated
to a spike instead of analysed to see whether there's anything
in thern or not. How better things could be done to get this
communication, I'm not sure. When I was a Minister and not a
Prime Minister, my door was open always to journalists to come
o/ 7 
7.
in and question about handouts, to come in and question about
things they had heard around the market place and were they
true or weren't they true and all that kind of thing and this
seems to me to be the best method of communication that can be
devised other than interviews or interviews with press people
or interviews with television people, And provided a Government
can establish a reputation that what it says is designed to
provide information and not to suppress information, then that
kind of channel would be open. But it's not easy, partly from
a Governmental Department point of view because if there's some
kind of thing that they think could reflect criticism it is
sought to be suppressed. It's not altogether easy from a
Government's point of view vis-a-vis journalists because very
often some journalists will seek to take something and twist
it round a little bit and both ways tend to cause difficulties
in communication. I'm not satisfiod that the best method of
doing this has been arrived at. I am satisfied that we should
both try to see that it is arrived at because it seems to me
to be tho proper basis of a public judgment and a public
judgment seems to me to be the proper basis of a democracy
I mean a judgment on facts.
Thank you. 



161 9A6P8V ISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
ARRIVAL STATEMENTS BY NEW ZEALAND PRIME
MINISTER, MR. HOILYOAKE9 AND PRIME MINISTER
JOHN GORTON OF AUSTRALIA AT WELLINGTON AIRPORT
27 MARCH 1968
MR. HOLYCAKE: I want to say how delighted I am that Mr. Gorton
has come to visit us and has also brought his wife with him.
You all remember, and I do particularly, John,
that it is just a little over a year ago that we had Harold
Holt here. N,; wee re very fond of him, and I know we will be
of you as well. This is a wonderful gesture that you have
come over here so soon on your first overseas visit, to this
your sister dominion.
I do not know what new I can say because the press
have been asking me, and asking you the other side of the
Tasman, but we will of course, gentlemen, be discussing
everything that I can imagine of mutual interest to our two
countries. Don't ask me what the agenda is. We have no
formal agenda. It would be much easier to enumerate the
things we might not talk about, because we will have a lot
of opportunity in the coming two or three days we are
travelling together, but our talks are bound to cover trade,
defence, our common interests in the Commonwealth, the United
Nations, and all the subjects that are of current world
interest at the present time.
John, a very warm welcome, and I hope you enjoy
these three days with us.
MR. GORTON: Thank you very much, Mr. Prime Minister. For my own
part, it is a delight for me to be able to be in New Zealand
so soon after becoming the Prime Minister of Australia.
One of the first things I did when I became Prime
Minister was to ring up the Prime Minister of New Zealand to
let him know that this had happiened, because we had known
each other before and because of the particular closeness
that our two C. ountries have, and this very kind invitation
of yours to follow that up is something which I appreciate
and which I think the people of Australia appreciate.
We will be talking about a whole variety of matters,
but these will I think perhaps better be dealt with at the
formal press conference that is going to be heald tomorrow, and
questions can be asked about particular matters. But quite
apart from any specific things that wie may discuss, there is
over and above that, I think, the advantage of the general
meeting for myself the particular advantage of meeting
yourself and your Ministers who were so kind to come out to
the aerodrome today. a -/ 2 
2.
You spoke of an overseas visit, and indeed it is
an overseas visit because we flew across a lot of sea to get
here, but really it was not as far in miles for me as it would
have been if I had gone to Perth in Western Australia, and it
was not as long in time as it would have been if I had gone
to Perth in Western Australia. So though overseas, this, I
think, emphasises the neighbourliness that we have, and I
thank you for the invitation, Sir, to come here.
I believe there will be benefit to both our nations,
and I think this will be the forerunner indeed, it is not
so much a forefunner as a continuation of a situation where
your Ministers visit us and our Ministers visit you so
frequently that it occasions no particular comment, and then
I think we will have reached an even closer stage than we
ha. ve at present. Thank you very much.
CANBERRA 28 March 1968 



Ol 968
F OR PR ESS: PM. NO. 38/ 1968
VISIT BY MR DEAN RUSK
Mr Dean'. Rusk, Secretary of State of the United S11tates,
will be attending some international meetings in New Zealand next
week. He suggested Since he will be In New Zealand anyway at
this particular time, he would like to take the opportunity which his
visit to New Zealand presents to extent his visit to Australia and
call in to visit the new Prime Minister.
He will arrive In Canberra on the evening of Friday
April, remain throughout Saturday, and leave again on the
Sunday ( 7th). Mr Gorton said today that he was looking forward very
much to seeing Mr P usk again in Canberra. It would be a good
opportunity for him to get to know Mr Rusk better.
CANBERRA, 27 March 1968 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 39/ 1968
NATIONAL LIBRARY COUNCrIL
A-. ppointment of a New Member
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Prime Minister announced today that the Governor
General had appointed Dr Ursula Hoff C%-' urator of Prints and
Drawings at the National Gallery of Victoria, as a member of the
Council of the National Library of Australia.
Dr Hoff, who is also a member of the Australian
Humanities Research Council, replaces Mrs Kathleen Fitzpatrick
who has resigned from the Council for personal reasons.
The Prime Minister expressed his pleasure at Dr.
Hoff's appointment. Her knowledge and experience will be of immense
assistance In the Library Council.
CANBERRA, 27 March 1968 



Sø 2 APR 1968
FOR PRESS: BRAl
P. M. No. 4/ 163
ROYAL VISIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Duke of Edinburgh, who is coming to Australia
in May primarily to attend R. H. The Duke of Edinburgh's Third
Commonwealth Study Conference", has accepted an itinerary which
will take in visits to Canberra, Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide and
Melbourne. The visit will begin with a ceremonial arrival in
Canberra on Saturday 11 May and end on departure from Melbourne
on Tuesday 4 June. It also provides for private weekends to be spent
in Northern New South VWales before and after The Duke of Edinburgh's
visit to New Zealand. The Duke of Edinburgh plans to travel from London
to Australia in an Andover from The Queen's Flight and to use it
for all internal air journeys. It will also be used for the Tasman
crossings when His Royal Highness visits New Zealand ( 20 to 24
May) and for the return journey to Britain.
On the outward journey the Andover, after landing at
Darwin on Friday 10 May to refuel, will go on to Mt. Isa where The
Duke of Edinburgh will remain overnight. He will leave Mt. Isa on
the following morning to arrive at Canberra at 12.30 p. m.
On the homeward journey, His Royal Highness will
travel in the Andover from Melbourne via Alice Springs ' a refueling
stop) to Darwin and stay overnight. Cn the morning of Wednesday
June His :. oyal Highness will leave Darwin en route for London.
The itinerary in outline form is attached.
For Canberra on the first occasion, no formal programme
is planned for The Duke of Edinburgh. But His Royal Highness has
accepted the following programme of engagements on his return to
Canberra from Sydney:-
THURSDAY 16 MAY
Morning Attends the First Session of the Canberra
Meetings of the Third Commonwealth
Study Conference
Lunch V! ith the National Press Club
Afternoon OCens the Forestry School's newv building
at the Australian National University
Later Attends RPeception given by the Government
to Study Conference participants ( Senators
and Members invited)
Dinner At Government House / 2 
FRIDAY 17 MAY
Morning Opens the Annual Conference of the Royal
Federation of Aero Clubs of Australia
Lunch With the Canberra Polo Club
Afternoon His ? Royal Highness plays polo
Later Attends s 2eception at Government House
for Study Conference participants
Evening Dines at the Lodge
SATURDAY 18 MAY
Morning Departs for private weekend in the
Quirindi district
This will be for The Duke of Edinburgh, the seventh
occasion on which he has visited Australia and the Australian people
with their very happy recollections of his earlier visits, will welcome
his return for The Third Commonwealth Study Conference of which
he is President. The itinerary which His . Royal Highness has been
pleased to undertake, Includes time in most of the Capital Cities
and the programme of engagements provides opportunities for a
great many citizens in each place to see him. While it would be
disappointing to some that His ?. oyal Highness is not visiting all
States, it wculd be well accepted that The Duke of Edinburgh is not
coming to Australia for the purpose of making a nation-wide tour
but for a specific purpose.
I am pleased indeed that it has been possible to offer
His Royal Highness in the course of his visit, two private weekends
relaxing in the Australian countryside free from official functions.
NOTE: The Fremiers of New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland
qnd South Australia will each announce the programme of engagements
for the visits to their respective States.
CANBERRA 27 March 1c60 



VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
WELLINGTON
STATE LUNCHEON 28 March 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Prime Minister, The Deputy Leader of the
Opposition, and Distinguished Guests:
The first thing that I would wish to say to you and
to those of you who have come along to this lunch is to thank
you for the honour you have done me and to thank you for the
opportunity of having met you and your Cabinet and now having
met, even if vicariously, such a representative section of
New Zealand opinion. I do not know, Sir, whether there are in
fact representatives of the South Island present, but there is
one thing I think I should make clear and that is that although
on this occasion my visit is unhappily confined, on past occasions
I have been to the South Island and have travelled from Christchurch
on the way to regions further south, where I had, at McMurdo
Sound, happy associations with the New Zealanders stationed
there so it is not a completely terra incognito to me as far
as that is concerned.
You were very kind in your remarks to me. There are orn~ n'
two things, before I launch in to what I really have to say of
serious moment to you, which unfortunately I cannot answer. You
asked me how many Rugby matches somebody had won. I do not know.
You see, I am an Australian Rules player myself. I share with
you entirely, Mr. Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the feeling
that this visit is too short, but while it is unfortunate that
one cannot have enough of a good thing, at least it is highly
fortunate that one can have some part of a good thing, and that
is what you are giving to me.
This, Sir, is the first time on which I haves spoken to
a gethering outside of my own country as the Prime Minister of
Australia, and because of that I think you will agree it would
be natural if I were rather nervous. In fact, to let you into
a secret, if you have not discovered it already, I am rather
nervous. But I can say this I am not as nervous as I would
be if I were speaking to a gathering anywhere but in New Zealand,
or to any other than New Zealanders. It is really and this
sustains me no new thing for an Australian to find himself
in company with New Zealanders. Indeed, it is in keeping with
what has happened over the last half century and more.
Australians and New Zealanders have had common goals in the
harsh arbitrament of war on Gallipoli, in France, in Greece,
in Crete, in the northern deserts of Africa, in Korea, in
Malaya, and now in Vietnam and during that time, and I
believe that this is true, those common goals in war which
were attained when the militant Fascism and Nazism of Germany
were overthrown, which were attained when the military invasion
of South Korea by Communism was overthrown, which were attained
when terrorism was prevented and destroyed in Malay-e, have forged
a link between our peoples which is enduring and which will, for
as far in the future as I can see, endure.
But we have now before us goals in peace. We have
now before us goals which beckon us to try together to make
the most use of that opportunity which together, and together
with other nations, has been won in war. It is of this that
I want to speak to you, but before I do, let me just say this.
There has been much speculation in newspapers and by individuals 
2.
on both sides of the Tasman as to whether there should or
should not be some form of political unity, and indeed the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition mentioned this, between our
countries; some kind of arrangement by which each one, I
suppose, of our nations I have never seen it spelt out
should give up some of the sovereignty it possesses, some of
the national identity it cherishes. I have no chance of
seeing what in some unforeseen future might occur and I
speak of an unforeseen future. Whenever, if ever that kind of
thing occurs, it can only occur by the nations and the
individuals in the nations of New Zealand and Australia saying
so. But this I say to talk about that now, to worry about
that now, to raise the questions which are involved in that now,
is, I would have thought, not only irrelevant but tending to be
damaging, because it can lead to suspicion; it can lead to
resentment; it can lead to impediments in the gaining of goals
which are quite clear before us and which do not require this
kind of solution in order for those goals to be attained.
So let us put that on one side. Let us put it out
0 of our minds, and let us reconsider what can be done by us both
as we are, with our sovereignty, without worrying about these
future things; these matters which can be achieved by you and
us, bearing in mind that both of us are relatively technically
advanced nations, relatively wealthy nations, relatively
isolated nations as far as the European origins from which we
come are concerned let me put to you what it is that I see
as the closer co-operation-for a common end.
Let me first talk to you about co-operation for a
common economic advancement and for the enhancement of trade
and employment opportunities and increased. populations between
our countries. There was originated not so long ago I think
in January 1966 the New Zealand/ Australia Free Trade Agreement.
Before that time, of course, we had one of those elements which
are claimed to be so significant as a result in Europe of the
creation of the Common Market, because we had taken for granted
the opportunity for New Zealanders to travel to Australia, to
work in Australia, to live in Australia; the opportunity for
Australians to travel to New Zealand, to work in New Zealand,
to live in New Zealand and this interplay of a work force was
one of the great benefits claimed for the European Common Market
in Europe. ' Ve have had it, and have taken it for granted. Not
only have we taken it for granted, but we have discovered that
those New Zealanders who come to Australia and who do live there
and work there have to a highly disproportionate extent attained
the highest offices in our country, and run such things as the
Snowy MountainsAuthority, which is one of our greatest developments.
I do not think we have done quite so well over here, but this is
something of significance, which we have.
This New Zealand/ Australia Free Trade Agreement was
reached on top of that, and I sometimes think that because that
Agreement has not resulted in an immediate and dramatic change
in the balance of payments situation between the two countries,
and because there are, as there will always be in such Agreements,
some areas of exacerbation, that we could tend to write down the
benefit of the Agreement already and the ultimate benefit to both
of our nations. This was not intended as an Agreement which
overnight would alter things dramatically. It was intended as
an Agreement which, as the years passed and as duties were
progressively reduced for the most part over a period:. of
eight years for matters stated in the Treaty would tend to
free trade between our two nations, would tend to help redress
the balance of trade between our two nations and this, I think, 
J 3.
it already shows not only promise of' doing but I think some
performance in doing, though, as the Deputy Leader of the
Opposition pointed out, we are four times the size of New
Zealand and you would expect some disparity in trade figures
between a nation four times the size of another.
But let me put this to you. Over the last two yearsand
this is roughly the period of operation of the Treaty
whether entirely due to the Treaty or not I do not know,
but over the period in which the Treaty has operated, our
exports to New Zealand have fallen off I think by some
million or $ 6 million. New Zealand's exports to Australia
have increased, I think by between $ 1 million or $ 2 million,
and this is a move towards what ultimately is suggested to be
the result of this trade Treaty. Of course, each nation will,
as the Treaty operates, seek to protect its own vital interests
if they become disrupted, but still the Treaty was signed and
so far this is an indicationz~ of what is flowing from it. It
provided for a whole list of nominated products which over a
period of eight years were to have duties progressively released;
but again, as a symbol of hope in the way in which this Treaty
is being approached by, I think, both of us, may I tell-: you
this. There was the matter of excuse me if I sound indelicateundressed
timber from New Zealand, which over a period of eight
years was to have duties progressively reduced. There was an
appIcation that we, the Australian Government, should waive
this and should at once say, " No, we will not reduce it over a
period of eight years; we will immediately abolish all duties
on undressed New Zealand timber coniiig to Australia." And
only a week ago it has not yet been announced in my own
country my own Government decided that as a result of that
approach we would agree and we will abolish at once all duties
on undressed New Zealand timber coming into Australia. A
small thing, but an indication of the way in which this Treaty
can work to our common and mutual advantage.
I have no doubt that over the period ahead there will
still be difficulties. There will still bo people in Australia
saying, " You cannot bring blue peas in from New Zealand, or it
will destroy something or other in Tasmania", and there will be
people in New Zealand saying, " We have not really got a big
enough market for our lamb or whatever it may be" l; but these
things can be ironed out, they can be a matter of discussion,
and on the history of the Treaty, so far I believe there is room
for great hope that we will not only have this ability for
employment to move backwards and forwards, but for trade to be
progressively freed to our common benefit, and for joint ventures
of New Zealand and Australian capital to build in New Zealand or
in Australia manufacturing processes such as Comalco, for
example, is building in New Zealand to take advantage of power
from your hydro-electricity capacity, providing employment here,
profits for both of us, and, through profits, an opportunity
for growth for both of us. You, Sir, spoke of the need to help
nations in our region, and I too speak of the need to do that,
and also, as far as possible, to protect ourselves as Britain
goes, as I believe she will completely go, from this part of
the world. That depends on growth, both in population and in
economic resources, to carry out those tasks, and in so far as
this Treaty helps and I believe it does so it will help both
nations to attain what you would, I am sure, agree are , tignificant
go~ als. / 4 
4.
In the field of defence itself lies another close
area of co-operation, not of integration of our Armed Forces,
not of a common commander, one star, for running the Armed
Forces of both nations, though it may be at some stage if a
Task Force is required for some particular purpose the best
commander might be picked from whichever country can provide
him but rather the study in common by an Australian Defence
Committee and a New Zealand Defence Committee of what each
nation was going to require for the purposes of its defence
over thc next three years or whatever time it might be, so
that as far as possible a compatibility of arms might be
achieved, so that we would find, for example, that squadrons
might be partly of New Zealand flights and partly of Australian
flights, and could operate together with the same kind of aircraft
and the same kind of ancillary equipment and same kind of ground
control; so that we might see that if fleets at sea, comprising
partly Australian and partly New Zealand vessels were put in
convoy then the ammunition used was as far as possible the same,
the signals used were as far as possible the same, and the
compatibility was there.
I do not need to spell this out, but it must be clear
that for any given expenditure of national resources on defence,
if two countries are likely to co-operate in defence in the
future as they have in the past and I believe they will then
from that proportion of national resources so devoted, greater
effectiveness can be gained if there is common study at the
beginning of the kind of arms, the kind of logistics, the kind
of spare parts which best will allow the integrated operation
and that is different the integrated operation of forces from
our two nations. And this we seek.
In our approach to foreign affairs there has been for
some time past the closest co-operation which I think is possible
between two countries, and this is whether it means an approach
towards a problem of external affairs posed because of the present
incoherent state of so much of the world, or whether it relates
to assistance in the economic field to try by that way to turn an
incoherent state of the world into a coherent state. These
together, again, are things which we get. They are of great
assistance. They do not require a surrender of sovereignty
by anybody. They do require the abolition of suspicion and
resentment in our own country or in yours. They do require not
only that politicians should say these things and believe these
things, as your politicians and ours say them and believe them,
but they require also that those charged with the industrial
management of a nation should belie-ge those things and should,
by getting together with their counterparts in Australia, and
Australians getting together with their counterparts in New
Zealand, translate the opportunities provided by political
agreements reached into the practical terms which provide the
employment and growth and economic strength we both require.
I am happy to say, again, that there are signs enough that
this already is operating, and I am confident that in the years
ahead not only will we achieve these advanced goals I have spoken
of they are fairly easy not only am I confident there is
unlikely to . be any rift between our approaches to foreign
affairs, but I am confident that firms both here and in my own
country will make their decisions and build their factories on
the assessment of a market available to a firm here or a factory
here; the Australian assessment of a firm or factory in Australia
on the assessment of a market ho-re. 
If this happens, as I think it will, and is built on
that goodwill already here, and is built on that experience
already gained, and is built on those sacrifices already jointly
shared, then I think that we have an opportunity and will be able
to take advantage of that opportunity. Perhaps, if this is not
going too far but perhaps let me put it as a dreamer to call
in this regional new world into being to redress the balance
of the old, as once was said about the calling of the United
States into being and when it is called into being, and when
it redresses the balance of the old, it will, if it is properly
done, remove many of the causes of dissension and lead to a
happier and a better life, not only for us and the peoples under
our care, but for the peoples in the region from whom geography
and morality must ever prevent us from being separated. That
is why I attach so much importance to this visit and to the
Australians'and New Zealanders'continued efforts in peace in
the Anzac tradition formed in war.
Thank you. 



NEW ZEALAND VISIT
WELLINGTON 16 APR 1968
JOINT COMMUNIQUE ISSUED BY NEW ZEALAND
PRIME MINISTER HOLYOAKE AND AUSTR-LIAN
PRIME MINISTER GORTON 28 MAiRCH 1968
The Prime Ministers of A ustralia and New Zealand greatly
welcomed the opportunity provided by Mr Gorton's goodwill visit to New
Zealand to discuss a wide range of subjects, expecially those which
affect relations between the two countries.
Mr Holyoake and his colleagues expressed their
appreciation that it should have been to New Zealand that Mr Gorton
paid his first visit outside Australia as Prime Minister. Both Prime
Ministers noted with satisfaction that the visit reflects the very close
ties between Australia and New Zealand.
The talks have also been most timely in view of the
forthcoming meetings at Wellington in connection with SEATO, kANZUS
and the Viet Nam war.
This meeting took place against a background of increasing
consultation and co-operation between Australia and New Zealand.
Not only do the two countries continue to work together
within alliances and groupings such as ANZUS, SEATO, tsia and the
Pacific Council ( ASPAC) and the Commonwealth, and in international
forums such as the United Nations, but the essence of their relationship
is-to be found in the close contacts between them which are constantly
maintained at many levels.
The Prime Ministers viewed with satisfaction the trend
greatly strengthened since the visit to New Zealand last year by the late
Mr Holt for more frequent consultation between the two Governments,
and agreed they would do all that was necessary to ensure that these
exchanges will continue and increase.
The discussions were informal, their chief purpose being
to acquaint the Prime Minister more fully with each other's thinking.
They covered not only developments in relations between the two countries
but international questions, especinlly the two countries' policies in
South-East Asia and the Pacific and their attitudes to tnterna. tional trade.
The Prime Ministers sgreed that while the aggression in
Viet Nnm continues, the two countries will maintain their military support
to the Republic of Viet Nam and its Allies. At the same time, they will
endeavour to assist the search for peaceful solution. Both countries
accept the need to continue civil aid to assist the social and economic
reconstruction of that country.
The acceleration of the withdrawal of British Forces from
South E. st Asia is of deep concern to both countries and has prompted
both Governments to reassess, in consultation with their Allies in the / 2 
-2
region, the role Australia and New Zealand are best fitted to play.
With regard to the situation-n South-East Asia
generally, the Prime Ministers were particularly heartened by the
disposition of many of the States in this region to work together for
peace and prosperity. Through ASPkIC, the Colombo Plan, the
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far-East ( ECAFE), and the
Asian Development Bank-to which Australia and New Zealand belong,
both countries demonstrate their sense of continuing Involvement In the
progress and stability of the arec.
The Prime Ministers welcomed the recent formqtion
of the Association of .0outh-East Asian Nations ( ASEA~ N)-and the development
of a closer working relationship between Indonesia and its
neighbours. The Prime Ministers also -discussed their continuing
Interest in the iff airs of the-South Pacific, an area with which Australia
and New Zealaind have intimate ties and in whose development both
countries are closely involved,
Both countries have ak common concern in the stability
of international commodity-trade, and in this field they tr,' ditionslly
adopt q co-operative approach. The Prime Ministers noted that world
markets for dairy products were under intensive pressure because-of
subsidised competition, and agreed that an international solution was
urgently needed. An attempt to achieve an interim solution w~' s at
present-being made in the GATT. Both Governments are striving to
ensure a successful outcome to these negotiations.
Matters relevant to the Free Trade Agreement
between r-, ustralia and New Zealand will be the subject of further
discussions between Mr Mc-7wen and Mr Marshall next week. The
Prime Ministers agreed on the importance of doing everything possible
to ensure the success of the agreement and that it was a key factor in
the healthy development of both economies.
The discussions between the Prime Ministers, which
took place in -g most friendly atmosphere, have-given them both valuable
Insights into the respective policies of Australia and New Zealand over
a wide range of subjects. They look forward to further meetings and intend
that contacts kt all levels between Australia and New Zealand should
increase. 



VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
AUC.-' KLAND
Speech at Civic Repto J
by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton LIBRJt1--
3C March 1966
Mr. Mayor, The Right Honourable the Prime Ministerp Ladies and
Gentlemen: You will not, I know, either expect or want the to speak
to you for any length of timie6 This is rather an occasion on which 1 say
thank you to the Mayor for having tendered to me this reception and tha nk
you to you people In this room for having been good enough to come alonig
to it. I have not, Mvr. Mayor, as you seem to fear, had to listen
to a lot of long speeches since I have been in this country. On the contrary,
I have had to listen to a number of short speeches which were warm and
touching and welcoming, and if there were long and boring speeches given,
then they were given by me, which is a far better thing to do than to haye
to listen to them being given by somebody else. Indeed, I was quite
surprised because as one travels around my own country, ( and I hope If
there are any of my own pressmen here they won't report this too nastily%,
as one travels around my own country, it is common for, at even the
smallest gathering, for there to be at least four, five, six, seven speeches.
This is why we are known as a nation which has the smallest number of
people to the square mile, and the greatest number of speeches to the
square meal ( applause).
This Is not, in fact, the first time either that I have been
to Auckdand, though it is the first time, of course, as Prime Minister. Wie
called through before, my wife and I, ou our way back from England to
begin to raise that family of which you spoke. And later I remember calling
in to Auckland on a trooper and picking up part of the Maori battalion who
went with us then across to I. ngland. But those were days of long ago. It
is my mission here and m-y hope here to try and see that those bonds which
began in war are now used in the arts of peace for the real use of the
opportunities the war has presented to us, the opportunities to act as a
free people for the good of free peoples.
Sir, It is kind of you indeed to give this reception to me.
It was kind of you to talk of the. potentialities of my own nation, which are
great, and which if we can overcome the shortage of water, which is the
main shortage, we now have open up for us, and I don't brag and please
don't think I am bragging -open up for us an almost limitless possibility
for the future. But that is speaking of one nation. This is not enough.
There are also possibilities in this nation which are great and If the
possibilities of this nation and of our nation can be wedded and welded
together for the benefit of both of us, then as I have said today at the
showground and previously at Wellington, we will be the stronger for
what you can do, you may be the stronger for what we can do. / 2 
2.
And if it turns out that that is what does happen then all
the peoples round us will be the stronger for what you and we together
do, and this Is what we seek this is what I think the future holds for us.
I don't know how quickly but I can see and I think that you can see and I
think the people of my own country can see in their minds that vision before
them at some stage in the future as something to build for. I am sure you
can do the same. If we don't get there as quickly as we would like, what
of it. just like a man, a nation's reach must exceed its grasp, or what's
the future for. The significant thing is to reach and to reach together as
far as Australia and New Zealand are concerned. And that's what we are
going to do, I believe. Tomorrow w e must leave but I do hope that there
will be an opportunity for me to come back and meet you all again. And
I do hope that when I stop being Prime Mi nister I don't hope that soon
but politics is an uncertain business that whoever is Prime Minister of
Australia for the next iC33 years will come to New Zealand as a matter of
course. And whoever's Primei Minister of New Zealand will come to
Australia as a matter of course. And this too is part of' that joint effort
which I see as something of a destiny for us both.
I thank you, Sir, indeed. I am sorry that I spoke longer
than I meant to speak to you. These are things of some importance to
all of us to both nations and forgive me if I spent too long in talking
about them. Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
AUCKLAND
OPENING OF NEW ZEALAND EASTER SHOW Ap, 16
BY MR. JOHN GORTON March 1968
Mr. ( Co-Chairman, the Right Honourable the Prime Minister,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
You, Mr. Prime Minister, have said you attached
some significance to the fact that within three months of
assuming office in Australia the first overseas trip taken
by me as Prime Minister of Australia has been to New Zealand.
But this is, I think, in no way surprising. There cannot be
two nations more contiguous than New Zealand and Australia.
There cannot be two nations which have in the past forged
closer bonds in war and peace and which are now fusing yet
closer thosc bonds which were previously forged. And there
cannot be two nations which, if they are given the opportunity
to grow as they have the capacity and the will to grow, can
more significantly complement each other, can more significantly
help the growth of each other, and more enrich the standards
of living of each other, and by so doing can more contribute
to the region of the world in which these nations live. So
it is not surprising that the first visit of an Australian
Prime Minister should be to New Zealand, nor is it surprising
that that visit should take place quickly.
Rather would it be surprising if an Australian Prime
Minister first went anywhere else, or delayed too long before
he came to see those whose past and whose destinies are, as I
believe, so closely intertwined, and that is why I think there
will be now and in the future, not for a person but for an
Australian Prime Minister a requiremcnt to be closely and
constantly in touch with this nation and a requirement for a
New Zealand Prime Minister to be closely and constantly in
touch with ours.
This has been an all too brief sojourn amongst you,
but during the period of time I have been able to be here, I
have had extended to me that hospitality I expected before I
came and I expected much and got much and have had the
opportunity to speak in Nellington to the leaders of commerce,
to the leaders in politics, to the head men in all kinds of
human endeavour. This, I think, is the first time that I
have had the chance to speak to a large gathering of
representative men and women of New Zealand, and to them I
want to say that I bring in my person greetings from
representative men and women of Australia.
' tie are, as the Co-chairman has pointod out, as a
nation an exhibitor in this show and have been an exhibitor
for 10 years. d~ e are, I think, the only overseas exhibitor,
and from my memory I think we have committe ourselves to
continue to be an overseas exhibitor here until the lease of
the showgrounds runs out in 1974. ' Ie cannot commit ourselves
to be exhibitors after that because we don't know what the show
and the owners of the showgrounds are going to do, but if they
can work things out then you can count on us to continue to be
involved. And so we should, because here, and particularly in
this division of the show, we see the growth of secondary
industry in New Zealand. 
Now we, Australia and New Zealand, are competitors
in producing the products of primary industry and our markets
are, because of that, difficult of access, the one to the
other, for primary products, and we are competitors in other
countries of the world for the sale of primary products. And
we have a balance of trade which is adverse to New Zealand.
So how can we overcome this; what is being done to overcome
it? I think we can overcome it b0y endeavouring to open our
markets to the secondary products of New Zealand and by
continuing to sell in New Zealand our own secondary products,
and by expanding the volume of trade from New Zealand to
Australia and back, in that way, and in secondary products
but not entirely, hope to increase the manufacturing capacity
and the markets of each of our nations.
For that purpose we entered into an Australian/ New
Zealand Free Trade Agreement. This required that, at the time
that agreement was entered into two years or so ago, all those
products of New Zealand which were duty free should continue
to be duty free for admission to Australia, and it required
that a listed number of products on which duties were charged
when the agreement was entered into would have those duties
progressively reduced over a period of eight years until those
tariffs too were quite removed and those on that schedule were
also freely admitted. The result of that is already showing,
because, as your own Minister, Mr. Marshall, pointed out in a
press statement last February, in the last half of 1967 the
exports from New Zealand to Australia increased by over
compared with the exports in the last half of 1966.
And it is being required by this agreement that, by
arrangement, in order to help both countrics, manufacturers
can agree amongst themselves, and governments can endorse that
agreement, that something manufactured in New Zealand and
brought into and sold in Australia can be brought in and sold
without tariff even though it is not on the list of goods to
which I have rcferred, provided the New Zealand Government will
grant import licences to Australia for 80% of the value of the
goods imported to Australia from New Zealand. And it is provided
in that agreement that as it progresses the governments converse
with each other and can remove duties altogether before the
eight-year period is up, and this has been done on more than
one occasion, and just recently on undressed timber, so that
last October a decision was made to admit undressed Douglas Fir;
and this month another decision to admit undressed native timber
without duty, which we calculate, without taking in the factor
of growth, will mean an extra one million dollars a year trade
for New Zealand with Australia.
Now I know and I don't intend to traverse this
subject too much, because it is more one for manufacturers
and perhaps not immediately one which catches the imagination
of men and women I know that not only in the field of
secondary industry but also in the field of forest products
is New Zealand vitally interested, and this, too, will be
discussed between us in a week or so.
But these are mere mechanics of something which we
are seeking to achieve between us in the future, mere indications
of thc paths we are trying to travel, more hopes that the goals
that are held out to us will be reached. Those goals are ones
that we seek in the future, and the building we are hoping to
start now is one which will reach its fruition in the future,
at some time when you are a nation of 20 million people and
we are a nation of 50 million people perhaps, and we can together,
by what is in effect going to be joint effort through these 
3.
kinds of' agreements and their working out, see that there are
diversified opportunities for employment in this country and
in ours, that there are markets in this country and in ours,
amd that because there is this diversified manufacttiring
capacity, because there are these markets, because we are both
nations which can use technology, we will be able to make and
sell to each other things more cheaply than before and in
greater volume than before, and from the strength that generates
in both our countries will be able again jointly to contribute
to building up the standard of the region in which we live.
This is a task that I think destiny has laid upon New Zealand
and Australia. This is a task we cannot achieve if we hold
each other at arms' length. This is a task which is coming
nearer to being fulfilled because we are coming nearer together.
Some feelings of suspicion in the past, some feelings of
worrying about a big brother seeking a takeover, I think are
going, and they must go, because that is not the question that
confronts us. The question that confronts us is, how can we, who
are not cousins but more like brothers, work together, being
so close together and you, in terms of' time and distance
are closer to Sydney than is Perth work together for this
end which we have begun now to work for and which I think all
no, not all, but 90% 6 of the people in my country and in yours
wish to see pushed ahead until the goals I have outlined are
attained, and wish to see achieved, as a building is achieved
in the future, without having it handicapped by problems which
arise from some immediate consideration, which ax'e difficulties
but which can be overcome if that great structure which I think
you want and we want is jointly to be achieved.
Because this show helps towards it, because it gives
me an opportunity to speak to those of you who come here, not
as heads of great companies, not as members of parliament, not
as people in the Chamber of Manufactures, but as men and women
from New Zealand, because it gives me these opportunities, and
because I think the aims in front of us are so high, I thank
the organisers of this show so much for having given me the
opportunity to talk to you, to weary you a little with statistics,
but I hope to open to your minds a vision. It is because of
this that I thank the organisers, and declare this show open. 



VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
Recorded 30/ 3/ 6ur Telecast 313/ 68
AUJCKLAND SES C,'
INTERVIEW ON NEW ZEALAND TELEVISION 9 A m
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN __ RAGORTON
Interviewer Mr David Beatson 31ST MARCH, 1968
( Beginning not recorded)
PM: it is hard tosay what the out. omewould be,
but as far as we are concerned, we are predisposed to do what we
can to help In relation to what we are asked to do to help by the
countries there.
Q. You have expressed a desire to help your good friends
and neighbours, I believe as you put It, and you also said there was
a limit to what you could spend on defence because of your needs
for internal development. Do you think Australia can make a
greater contribution to the stability of the area by stimulating
economic assistance and through trade ties than it can by supplying
troops and military equipment to overseas bases?
PM:. No, I don't think so, but I think both those avenues of help
are necessary, We are trying through trade ties, and indeed
we would like to see, through traide ties, assistance and stability,
not only for Malaya and Singapore, but for Malaya, Indonesia and
Singapore because these, in our view with Australia and New
Zealand would form a package. If we can increase the whole of
the living standards in fti area, the trading possibilities In the
area, we think this would be good. But there Is also a need for a
military presence or so we were told by those in the area to
provide conditions of stability against subversion, against terrorism,
against the sort of thing that happened In Malaya In the 1950' s.
So I think both those requirements are there. But It Is true, as far
as Australia Is concerned, we have so many requl rements to
improve development, to help progress, to look after the aged and
the ill, so many requirements that we can't sort of push everything
Into just military commitments.
Q. Do you feel that the date that Britain has set for her
withdrawal puts the pressure on Australia and New Zealand to
make decisions about military involvement In South-East Asia?
PM: Yes. I think the latest date, If I might put it that way,
which Britain has set for her withdrawal, which Is quite different
from the dates set for her withdrawal previously, and the doubt
which previously wasn't a doubt that there would be a British naval
and air contingent there, able to come to the area when they were
asked for, with some real significant military capacity, which now
we don't know whether will be there or not; It looks as if It won't,
but the withdrawal of that Idea, coupled with the acceleration of
total withdrawal of grctund forces, does provide not only Britain
and Australia, but Britain, Australia, Singapore and Malaysia with
problems which obviously weren't there when 1975 was the date
for final withdrawal of ground troops and when It was, as we
understood It, part of the plans of withdrawal that there would be
a naval and air contingent from Britain available for the area. / 2 
-2
Q. Australia enjoys trade ties with the People's Republic
of China to a degree, and also with Japan, another major force in the
area. Do you think that these strings can be draWfitogether through
your Influence throughout the S'outh-East Asian area to form some sort
of mutual assistance or non-aggression agreement which will guarantee
the security and stability of the area?
PM: Well, I think our trade ties with Japan, which are quite
strong, indeed very strong, and Increasing Japan Is one of our best
buyers of wool, for example will draw us closer towards Japan, but
I don't know that this will contribute terrifically to the stability of the
region because Japan Is no threat to the stability of the region but
rather Japan Is one of the factors which helps towards the stability
of the region. Japan Is investing heavily In the region, Japan is helping
the economies to grow And so, yes, we will be Increasingly
trading with Japan. I think Japan will be a stabilising force in the
area, but this is just in the course of the things that are likely to
happen. Cur trade ties with China are mainly that we sell them a
great deal of goods, particularly wheat, mainly wheat. Vle don't buy
a great deal from them. I would like to think that China would be
a stabilising influence In the area, but I don't think It will. I hope It
will, but I doubt It.
Q. This week, Mr Gorton, the LSouth-East Asia Treaty
Organisation is meeting In New Zealand. Partnership In SEATO* has
been a controversial point with many South-East Asian countries.
Do you think that in view of the need for new regional defence arrangements
that we are going to have to look for something new to replace
or supersede SEATO?
PM: For what particular purpose? For the purpose of the
security of Australia and New Zealand?
Q. Of the whole South-East region.
PM: I see. Well, I don't think I foresee an alternative to
SEATO, though it has some difficulties about It, particularly the
participation of some countries that are out of the region. But as far
as Australia is concerned and New Zealand is concerned, I think the
ANZUS pact is the one which provides the greatest security for us.
Q. Do you think our security really depends on the total
security of the whole South-E-ast Asia region?
PM: " Depends" Is a strong word. I think our security Is
affected by what happens in the South-East Asia region here. But
assuming that the worst happened in the whole South-East Asian
region, then I think our security would depend on the alliance with
the United 2tates through the ANZUS pact. Now it would be much
better, of course, If the worst didn't happen In the South East Asian
area, and we did not have to depend on the ANZUS pact. But I think
the SEATO Treaty Organisation Y. ill help to see that the worst
doesn't happen in the South-7-ast Asian region. / 3 
-3-
Q. At the moment the ANZUS partners, although perhaps not as
such, are involved in Viet Nam and you have said you feel the
cost of the Vic: operation to Australia must be held to
about the c. a~ as last year. In view of this, does this
really mcc-n, zecritics suggest, that you are less
enamoured of 1ted States and more sceptical about the
commitment to Viet Nam than Mr Holt your predecessor?
PM: I don't think it does. You said we kept it at the
level of last year. Well, this is not quite true, though I
understand how it could be said. It was, I think, October or
November of last year that we increased our commitment to
Viet Nam by some one-third, so that now we have got somewhere
between 8, 000 and 9, 000 fighting men there, which we mn,, only
provide but supply with arms and ammunition, aeroplanes,
ships, food, logistics look after completely. And this is
quite a significant contribution from a country of our own size.
Now, we are keeping it at a recently-expanded level. I think
that it is a significant contribution and one which is worthy of
an ally to be given, and I would want to think long and hard
before any addition to that was made because of the requirements
for Australia itself to develop into a significant power as quickly
as possible, to meet all its other requirements. I don't believe.
this means that we are less enamoured with the United States.
I don't believe it means any indication of diminution of our belief
that it was right to go in there to try and give the South Vietnamese
the right of self-determination, It is just a sort of look at what
we are providing, of all the other things we need to do, and
whether what we are providing in relation to all the other things
we need to do is a reasonable contribution. I think it is.
Q'i This is an independent attitude, in other words, a
specifically Australian attitude towards the involvement
PM: Well, it is, but on the other hand, of course, we
haven't been asked to increase the contribution, but that would be
the approach I would have to the situation which, I suppose, you
could call an Australian attitude.
Q. Since the military situation in Viet Nam does appear
to have deteriorated quite considerably in the latter part of last
year and early this year, do you think the time has now come for
the Allies to press more firmly for thorough investigations to
open up peace negotiations?
PM: Well, we would certainly want to support any peace
negotiations that led to a genuine peace. We wouldn't be
interested ourselves for pressing for so-called peace negotiations
which, in fact, were not designed to secure the sort of peace
in which the South Vietnamese could run their own affairs, but
were designed for a disguised surrender to the North. We'vye
seen countries I think Laos is an example where peace
negotiations led to a composite government and agreement
that it would be run by a composite government, and we have
seen what has happened as a result of that, If we can do
anything to achieve talks about a peace which will provide the
South Vietnamese without North Viet, namese intereference
with the right of selecting their own government, and living
under that government without fear, then we would be in favour
of that ind of arrangement. We are not interested in 9 / 4 
-4
PM. ( Contd. thing,; s which are called peace talks but which in fact are surrender
talks.
Q. Moving on now to questions on the relationship between
Australia and New Zealand, Mr Gorton. New Zealand is one of
Australia's major markets. Have you been concerned about the
economic conditions here?
PM: Well, the economic conditions no, I ca't say
I've been concerned about the economic conditions. Indeed I don't
know a great deal. I can't discuss a great deal about the
economic conditions, but you are quite right, New Zealand is a
significant market for Australia, and I would hope Australia
would grow into being a significant market for New Zealand.
Q: The point that I make here is that certain measures have
been taken, First of all, the devaluation of the New Zealand
dollar which makes imports to New Zealand look more expensive
and our exports look more attractive, and certain other measures
which have been to dampen down the demand for imported goods
must have reflected themselves on the marketing trends or rather,
the exporting trends in Australiab Has there been any concern
about these measures?
PM: No, not particularly. You seg, even though there wa's
devaluation in the New Zealand currency, it only brought it down
to a par, or roughly to a par with the Australian currency whitch
had previously been devalued and the New Zealand currency
hadn't, and so in some ways, I suppose, that didn't make it
much more difficult for us. Our trade has been growing well,
perhaps it hasn't been growing but at least it's been fairly
constant over the last two years with New Zealand, and if it
hasn't been growing, I think it is possibly partly because of
import restrictions which need to be put on in any country when
the balance of payments gets out of kilter.
Q. The other question, of course, relating to New Zealand
exports to Aistralia is that we are a dairy efficient country, and
Australia is now engaged on a reform of the dairy industry. In
view of the fact that it is obviously going to cost a great deal of
money to bring about the reform you envisage eventually,
wouldn't it be cheaper really to let New Zealand products in on
the Australian market?
PM: I don't think it would for these reasons. Yes, we want
to reform the dairying industry in Australa because we have got
a lot of I won't call them inefficient but uneconomic:
dairy farmers, and we would like to get them into some other
form of production or to get a lot of unecanomic dairy farmers
combined into one economic area. But even if all the uneconom-ic
dairy farmers went out of production, if all northern production
of dairy products in Australia stopped, the southern areas could
produce not only all the butter that Australia required, and:
probably at a competitive price with the butter from any other
country in the world, but would also produce surpluses which
would need to be sold abroad. I don't see, in my forecast for the
future, a market opening up in Australia for New Zealand dairy a, 4 h 
PM ( Contd) produce. I see Australia and New Zealand working together to
try and keep prices reasonable overseas for dairy produce from
our joint countries, but the areas where I think the greatest hope
lies are in forest products being available in greater quantities
to be sent to Australia and an increase in New Zealand secondary
industry, and a market for that secondary industry in Australia
and vice versa. These are, I think, where the real hopes or
expanded trade lie.
Q. Can you see really significant opportunities in terms of
this belief of yours that we should be restricted to these two
areas for New Zealand's exporting future in Australia when most
of our exports are, in fact, primary produce?
PM: Yes, I think I can because I think that the Australian
market will grow all right it's what, 12 million people now,
which is not very large. It will be 25 million before very long,
aad that will be twice as big a market. New Zealand will have,
as it has now, an advantage in that market under the Free Trade
Agreement, and I expect New Zealand will diversify. I expect
New Zealand will build up its secondary industries in conjunction
with Australia or by itself, and have more of those kind of things
to export. Indeed, I think they will follow the same path that
Australia has followed. Once we were entirely dependent on.
primary industry, ' r almost entirely dependent. Now we have
so diversified, built up so many secondary industries that even
the sort of terrific drought we are suffering from now doesn~ t
have the economic effect on us that it would have had. I know
Now Zealand will always be dependent to a great extent on*
primary production and the export of primary production, bu t I
believe that it will certainly greatly expand in secondary
industries, want a market for those secondary industries where
it has preference and will get that in Australia. I think that
New Zealand and Australian firms will tend to come together
in joint enterprises and that this is the area which will expand
for the future for the good of both of us.
Q. Talking about joint enterprises, there has been a
great deal of talk about union between the two countries. Do
you think the time has now come, as some people suggest, that
some form of joint secretariat or organisation common to both
countries should begin to plan for closer relationship and closer
ties between the development and overall efforts of Australi4
and New Zealand to penetrate markets elsewhere?
PM: Well, I hadn't thought about a joint secretariat but
I do believe that our defence chiefs in New Zealand and Australia
are planning together more than they used to do, that your Prime
Minister and my Prime Minister, your Ministers and our
Ministers are planning together more than they used to do not
in the sense of a political union but in the sense of a joint
effort. I think this is happening more than it used to happen.
I think perhaps it could happen even more in the future. I have
read about this proposal for political union betweL.. n the two
countries. If and when that ever becomes a possibility, it will
only become a possiliity if the people of New Zealand say " This
is what we want to have at some particular time" and the people 
-6-
PM ( Contd) of Australia say, " This is fine. We will agree to it at some
particular time". But at the moment, what is far more significant
than that is that we should plan together in defence, plan together
in foreign affairs, plan together to expand our joint trade, plan together
to work together in the region in which we live.
Q. Mr Gorton, thank you very much. 



_ lB ' BP4 3FING FOR HEADS OF B UREAUX,
PARLIAMENTARY PRESS GALLERY,
C ANB'ER R A 1 APRIL, 1968
PRIME MINISTER : You have all had copies of the statement, so there is
no point in reading it over to you, so here I am. What would you
like to ask about it?
Q : Can you tell us what lay behind the President's
statement. Any official or unofficial advice as to why he made
this decision?
PM: Nothing other than would appear on the surface of it
that hie does hope that this will lead Hanoi to start entering into
peace negotiations.
Q. Is there anything to indicate that Hanoi might?
PM: Nothing that I have seen, but It is after all, quite a
gesture on the part of the United States.
Q. At what stage were you informed, Sir, of the US plans
for de-escalation?
PM: Yesterday.
Q. After you returned from New Zealand.
PM: Yes. They were trying to get In touch with New Zealand
but they missed me.
Q. Did you see a full draft of this speech yesterday, Sir?
PM: No, the State Department just sent out all the significant
points that were to be covered but not the draft of the speech. No.
Q. Did that Include his decision not to seek re-election?
PM: Nc.
Q. You learnt of this today?
PM: Yes.
Q. What Is your reaction to that, Sir?
PM: Well I have got a brief statement that I have written
out, but it is not yet typed, but I could have it typed and circulated.
Here it is do hnot think it proper to comment on the decision
taken by President Johnson not to seek re-election, other than
to say that we in Australia will always remember with gratitude
the warmth and special consideration which he has shown to us
during his Presidency. e/ 2 
-2
PM. ( Contd.) " He has had to bear immense burdens and make
momentous decisions and carry the responsibility for
those decisions and I believe he has made them
on the basis of what he sincerely believed to be right,
and to the ultimate benefit of freedomr Inside the United
States and outside that country. He Is a great man.
Q. You are satisfied, Mr Prime Minister, that this
decision will hold and he won't go back on it?
PM: On reading the words that he used, It seems to me
that they come as close as it is possible to come to the words
the previous American President used who was It Sherman, I
think " I won't run, and if I am elected, I won't serve". It
seemed to me that
Q. It's final?
PM: Well, I can only go on the words that he used, but
they seemed to me to be very final words
Q. Except for the reason he gave. The one reason
I heard he gave was that he was so busy conduct ing the war In
Viet Nam that he didn't have time to run an election campaign,
which did seem to leave the door open a little bit for a draught.
( Interjection) He said at a press conference afterwards it was
on our four o'clock news that the decision was Irrevocable.
PM: I can't comment other than on the words that he
used and they seem to me to be perfectly finite words.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, in your statement, you point
out where this statement of President Johnson's is consistent with
past American statements. In fact, this Is an entirely different
break In policy as far as we are concerned. ' They have virtually
unconditionally elected to cease the bombing. Did this particular
move catch you by surprise or were -you -expecting, ttfrom -the
political winds?
PM: Now, let's analyse a little what you say bef ore I
answer it, if you don't mind....
Q. To put it more Simply, Sir, were you advised in
advance of this major change of policy?
PM: I was told yesterday of the points that were covered
in the President's speech of today. If you will have read the text
of the President's speech, he presents this as an advance on his
San Antonio speech. In the San Antonio speech, he said: " We are
prepared to stop the bombing of North Viet Nam as soon as we
have an indication that North Viet Nam will enter into negotiations
as a result". He has gone further than that, one step further than
that by now saying, " Well, we will stop the bombing of most of
North Viet Nam, even though we haven't got a previous indication
that Hanoi will enter into peace negotiations, but we call on Ho
Chi Minh to respond to this, and we call on the Co-Chairmen to
ask Hanoi to respond to it. It is a further step. / 3 
-3
Q. You wouldn'tcalLit a-major--change, then?
PMK Well, I can only present to you the position as it Is
offered -to. Hanoi in the initial statement: " We will stop bombing
altogether as soon as you give us an indication that if we do, we
will enter into ngtais. Then that statement shortly
afterwards is expanded by another statement saying, " Of couirse, if
we do this and we expect to enter into peace negotiations, we don't
expect the North to take military advantage of it in a great build-up."
But It would be reasonable to expect them to maintain the forces they
have got there. This is a further step forward in that he is now not
ceasing bombing, but ceasing bombing on a considerable area....
Q. Less ruthless, shall we say?
PM: Well, it Is closer to the battle area and more designed
obviously to hinder flows of men and materials directly to the North
where the fighting is taking place. B ut he is taking that extra step.
Q. He also says, Sir, just to sort of get back to this
. rhis is the first step in a series of de-escalating the war"...
PM: He says It may be the first step In a series of
de-escalations
Q. We don't have the full text...
PM and he hopes it will be the firs t step.
Q. But it is a step towards de-escalation. This is the
important break I was talking about. There have been a series of
escalations military escalations and this is the first positive and
recognis able military de-escalation as distinct from statements of
what we would do or could do. They are actually doing something.
Did that particular act ion take you by surprise?
PM: You are claiming that previous bombing pauses which
have taken place are not to be described as de-escalatlons because
you know that America has stopped previously, and you wouldn't
regard that as being a de-escalation?
Q. They didn't call It that at the time.
PM: No, but they did stop it. I think you should read the
actual text of the statement which is that he hopes that this will lead
to rapid peace talks and that they in turn will lead to increased
de-escalation.
Q : On this point this Is " Iffy" of course If nothing
happened quickly, would you want the bombing to start again, because
you say " We must all hope that this response is forthcoming quickly"
PM: Well we hope -the response is forthcoming quickly
because we hope that the peace talks will begin which is what we
constantly wanted.
Q. If nothing happens? / 4 
-4-
PM: Well, I wouldn't know.
Q. Will this make any difference to the talks ANZUS
and SEATO are having?
PM: I would think not. I would think It would have no
bearing on them at all.
Q. Sir, have you had any impression from America
that if this doesn't lead to de-escalation, it doesn't work out the
way the President hoped, it will resume bombing?
PM: I have only got the text of the President's speech
and the points which vare covered, and they don't extend into that
area.
Q. Sir, the request In the past to be kept Informed of
any major change in policy in Viet Nam and the fact that your two
Ministers on Tuesday and Thursday were obviously placed in the
position that they went right on a limb on the thing, are there
going to be any approaches that we be Informed of these things in
the future?
PM: Well, I think we have consistently made it clear,
Indeed as late as the Governor-General's Spe~ ech, where it was
said in unequivocal language that we would support any moves which
were designed to lead to the opening of peace talks, and we expect
those peace talks to lead to a real peace which, indeed, is clear.
By " Peace", I ne an a just and enduring peace, and self-determination
for the Vietnamese a real peace Indeed, the President's
statement this time indicates that thisis what is being desired, and
not something which he describes in his statement as a fake peace.
Well we have consistently indicated that we wculd support those
kinds of moves, and I think this is a move along that path.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, doesn't it seem that the close
consultation that we have always been told this Government has with
the American Government wasn't in evidence this time?
PM: I told you when we were informed of the points
which were to be covered in the American speech, they weren't
discussed with us before that time; but as I have pointed out, we
have made it perfectly clear that we were prepared to support
efforts to reach a genuine peace. This is a step further than the
San Antonio speech. It is a step further. The San Antonio speech
was speaking of ceasing bombing altogether, which I think you
mentioned. This one mentions ceasing bombing in the highly
populated areas, the food-producing areas, but retains it on the
approaches to the military field, and it is therefore a cessation
of bombing on significant areas of Viet Nam well, I have put
it in this statement.
Q. Prime Minister, are you likely to discuss this
directly by telephone or any other way with Mr Johnson to get
to his reasoning? You have indicated you only have the text
of his speech as we have probably had it. 
PM: Yes, well...
Q. beic.. I thought you would probably-viant to know the reasons
PM: Well the reasoning behind it, I think, appears quite
clearly in the speech itself. Hle does hope that this will lead to a
reaction from Hanoi, and that it will lead to the opening of peace
talks. He expresses in his speech the hope that he will get a
reaction from Hanoi in response to this gesture and that then the
question could be open for discussion as to whether the areas that
were being still to be bombed for military purposes could be
also taken away from bombing, provided certain arrangements were
made. And this Is the de-escalation of which you were talking...
Q. Do you feel there is a necessity to ring him or to
get our Ambassador in Washington to give you a background report
or briefing on this?
PM: Well I don't think it is necessary because I think the
indication is there. When the State Department people told me the
points that were to be covered, they indicated to me that this was
a hope in the hope that this sort of thing would follow.
Q. I presume you will discuss it with Dean Rusk during
your talks with him later in the week, anyway?
PM: I wouldn't necessarily say that I would or that I
wouldnt. I will be discussing a whole range of matters with Dean
Rusk.
Q. You will have some background material from our
Embassy in Washington, Sir, won't you, be fore tomorrow's
Parliament?
PM: Well, we have had some background material from
Waller. You can't go much further, I don't think, than what I have
told you. That is the background material and the background thinking
to It.
Q. What about the President's health? Do you know
anything about that?
PM: No, but Waller's views were the same as mine
there was a question I was asked earlier as to the definiteness of
this announcement of not standing and Waller's views were that
he believed it was quite definite. Since then, there has been another
thing I understand.
Q. Sir, there are two alternatives in this either the
North Vietnamese have indicated something or the Americans have
made a definite change. You have indicated that this is a new step.
PM: I indicated they had gwle one step further. Yes.
Q. It's about stix weelG since I think Mr Rusk finally
rejected the last Vietnamese statement.... / 6 
-6-
PM: I don't know which one you are talking about, John.
Q. It's about six weeks. Now, what is the new factor as
you see it in the last six weeks which has influenced the president to
make this, what we see as a new step?
PM: I'm sorry, John, I don't know the statement of Rusk that
you are talking about, but It was, I think, last August that the San
Antonio steech was
Q. Yes, then late in December, North Vietnamese
Foreign Minister said something If you stop bombing, we'll talk.
PM: Did he?
Q. And it took until 14th February to investigate it and say
that it wasn't bona fide. Now, in the six weeks sinco, we have a new
factor to make a new step?
PM: I don't have any information I haven't been given any
by the External Affairs Department that the North Vietnamese have
ever made the statement You stop bombing and we will talk.
Rather I thought the statements had been Unless bombing is stopped,
we won't talk.
Q. Sir, you have indicated that you are quite happy with this.
Some of your Ministers in the past have stro: ngly opposed any such move
on the grounds....... as recently as last Thursday, the Defence
Minister, Mr Fairhall, talking about bombir' North Viet Nam at large
said that the only thing that made North Vic : am as a whole different
from the demilitarized zone or Laos and Cambodia which were safe
havens for the North Viet Nam troops, was tbh-bombing at large of
North Viet Nam Have you discussed this them? Are their
feelings still the same? Are they still opposed to this?
PM: I haven't discussed the statement with Mr Fairhall.
If you look at practically everything I have said on this matter, either
in the Higgins by-election or in radio and television appearances, " Four
Corners" and things of this kind, or indeed . gain, in the Governor-
General's speech, or in New Zealand, you i'll see a consistent thread,
I think, that we don't to destroy North Viet N'm, we don't want to
destroy the North Vietnamese Government. V'e see the value of bombing
as to try and hamper and hinder the flow of r. oops and materials from the
North to the South and this is the significa:; we attach to it. Well that
again, as this statement indicates, is now, to be sought to be done
by bombing a smaller area than it was bc: That is still designed to
try to prevent and we never claimed it di: l prev. ent but to make it
difficult, to hamper the flow of men and m--' ri. ls, while at the same time
freeing the large areas further north the danger of attack in
the hope that that will lead to a postive respornco from Hanoi. Then it
could go step by step if that happened. I think that was the reasoning
behind it.
Q. Sir, could you tell me, since you were informed yesterday,
which Ministers have you discussed this with? Have you talked to Mr
Hasluck? / 7 
-7-
PM: Well, I have been incable communication with Mr Hasluck
In New Zealand. I had a word with Gordon Freeth, the acting Minister
here, and with a number of officials, and with the Deputy Prime Minister.
Q. Have you spoke n to any other R1ime Ministers like Mr
Holyoake?
PM: No.
Q. Sir, how soon do you expect a positive response from
Hanoi? What would you call a reasonable thing?
PM: I couldn't guess. I wouldn't guess.
Q. Mr Prime Minister how big do you see this move?
PMo: f whether NortIh t hViniekt iNt aomug hist tpor ebpea raebdle toto sbtea rrte tgaalkrdinegd oars nao tr. eal test
Q. Would you go further than that?
FM: I think that is a pretty big thing, isn't it?
Q. Do you think there have been steps to peace on an equal
scale?
PM: I think perhaps that this is the greatest concession the
Americans have made. There have been concessions, but following on
from the thing held out at San Antonio, and the President's speech itself,
when you read it all in with the S2an Antonio one, this is a further concession
than was offered in the San Antonio speech.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, could you illuminate the section of
the President's statement on troops? Could you call his attitude now one
of having a holding operation?
PM: No, I don't think I would. I think he has indicated a resolve
to continue the struggle, and indeed, a resolve to build up the South
Vietnamese armed forces, and expect them with the equipment which the
United States will provide, to take an even bigger part to provide some
reinforcements from the United States itself, and to continue the struggle
I have forgotten the words he used, but the resolve is completely unweakened.
Q. This is directly related to the Tet offensive?
PM: I have seen no indication of it. I car only tell you what
I have been told and what I believe to be the reason behind it. I think
the reason behind it is All right. Vie will make this further concession.
We will go this extra mile.
Q. Do you think the New Hampshire primaries may have had
anything to do with it?
PM: VWell, would they have anything to do with it if he wasn't
go to stand for President again? 
-UQ.
Does this leave you in the position that you need to
clarify your thinking on the thing. Cbviously, yours consiLsted of a
series of impressions as you have told us today.
PM: My thinking of a series of impressions on what?
Q. On his official statement and the slight background
given to you by the State Department. Will this speed up any intention
on your part to go to the States to talk with him and his authorities?
Or will you rely on Mr Rusk here?
PM: Well, I will be talkdng to Mr Rusk here. I was proposing
to go to the States quite soon for a rush trip, but they will be engaged in
all kinds of various political activities. Now that President Johnson has
indicated that he will not be standing again, I will have to consider whether
it might not better to do it later.
-Could you indicate when you say'soon Sir, what your
original plans were?
PM: Well, they were rretty tentative.
Q. You will wait for a new President, then?
PM: Well, this Is the sort of thing I said I would have to take
Into consideration. I want to think about it.
Q. Otherwise It could be a trip which
PM: Well, there are all sorts of considerations
Q. In view of the fact that this very latest step was taken
without consultation with the Australian Government, despite assurances
we had in 1966 after the Honolulu Conference, can we take this as
official acknowledgment now that the war has passed out of our hands
without even going through the pretence of influencing the course of the
war here?
PM: Well, I suppose anybody is at liberty to take ar. ything
at any time in any way they like. Rre you asking me the way I take it
or you asking me the way you can take it?
Q. The Government.
PM: Well, let me make these points. This is not anything
which in any way requires any increased contributions from Austrdlia.
This is not something which requires Australia to make some additional
effort at all. In those kind of circumstances, I have no doubt whatever
that full consultations would take place. I don't expect them to take
place in other circumstances..... if anyone wants to interpret that....
This is a further attempt and a further step to see whether they can
bring about talks while continuing the struggle in South Viet Nam, wie ther
they can bring about talks leading to a genuine peace. Vie have
consistently Said that we would support such attempts. / 9 
C.
Q. Have we said what we think is a genuine peace?
PM: Yes, we have. I can't remember the words, but a just
and enduring peace that really gives the people of South Viet Nam the
opportunity to make freedom cf choice. That is it by and large. You
will find this firm statement in the Governor-General's Cpeech, I think
Q. On this point of consultation Mr Prime Minister, are
you then satisfied with the lack of consultation and warning that the
Australian Government was given?
PM: I thought I had answered that before in the last question,
indicating that we would support moves leading towards it ( peace). In
the Governor-General's Speech, we said we seek a just and lasting
peace based on those objectives. 1 will read you the whole passage,
because it ties in with something you said, Frhnk
" My Government believes that the South Vietnamese
people should retain the elementary right to determine their own
future in their own way and will, besides the effective military
assistance it is rendering to this end, continue to provide economic
and civil aid n South Viet Iam.
In doing this, my Government desires neither the
destruction of North Viet Nam, nor the overthrow of the Government
of North Viet Nam but merely the cessation of aggression against
the people of South Viet Nam so that those people may, by the
exercise of a franchise they have shown they know how to exercise
even under the most difficult and dangerous circumstances, choose
their own form of government. We seek a just and lasting peace
based on these objectives. We have supported and will support
every effort for negotiation off such a peace. 4
Q. Even in the better conditions of peace, as we state them,
what are the pre-conditions as you see them for. peace. talks? VWhat are
the pre-conditions before we get into talks? Are there any?
PM: Well, I imagine a pre-condition is that the Government
of North Viet Nam indicates that they are prepared to enter into peace
talks.
Q. A cease-fire?
PM: This seems to be the objective, doesn't it? I mean, this
is the objective, to enter into peace talks. This has been, all the time.
The United Ctates has been saying, " Well, we'll try this. V-e'll try
that to see vwhether it results in an indication that the North Vietnamese
will begin to talk" Not necessarily before the fighting finishes, but
begin to talk,.
Q. The diplomatic pressure is obviously on them now. There
will be some sort of an answer, apparently. * If we presume-there will
be some sort of an answer, I am looking for a minimum pre-condition
that we would regard as acceptable. Just a willingness to enter talks?
PM: Well, this is what..
Q. ' Will we be taking any diplomatic initiative to urge Britain
to follow the Fresident's request to call a meeting, to get moving? 
10
PM: To call Britain and . Russia to get on to Ho Chi Minh?
Q. Are we going to press Britain along on this?
PM: I wouldn't comment on that at this stage.
Q. What is the difference between this bombing pause and the
previous bomb.: ing pause? This has been presented as a dramatic move by
the US. It has been presented in rather dramatic circumstances with
rather dramatic surrounds. But is it essentially any different from the
previous bombing pauses?
PM: Well, I think one has to make one's own mind up about this,
but previously, there have been sort of bombing pauses this is not presented
as a bombing pause essentially but there have been bombing pauses in
the sort of hope that we would see what happened. Now, the -next step was
that the President I am sorry to go over the same ground again made
the Sja n Aintonio speech in which he said, " We'll stop bombing if you will
start talking and not take great military advantage of our stopping bombing"
and that didn't seem to elicit any response. Then a number of people around
the world said, " W~ ell, give it a go anyway. Stop the bombing and we think
they will probably talk if you do. Give them an opportunity to talk. They
said they wouldn't talk if you didn't. This is a stopping of bombing except
for the direct military support which is needed, Well, as I said before, it
will test whether this does lead to indications of their willingness to enter
into talks.
Q. This also has an element of tick-tacking involved in it. " We'll
do this and expect some gesture on your part and we will do something
else. This wasn't apparent in the earlier bombing pauses.
PM: This word " tick-aing" what do you nie an by that? I think it is
a sort of indication. All right. Here's a real gesture. Does it elicit
any response? If it elicits a response, then we can talk about the next
step downwards, at the same time as we are talking about how to achieve
a just and enduriug peace. The whole thing, I think, is now waiting to
see what sort of a response it elicits.
0. just on this point of consultations, Sir. Is the point you are making
because we have said we support any steps towards peace, there is no need
for the United States to come to us and say " We are going to do this because
we see this as a step towards peace"?
PM: W~ ell, I was endeavouring to indicate that the United StateE;
in relation to all the things we have said about supporting steps towards
peace and supporting the previous San Antonio speech of the President,
might have thought it was essential fcr long-term prior consultations had
there been any alteration the other way, had there been any alt eration in
continuing their resolve on the ground in South Viet Nam, altering their
approach there, which there is no indication of at all.
Q. It is just that in the reassessment that went on, one would have thought
they would have said to the other nations fighting " What are your views
as to the conduct of the war and how It is going?" before they made the
unilateral decision. 
11
Q. Particularly in the light of the fact that our Government, the
Australian Government has consistently claimed that one of the motives
in bombing was to save Australian lives.
PM ' Well, the bombing is still going on in the areas where there is
a military build-up put it this way, the bottlenecks, the trails along
which men and munitions have been flowing down to the scuth, and that
is why the same approach you have just said, quite properly, is the
Australian Government's approach, is why the American President said
" I couldn't in all conscience prevent that part of the bombing" because it
would tend to help our people being killed.
Q. Sir, in the last paragraph of your 1tment today you talked about
not leaving allied troops at too great a~~ sa vttntage. Isn't this an admission
that the cessation that is being allowed will do just that?
PM: 171111 do just what?
Q. Leave our troops at some disadvantage...
PM: Oh. You read out my statement which said this is not leaving our
troops at too great , isadvant age and then suggested my statement was
saying it did just that, that it did leave them at too great a military
disadvantage. It doesn't. But clearly there would be some military loss
because you are not bombing arms factories, barracks and roads and
bridges fuirther north, so there would be some diminution of t he effort
in that direction, and that, I think, indicates that this is a real gesture
on the part ofe the United States.
Q. W~ ould it seem, Sir, if this gesture does succeed, even more Australian
lives will be saved?
PM: You mean if it moves step by step long term, and you reach the
logical goal of having a real peace which gives them a chanc well you
don't have people killed when you reach a real peace.
Q. You don't see it in any way what the Americans have done about
bombing as a public admission that their bombing policy has failed?
PM: I don't think it is a public admission at all. I think it is-a genuine
attempt, as the President has said, to make this movp in the hope that it
will lead to Hanoi entering into these talks whereas previously and this
is the significant change that we've been talking about, he has said we
would like an indication of entering Into peace talks before wie make the
next move. Now that is a significant change indeed.
Q. Do you propose a debate on any stctement you might make on this
to the Houce?
PM: I don't believe I would be proposing a debate. I will probably make
a statement to Parliament, but then it is open to debate....
Q. You will make a further statement tomorrow?
PM: I think dia t would be the reasonable thing to do.
Q. The way will then be open for the Opposition to reply? 
-12-
PM: V. 7eli, there could be a debate on this. Yes.
Q. Has the Foreign Affairs debate finished?
PM: Wlell, I have been away. I haven't caught up with it. V/ e only
got back yesterday afternoon. I had to do a little work yesterday after
we got back and I haven't had time to get round to
Q. It was adjourned, Sir, on the motion of Mr Giles.
Q: VWIll you have an early " Cabinet meeting to present this to Cabinet?
PM: VTell, we will be having a Cabinet tomorrow in the normal way,
but what this would call for is not a Cabinet discussion?
Q. Sir, personally, do you feel optimistic about the outcome of
this
PM: Oh, I am not going to speculate on the future. S-or-. y, I just can't
speculate on this one
Q. Can you s ay anything now a-bout the Fill1? R emember you were
asked yesterday and you said
PM: No, I'm sorry I can't. But Mr Fairhall is coming up here. He
will probably be able to say something about it. He has indicated to me
that he will be getting reports from the United States authorities on
whatever it was that happened. Nobody seems to be quite sure yet what
it was. Thank you. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 42/ 1968
PRESIDENT JOHNSON
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I do not think it proper to comment on the decision
taken by President Johnson not to seek re-election, other
than to say that we in Australia will always remember with
gratitude the warmth and special consideration which he has
shown to us during his Presidency.
He has had to bear immense burdens and make momentous
decisions and carry the responsibility for those decisions
and I believe he has made them on the basis of what he sincerely
believed to be right, and to the ultimate benefit of freedom
inside the United States and outside that country. He is a
great man.
CANBERRA 1 April 1968 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 41/ 1968
PRESIDENT JOHNSON'S STATEMENT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The statement re-emphasises two important
aspects of the approach of the United States.
One is that the United States is firmly resolved
to continue the military struggle to the point where it becomes
recognised that talks designed to secure a just and lasting peace
must take place. The other Is that the United States Is prepared
now, as it has been prepared in the past, to enter into such talks
at once, and is prepared to make concessions In an effort to bring
about such talks. The Australian Government has repeatedly
Indicated that it would support peace negotiations provided they
held promise of leading to a just and lasting peace which effectively
safeguards the security and freedom of choice of the people of South
Viet Nam. The Australian Government regards this initiative
by the American President as a further and significant exhibition
of willingness on the part of the United States of America to engage
in taflks aimed at that end.
The halting of bombing over most of North Vt Let
Nam, without insistence on an indication from Hanoi of a willingness
to negotiate or of a reciprocal cessation of military build-up by
North Viet Nam, will test the willingness of Hanoi to enter Into
discussions aimed at a peaceful settlement of a genuine kind. We
must all hope that this response by Hanoi Is forthcoming quickly.
At the same time, the continuation of bombing
in the area to the north of the battlefields will continue to hamper the
flow of troops and war material from north to south and will not
leave allied troops at too great a military disadvantage.
CANB ERRA,
1 April 1968 



BRIFING FOR HEADS OF BITREAUX,
PARLIAMENTARY PRESS GALLERY,
CANBERRA 1 APRIL, 1968
PRIME MINISTER : You have all had copies of the statement, so there is
no point in r~ eading it over to you, so here I am. What would you
like to ask about it?
Q : Can you tell us what lay behind the President's
statement. Any official or unofficial advice as to why he made
this decision?
PM: Nothing other than would appear on the surface of it
that hie does hope that this will lead Hanoi to start entering into
peace negotiations.
Q. is there anything to indicate that Hanoi might?
PM4. Nothing that I have seen, but It Is after all, quite a
gesture on the part of the United States.
Q. At what stage were you informed, Sir, of the US plans
for de-escalation?
PM: Yesterday.
Q. After you returned from New Zealand.
PM: Yes. They were trying to get In touch with New Zealand
but they missed me.
Q. Did you see a full draft of this speech yesterday, Sir?
PM: No, the State Department just sent out all the significant
points that were to be covered but not the draft of the speech. No.
Q. Did that include his decision not to seek re-election?
PM: Nc.
Q. You learnt of this today?
PM: Yes.
Q. V/ hat is your reaction to that, Sir?
PM:. Well I have got a brief statement that I have written
out, but it is not yet typed, but I could have it typed and circulated.
Here it is " I do ' not think it proper to comment on the decision
taken by President Johnson not to seek re-election, other than
to say that we In Australia will always remember with gratitude
the warmth and special consideration which he has shown to us
during his Presidency. / 2 
-2
PM ( Contd.) " He has had to bear Immense burdens and make
momentaus decisions and carry the responsibility for
those decisions and I believe he has made them
on the basis of what he sincerely believed to be right,
and to the ultimate benefit of freedom inside the United
States and outside that country. He Is a greata."
Q. You are satisfied, Mr Prime Minister, that this
decision will hold and he won't go back on It?
PM: On reading the words that he used, it seems to me
that they come as close as It is possible to come to the words
the previous American President used who was It Sherman, I
think " IJw on't run, and if I am elected, I won't serve". It
seemed to me that
Q. It's final?
PM: Well, I can only go on the words that he used, but
they seemed to me to be very final words
Q. Except for the reason he gave. The one reason
I heard he gave was that he was so busy conduct Ing the war in
Viet Nam that he didn't have time to run an election campaign,
which did seem to leave the door open a little bit for a draught.
( Interjection) He said at a press conference afterwards It was
on our four o'clock news that the decision was Irrevocable.
PM: I can't comment other than on the words that he
used and they seem to me to be perfectly finite words.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, in your statement, you point
out where this statement of President Johnson's is consistent with
past American statements. In fact, this Is an entirely different
break In policy as far as we are concerned. ' They have virtually
unconditionally elected to cease the bombing. Did this particular
move catch you by surprise or were you expecting It fromn the
political winds?
PM: Now, let's analyse a little what you say bef ore I
answer it, if you don't mind....
Q. To put it more simply, Sir, were you advised in
advance of this major change of policy?
PM: I was told yesterday of the points that were covered
In the President's speech of today. If you will have read the text
of the President's speech, he presents this as an advance on his
San Antonio speech. In the San Antonio speech, he aid " We are
prepared to stop the bombing of North Viet Nam as soon as we
have an Indication that North Viet Nam will enter into negotiations
as a result"'. He has gone further than that, one step further than
that by now saying, " Well, we will stop the bombing of most of
North Viet Nam, even though we haven't got a previous indication
that Hanoi will enter Into peace negotiations, but we call on Ho
Chi Minh to respond to this, and we call on the Go-Chairmen to
ask Hanoi to respond to it. It is a further step. ./ 3 
-3
Q. You wouldn't call it a major change, then?
PM: Well, I can only present to you the position as it Is
offered to Hanoi In the initial statement: " We will stop bombing
altogether as soon as you give us an Indication that if we do, we
will enter Into ngtais. Then that statement shortly
afterwards is expanded by another statement saying, " Of course, if
we do this aud we expect to enter into peace negotiations, we don't
expect the North to take military advantage of It in a great build-up."
But It would be reasonable to expect them to maintain the forces they
have got there. This is a further step forward In that he is now not
ceasing bombing, but ceasing bombing on a considerable are....
Q. Less ruthless, shall we say?
PM: Well, it Is closer to the battle area and more designed
obviously to hinder flows of men and materials directly to the North
where the fighting Is taking place. B ut he Is taking that extra step.
Q. He also says, Sir, just to sort of get back to this:
YThis is the first step in a series of de-escalating the
PM: He says It may be the first step in a series of
de-escalations
Q. We don't have the full text....
PM: 9. and he hopes it will be the first step.
Q. But it Is a step towards de-escalatlono This is the
Important break I was talking about. There have been a series of
escalations military escalations and this Is the first positive and
recognisable military de-escalation as distinct from statements of
what we would do or could do. They are actually doing soiiierhing.
Did that particular act Ion take you by surprise?
PM: You are claiming that previous bombing pauses which
have taken place are not to be described as de-escalatlons because
you know that America has stopped previously, and you wouldn't
regard that as being a de-escalation?
Q. They didn't call It that at the time.
PM: No, but they did stop it. I think you should read the
actual text of the statement which Is that he hopes that this will lead
to rapid peace talks and that they in turn will lead to increased
de-escalation.
Q : On this point this is " Iffy" of course If nothing
happened quickly, would you want the bombing to start again, because
you say " We must all hope that this response is forthcoming quickly"
PM: W ell we hope -the response Is forthcoming quickly
because we hope that the peace talks will begin which Is what we
constantly wanted.
Q. If nothing happens? o. / 4 
-4
PM: Well, I wouldn't know.
Q. Will this make any difference to the talks ANZUS
and SEATO are having?
PM: I would think not. I would think it would have no
bearing on them at all.
Q. Sir, have you had any impression from America
that if this doesn't lead to de-escalation, it doesn't work out the
way the President hoped, it will resume bombing?
PM: I have only got the text of the President's speech
and the points which waere covered, and they don't extend into that
area.
Q. Sir, the request in the past to be kept informed of
any major change in policy in Viet Nam and the fact that your two
Ministers on Tuesday and Thursday were obviously placed in the
position that they went right on a linb, on the thing, are there
going to be any approaches that we be Informed of these things In
the future?
PM: Well, I think we have consitnl made it clear,
Indeed as late as the Governor-General's S peech, where it was
said in unequivocal language that we would support any moves Which
were designed to lead to the opening of peace talks, and we expect
those peace talks to lead to a real peace which, Indeed, Is clear.
By " peace", I ne an a just and enduring peace, and self-determination
for the Vietnamese a real peace Indeed, the President's
statement this time indicates that thisis what Is being desired, and
not something which he describes in his statement as a fake peace.
Well we have consistently indicated that we wouild support those
kinds of moves, and I think this is a move along that path.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, doesn't it seem that the close
consultation that we have always been told this Government has with
the American Government wasn't in evidence this time?
PM: I told you when we were informed of the points
which were to be covered in the American speech, they weren't
discussed with us before that time; but as I have pointed out, we
have made It perfectly clear that we were prepared to support
efforts to reach a genuine peace. This Is a step further than the
San Antonio speech. It is a step further. The San Antonio spoech
was speaking of ceasing bomibing altogether, which I think you
mentioned. This one mentions ceasing bom-bing In the highly
populated areas, the food-producing areas, but retains it on the
approaches to the military field, and It Is therefore a cessation
of bombing on significant areas of Viet Nam well, I have put
it in this statement.
Q. Prime Minister, are you likely to discuss this
directl. y by telephone or any other way with Mr Johnson to get
to his reasoning? You have indicated you only have the text
of his speech as we have probably had It. 
Me Yes, well...
Q. I thought you would probably want to know the reasons
behinL_.
PM: Well the reasoning behind It, I think, appears quite
clearly in the speech itself. He does hope that this will lead to a
reaction from Hanoi, and that it will lead to the opening of peace
talks. He expresses in his speech the hope that he will get a
reaction from Hanoi in response to this gesture and that then the
question could be open for discussion as to whether the areas that
were being still to be bombed for military purposes could be.
also taken away from bombing, provided certain arrangements were
made. And this is the de-escalation of which you were talking...
Q. Do you feel there is a necessity to ring him or to
get our Ambassador in Washington to give you a background report
or briefing on this?
PM: WNell I don't think it is necessary because I think the
indication is there. When the State Department people told me the
points that were to be covered, they indicated to me that this was
a hope in the hope that this sort of thing would follow.
Q. I presume you will discuss it with Dean Rusk during
your talks with him later in the week, anyway?
PM: I wouldn't necessarily say that I would or that I
wouldn't. I will be discussing a whole range of matters with Dean
Rusk.
Q. You will have some background material from our
Embassy in Washington, Sir, won't you, be fore tomorrow's
Parliament?
PM: Well, we have had some background material from
Waller. You can't go much further, I don't think, than what I have
told you. That is the background material and the background thinking
to it.
Q. What about the President's health? Do you know
anything about that?
PM: No, but Waller's views were the same as mine
there was a question I was asked earlier as to the definiteness of
this announcement of not standing and Waller's views were that
he believed It was quite definite. Since then, there has been another
thing I understand.
Q. Sir, there are two alternatives in this either the
North Vietnamese have indicated something or the Americans have
made a definite change. You have indicated that this is a new step.
PM: I indicated they had gone one step further. Yes.
Q. It's about six weeks since I think Mr Rusk finally
rejected the last Vietnamese statement. / 6 
-6-
PM: I don't jkpci' which cone you are talking about, John.
! tes abo. ur six weeks. Now, what is the newv factor as
You see it in the la oix weeks which has influenced the President to
mako thim, ._, iic we see as a new step?
PM: I'm sorry, John, I don't know the statement of Rusk that
you are talking about, but It was, I think, last August that the San
Antonio srneech was
Q. Yes, then late in December, the North Vietnamese
Foreign Minister said something -If you stop bombing, we'll talk.
PM: Did he?
Q. And it took until 14th February to investigate it and say
that It wasn't bona fide. Now, in the six weeks since, we have a new
factor to make a new step?
PM: I don't have any information I haven't been given any
by the Ext ernal Affairs Department that the North Vietnamese have
ever made the statement You stop bombing and we will talk.
Rather I thought the statements had been Unless bombing Is stopped,
we won't talk.
Q. Sir, you have indicated that you are quite happy with this.
Some of your Ministers in the past have strongly opposed any such move
on the grounds as recently as last Thursday, the Defence
Minister, Mr Fairhall, talking about bombing North Viet Nam at large
said that the only thing that made North Viet Nam as a whole different
from the demilitarized zone or Laos and Cambodia which were safe
havens for the North Viet Nam troops, was the bombing at large of
North Viet Nam Have you discussed this with them? Are their
feelings still the same? Are they still opposed to this?
PM: I haven't discussed the statement with Mr Fairhall.
If you look at practically everything I have said on this matter, either
in the Higgins by-election or in radio and television appearances, " Four
Corners" and things of this kind, or indeed again, in the Governor-
General's speech, or in New Zealand, you will see a consistent thread,
I think, that we don't to destroy North Viet Nam, we don't want to
destroy the North Vietnamese Government. We see the value of bombing
as to try and hamper and hinder the flow of troops and materials from the
North to the South and this Is the significance we attach to it. Well that
again, as this statement indicates, is now going to be sought to be done
by bombing a smaller area than it was before. That Is still designed to
try to prevent and we never claimed it did prevent but to make it
difficult, to hamper the flow of men and materials, while at the same time
freeing the large areas further north from the danger of attack in
the hope that that will lead to a postive response from Hanoi. Then it
could go step by step If that happened. I think that was the reasoning
behind it.
Q. Sir, could you tell me, since you were Informed yesterday,
which Ministers have you discu.-sed this with? Have you talked to Mr
Has luck? / 7 
-7
PM: Well, I have been in cable communication with Mr Has luck
In New Zealand. I had a word with Gordon Preeth, the acting Minister
bere, and with a number of officials, and with the Deputy Prime Minister.
Q. Have you spoken to any other Prime Ministers like Mr
Holyoake?
PM: No.
Q. Sir, how soon do you expect a positive response from
Hanoi? ' What would you call a reasonable thing?
PM: I couldn't guess. I wouldn't guess.
Q. Mr Prime Minister how big do you see this move?
PM: I think it ought to be able to be regarded a~ s a real test
of whether North Viet Nam Is prepared to start talking or not.
Q. Would you go further than that?
PM: I think that Is a pretty big thing, Isn't It?
Q. Do you think there have been steps to peace on an equal
scale?
PM: I think perhaps that this is the greatest concession the
Americans have made. There have been concessions, but following on
from the thing held out at San Antonio, and the President's speech itself,
when you read It all in with the 3San Antonio one, this is a further concession
than was offered In the San Antonio speech.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, could you illuminate the section of
the President's statement on troops? Could you call his attitude now one
of having a holding operation?
PM: No, I don't think I would. I think he has indicated a resolve
to continue the struggle, and indeed, a resolve to build up the South
Vietnamese armed forces, and expect them with the equipment which the
United 2tates will provide, to take an even bigger part to provide some
reinforcements from the United S0tates Itself, and to continue the struggle
I have forgotten the words he used, but the resolve is completely unweakened.
Q. This is directly related to the Tet offensive?
PM: I have seen no Indication of It. I car only tell you what
I have been told and what I believe to be the reason behind it. I think
the reason behind It Is All right. We will make this further concession.
We will go this extra mile.
Q. Do you think the New Hampshire primaries may have had
anything to do with it?
PM: W1-ell, would they have anything to do with it if he wasn't
go to stand for President again? 
~ 0-
Q. Does this leave you in the position that you need to
clarify your thinking on the thing. Obviously, yourp. consbsted of a
series of impressions as you have told us today.
PM: My thinking of a series of impressions on what?
Q. On his official statement and the slight background
given to you by the S" tate Department. Will this speed up any intention
on your part to go to the States to talk with him and his authorities?
Or will you rely on Mr Rusk here?
PM: Well, I will be talking to Mr Rusk here. I was proposing
to go to the States quite soon for a rush trip, but they will be engaged In
all kinds ofi various political activities. Now that President Johnson has
indicated that he will not be standing again, I will have to consider whether
It might not better to do it later.
Q: Could you indicate when you say'soon Sir, what your
original plans were?
PM: 6 Well, they were pretty tentative.
Q. You will wait for a new President, then?
PM: W~ ell, this Is the sort of thing I said I would have to take
into consideration. I want to think about it.
Q. Otherwise it could be a trip which
PM: Well, there are all sorts of considerations
Q. In view of the fact that this very latest step was taken
without consultation with the Australian Government, despite assurances
we had in 1966 after the Honolulu Conference, can we take this as
official acknowledgment now that the war has passed out of our hands
without even going through the pretence of Influencing the course of the
war here?
PM: Well, I suppose anybody is at liberty to take arythi ng
at any time in any way they like. Are you asking me the way i take it
or you asking me the way you can takce it?
Q. The Government.
PM: Well, let me make these points. This is not anything
which in any way requires any increased contributions from Austrdflia.
This Is not something which requires Australia to make some additional
effort at all. In those kind of circumstances, I have no doubt whatever
that full consultations would take place. I don't expect them to take
place In other circumstances.. . If anyone wants to interpret that....
This is a further attempt and a further step to see whether they can
bring about talks while continuing the struggle in South Viet Nam, wl-e ther
they can bring about talks leading to a genuine peace. 7! e have
consistently said that we would support such attempts. / 9 
Q. Have we said what we think is a genuine peace?
PM: Yes, we have. I can't remember the words, but a just
and enduring peace that really gives the people of South Viet Nam the
opportunity to make freedom cf choice. That Is it by and large. You
will find this firm statement in the Governor-General's Speech, I think
Q. On this point of consultation Mr Prime Minister, are
you then satisfied with the lack of consultation and warning that the
Australian Government was given?
PM: I thought I had answered that before in the last question,
Indicating that we would support moves leading towards it ( peace). In
the Governor-General's Speech, we said we seek a just and lasting
peace based on those objectives. I will read you the whole passage,
because It ties In with something you said, Frank
" My Government believes that the South Vietnamese
people should retain the elementary right to determine their own
future In their own way and will, besides the effective military
assistance It is rendering to this end, continue to provide economic
and civil aid 10 South Viet H'. am.
In doing this, my Government desires neither the
destruction of North Viet Nam, nor the overthrow of the Government
of North Viet Nam but merely the cessation of aggression against
the people of South Viet Nam so that those people may, by the
exercise of a franchise they have shown they know how to exercise
even under the most difficult and dangerous circumstances, choose
their own form of government. We seek a just and lasting peace
based on these objectives. We have supported and will support
every effort for negotiation of such a peace.
Q. Even In the better conditions of peace, as we state them,
what are the pre-conditions as you see them for. peace. talks? What are
the pre-conditions before we get Into talks? Are there any?
PM: Well, I Imagine a pre-condition Is that the Government
of North Viet Nam indicates that they are prepared to enter into peace
talks.
Q. A cease-fire?
PM: This seems to be the objective, doesn't it? I mean, this
Is the objective, to enter Into peace talks. This has been, all the time.
The United States has been saying, " W. ell, we'll try this. W. e'll try
that to see whether It results in an indication that the North Vietnamese
will begin to talk" Not necessarily before the fighting finishes, but
begin to
Q. The diplomatic pressure Is obviously on them now. There
will be some sort of an answer, apparently. If we presume there will
be some sort of an answer, I am looking for a minimum pre-condition
that we would regard as acceptable. Just a willingness to enter talks?
PM: Well, this is what.....
Q. Will we be taking any diplomatic Initiative to urge Britain
to follow the Fresident's request to call a meeting, to get moving? ./ 1G
C'. 
10
PM: To call Britain and. Russia to get on to Ho Chi Minh?
Q. Are we going to press Britain along on this?
PM: I wouldn't comment on that at this stage.
Q. V/ hat is the difference between this bombing pause and the
previous bombing pause? This has been presented as a dramatic move by
the US. It has been presented In rather dramatic circumstances with
rather dramatic surrounds. But Is it essentially any different from the
previous bombing pauses?
PM: Well, I think one has to make on's own mind up about this,
but previously, there have been sort of bombing pauses this is not presented
as a bombing pause essentially but there have been bombing pauses in
the sort of hope that we would see what happened. Now, the -next step was
that the President I am sorry to go over the same ground again made
the San Antonio speech in which he said, " We'll stop bombing if youwill
start talking and not take great military advantage of our stopping bombing"
and that didn't seem to elicit any response. Then a number of people around
h the world said, " W~ ell, give it a go anyway. Stop the bombing and we think
they will probably talk if you do. Give them an opportunity to talk. They
said they wouldn't talkc if you didn't. This is a stopping of bombing except
for the direct military support which Is needed. Well, as I said before, It
will test whether this does lead to indications of their willingness to enter
Into talks.
Q. This also has an element of tick-tacking involved in it. " We'll
do this and we expect some gesture on your part and we will do something
else. This wasn't apparent In the earlier bombing pauses.
PM: This word " tick-tacking" what do you rre an by that? I think It Is
a sort of indication. All right. Here's a real gesture. Does it elicit
any response? If it elicits a res-ponse, then we can talk about the next
step downwards, at the same time as we are talking about how to achieve
a just and enduring peace. The whole thing, I think, is now waiting to
see what sort of a response it elicits.
Q. just on this point of consultations, Sir. Is the point you are making
because we have said we support any steps towards peace, there Is no need
for the United . States to come to us and say " We are going to do this because
we see this as a step towards peace"?
PM: W~ ell, I was endeavouring to indicate that the United Statep
in relation to all the things we have said about supporting ste-ps towards
peace and supporting the previous San Antonio speech of the President,
might have thought it was essential fcr long-term prior consultations had
there been any alteration the other way, had there been any alteration in
continuing their resolve on the ground in South Viet Nam, altering their
approach there, which there is no indication of at all.
Q. It is-just that in the reassessment that went on, one would have thought
they would have said to the other nations fighting " What are your views
as to the conduct of the war and how It is going?" before they made the
unilateral decision. 
11i
Q. Particularly in the light of the fact that our Government, the
Australian Government hes; ccfte* nr1v elsme. di that one of the motives
in bombing was co save Australian lives.
PM: Well, the bombing Is still going on in the areas where there is
a military build-up put it this way, the bottlenecks, the trails along
which men and munitions have been flowing down to the south, and that
Is why the same approach you have just said, quite properly, is the
Australian Government's approach, is why the American President said
" I couldn't In all conscience prevent that part of the bombing" because It
would tend to help our people being killed.
Q. Sir, in the last paragraph of yq 1i~ ment today you talked about
not leaving allied troops at too great a fsdvantage. s' hsa diso
that the cessation that is being allowed will do just that?
PM: V1111 do just what?
Q. Leave our troops at some disadvantage...
PM: Oh. You read out my statement which said this is not leaving our
troops at too great~ isadvant age and then suggested my statement was
saying it did just that, that it did leave them at too great a military
disadvantage. It doesn't. But clearly there would be some military loss
because you are not bombing arms factories, barracks and roads and
bridges further north, so there would be some diminution of the effort
in that direction, and that, I think, Indicates that this Is a real gesture
on the part of the United States.
Q. ' Would it seem, Sir, if this gesture does succeed, even more Australian
lives will be saved?
PM: You mean if it moves step by step long term, and you reach the
logical goal of having a real peace which gives them a chance, well you
don't have people killed when you reach a real peace.
Q. You don't see it in any way what the Americans have done about
bombing as a public admission that their bombing policy has failed?
PM: I don't think it is a public admission at all. I think it Is a genuine
attempt, as the President has said, to make this move in the hope that it
will lead to Hanoi entering into these talks whereas previously and this
is the significant change that we'Ve been talking about, he has said we
would like an indication of entering Into peace talks Iefore we make the
next move. Now that is a significant change Indeed.
Q. Do you propose a debate on any straement you might make on this
to the House?
PM: I don't believe I would be proposing a debate. I will probably make
a statement to Parliament, but then it is open to debate....
Q. You will make a further statement tomorrow?
PM: I think ! ha t would be the reasonable thing to do.
Q. Thie way will then be open for the Opposition to reply? 
It 12
PM: Well, there could be a debate on this. Yes.
Q. Has the Foreign Affairs debate finished?
PM: Well, I have been away. I haven't caught up with it. W~ e only
got back yesterday afternoon. I had to do a little work yesterday after
we got back and I haven't had time to get round to
Q. It was adjourned, Sir, on the motion of Mr Giles.
Q: VWill you have an early Cabinet meeting to present this to Cabinet?
PM: W~ ell, we will be having a Cabinet tomorrow in the normal way,
but what this would call for is not a Cabinet discussion?
Q. Sir, personally, do you feel optimistic about the outcome of
this
PM: Oh, I am not going to speculate on the future. Sorry, I just can't
speculate on this one.
Q. Can you say anything now about the Fill? Remember you were
asked yesterday and you said
PM: No, I'm sorry I can't. But Mr Fairhall is coming up here. He
Will probably be able to say something about it. He has indicated to me
that he will be getting reports from the United States authorities on
whatever it was that happened. Nobody seems to be quite sure yet what
it was. Thank you. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
REPORT OF ROYAL COMMISSIONERS ON
STATEMENT BY LIEUTENANT-COMMANDER
CABBAN
[ Fromn the Parliamentary Debates," 2 April 1968]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
[ 8.50-Mr Speaker, we have heard tonight
from the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr
Whitlam) an exposition which appears to
attack and to seek to attack not only the
Naval Board, the Government and myself
but also and in particular the findings of
the Royal Commissioners who were set up
to conduct an examination and who, being,
I imagine the honourable member would
agree, completely impartial, should not be
subjected to this kind of attack and to this
kind of denigration for the findings they
made on the evidence presented to them
over such a period of time. But of course
the attack was not confined to the Commissioners
and their findings. it was also -xtended
in a way in which no politician
ought to extend an attack in this place to
a public servant to the extent of describing
the Secretary of the Department of the
Navy as ' this creature'. This is a shameful
way for the Leader of the Opposition to
carry on. If there is to be some opposition
to a course that is taken by a senior public
servant, if there is to be some claim that
that course was wrong, let it at least be
made in a reasonable way and let it not
be attached to this kind of childish denigration
of a man who cannot support himself
in this place.
14964168 It has been pointed out to me by a member
of the Opposition that I have 18
minutes left; but there are a number of
other honourable members on this side who
have a lot more than 18 minutes left and
who will be well able to defend themselves
against the improper attacks made upon
them. Let me just indicate to the House the
approach that the Government makes on
this matter. A second Royal Commission
was set -up as a result of allegations mnade
; by Lietitenant-' Commander Cabban, who
brought into question the drinking habits
and the seamanship of the late Captain
Stevens. Because the allegations in the
statement were so serious and because if
they had been proved to be accurate they
could have had such a serious effect, it was
decided that the question would be reopened
and that there would be a second
Royal Commission. Mr Speaker, the Royal
Commissioners, who I know are not exempt
from attack by the Leader of the Opposition
but whom most people would regard
as being completely impartial, have stated
that any reasonable man reading the
Cabban statement as it was made some 6
months after the completion of the first
Royal Commission could not fail to reach a
conclusion that Captain Stevens was a
chronic drunkard, that he spent his time 
in port drinking until he became ill, recovering
from that and then embarking
upon another drinking bout and that his
qualifications as to seamanship were such
that he should not have been in charge of
one of Her Majesty's vessels. This was what
the Commissioners said a reasonable man
reading the Cabban statement would conclude,
and this was what the Commissioners
specifically and completely rejected as being
a true history of the facts.
We in this House should now take this
opportunity to point out that the Commissioners
reached this conclusion after
examining all the relevant evidence and
they expressed their findings in these words:
This is not merely a cale where allegations of
frequent drunkenness are not proved. Not only
is there no evidence to support frequent drunkenness,
but the evidence positively establishes that
this was not the fact.
If it is true, as the Commissioners claim
it was true, that this officer of the Royal
Australian Navy, who perished in the performance
of his duty, has been held up
whether with malice or not, and the Commissioners
claim no malice, before the
public as somebody who was in such a
state of drunkenness, it is essential to establish
here that the Commissioners have completely
refuted in the words I have just
stated any accuracy in this accusation.
Indeed, I can go further and state, as I
believe I should state, that Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban himself in his evidence
before the Commissioners disclaimed any
attempt to have drawn from his evidence
a conclusion that the late Captain Stevens
was in fact so affected by drink. It is essential
that this should now be stated in this
House. Similarly it is necessary to state that on
the question of the competence as a seaman
of the late Captain Stevens the Commissioners
found that he was not in any way
incompetent as a seaman to command one
of Her Majesty's ships and indeed again
Lieutenant-Commander Cabban in his
statements and evidence before the Commission
disclaimed any intention in what
was in his statement to suggest that the late
Captain Stevens was in any way lacking as
a seaman. These two points should be made
clear, because : this officer has been subjected
to these accusations and these accusations
have been found by a judicial commision to be not founded in fact. I wish to make
that point in justice to an officer who is
no longer with us.
Now I move on -to some of the strange
and inaccurate statements made by the
Leader of the Opposition in his address to
us tonight. One of the first and most inaccurate
statements, if there is a degree of
inaccuracy in these matters, was that the
Commission found that from January 1963
to February 1964 Captain Stevens was unfit
to retain his command. This is what the
Leader of the Opposition told us 10 minutes
ago. Yet when we read the report of the
Commissioners, from which I presume the
Leader of the Opposition was pretending
to quote, we find that they say:
We must answer this question as from 31st
December 1963.
They did not say as from 1st January but
as from a year later. Here we have been
told that the Commissioners have found
something -to be true that the Commissioners
did not find to be true. What sort of
creditability can we give to this kind of
accusation? Mr Donald Cameron-None.
Mr GORTON-I agree. I thank the
honourable member for the answer. I prefer
to rely on the findings of the Royal Commissioners.
Then we have the Leader of
the Opposition suggesting to this House that
the Naval Board did know of the allegations
against Captain Stevens. Yet the findings
of the Royal Commissioners are perfectly
clear on this point. They are:
We find-
' We' are the Royal Commissionersthat
the Naval Board did not know of the allegations
and there was nothing that came
to their knowledge which ought to have put them
on inquiry.
This is a different presentation from the
one we have received tonight from the
Leader of the Opposition. Again, one must
make one's own judgment on the relative
credibility of the Leader of the Opposition
and of the Royal Commissioners sitting in
impartial findings on these facts. We are
told, and it is true, that officers such as
McNeill and Tiller did not complete the
forms which naval regulations required
them to complete. This is admitted. Both
these officers were out of the Navy by the
time the inquiry was set in train. But all
that this proves is that the regulations laid 
down by the Navy will, if they are followed
by the officers in it, bring to the attention
of the Board facts which the Board ought
to know. There is no military, Air Force,
Naval Board or other administrative
authority which can do more than lay down
regulations which, if they are carried out,
will fulfil the requirements sought to be
attained by that administrative authority.
I think one of the most serious derogations
of the Leader of the Opposition was
his attempt to suggest that the Attorney-
General ( Mr Bowen), the Treasurer ( Mr
McMahon) and the honourable member for
Higinbotham ( Mr Chipp), the former
Minister for the Navy, have in some way
misled this House during the last debate
upon this matter. It is claimed by the
Leader of the Opposition that there was
corroboration at the time of the statements
made by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban
and that these Ministers knew of that
corroboration and that in saying there
was not such corroboration Ministers
deliberately misled this House. I do not
believe there is any scintilla-I use that
word advisedly-of evidence to support this
statement. Let us look at what in fact was
said by Lieutenant-Commander Caibban and
what in fact was said by the relevant
Ministers in this place and what was said
by those officers whom Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban said would corroborate him.
In his statement Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban said:
During the period in the Far East the situation
became more than trying, it was quite desperate,
as he drank for very long periods in harbour
until he became violently ill and then would
spend days in bed being treated by the doctor
and his steward until he was fit to again start
drinking. Lieutenant-Commander Griffith, the officer
who Cabban said would corroborate him,
stated: I had never seen Captain Stevens under the
influence of drink.
Mr Kevin Cairns-A bit different.
Mr GORTON-Well, it is not corroboration,
although at the mess dinner to which
Cabban refers in his statement, Captain
Stevens obviously did not look well.
Lieutenant-Commander Griffith said:
The general remarks made on or after the
dinner was that the Captain had drunk too much
but when Captain Stevens left the mess he was not held up. I do not remember any signs of
slurred speech or of actions to indicate drunkenness
such as mentioned by Mr Cabban.
Can the Leader of the Opposition truly
claim that this statement by Lieutenant-
Commander Giffith is corroboration of the
statement by Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban? Later Lieutenant-Commander
Griffith-this is the officer who was supposed
to corroborate Cabban, whom the
Leader of the Opposition said did corroborate
Cabban, whom the Leader of the
Opposition said the Minister knew corroborated
Cabban, and in respect of whom the
Leader of the Opposition therefore said, the
Minister misled the House-said:
My understanding is that Captain Stevens had
the reputation of being a heavy rather than a
moderate drinker. I know of no occasion on which
I have seen him intoxicated.
Is that corroboration of a charge
of drunkenness? Lieutenant-Commander
Griffith went on to say:
Subject to the qualification on the night of the
mess dinner, the Captain was obviously unwell but
whether this was due to alcohol I cannot say. I
have never seen Captain Stevens drink at sea and
although I have been in his cabin I have never
seen him drink there other than the ordinary issue
of lime powder and water.
Is this corroboration of a statement which
the Royal Commissioners claimed would, to
any reasonable man, indicate that the late
Captain Stevens was a drunkard? What is
this claim of corroboration tied to?
Let me move to the question of seamanship.
In the statement made by Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban a number of incidents
are mentioned. There is the alleged collision
between two destroyers. This was the time
when one destroyer was berthing alongside
another destroyer which was static, not
moving. There was the incident when a towline
parted. There was the incident mentioned
when a ship drove in-I think that
was the term-between two other ships.
These incidents took place. Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban in his evidence before
the Commission said that he did not advance
these incidents as indications of bad seamanship
at all or of bad ship handling at all.
This was not in his mind and he did not
advance them in that way. But nevertheless
the Commission found that a reasonable man
reading the documents would have thought
they did tend to indicate some lack of seamanship
or some lack of ship handling, and 
they did take place. But on all the evidence,
including the evidence of Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban himself, they were not
either evidence of bad seamanship or
advanced as evidence of bad seamanship.
According to his evidence they were merely
advanced as an indication of the temperament
of Captain Stevens.
It is no corroboration of an incident to
say that that incident took place. If I were
to say here tonight-and of course I would
not-that yesterday I saw the Leader of the
Opposition walk through the door of his
office and he had had so much to drink that
he tripped on the carpet and fell flat on the
floor, and if later someone were to say, ' Yes,
he was walking through the door of his office
and he did trip on the carpet and fall over,
but I know he had nothing to drink the
whole day; he tripped because the carpet
was loose', then this second statement would
not be a corroboration of the first. It would
be quite different in content and in the
implications to be drawn from it. Yet, it is
that kind of suggestion which the Leader of
the Opposition claims to be a corroboration.
It is just not a corroboration at all. These
matters will be developed by the Ministers
who have been attacked. They cannot be
developed by the Royal Commissioners who
have been attacked, but they will be attacked
by those who can speak for themselves in
this House.
Let me refer to the questions which the
Leader of the Opposition asked in his statement
and to the answers which he has
given. The Leader of the Opposition asked:
Was Captain Stevens unfit to retain command
of ' Voyager'? The Commission said
he was. The Commission said he was as
from December 1963, not as from the date
which the Leader of the Opposition
advanced in this chamber as the time from
which he was unfit to retain command. The
Leader of the Opposition also asked: Did
the Naval Board know of his unfitness? The
Leader of the Opposition answered his own
question by saying: ' We know at least that
the Chief Medical Officer of the Navy was
aware of it.' Mr Speaker, what a misleading
statement that is. What an inaccurate
statement that is. Let us look at the Leader
of the Opposition's statement that the chief
medical officer of the Navy was aware of
Captain Stevens's unfitness to retain command
of ' Voyager'. tExtension of time granted.] I thank the House for its courtesy
in granting me an extension of time. I shall
endeavour not to extend my time too far.
The basis of this claim by the Leader of
the Opposition that the chief medical officer
of the Navy was aware of Captain Stevens's
unfitness to retain command of ' Voyager'
is that the chief medical officer of the Navy
knew that on one occasion Captain Stevens
had had a duodenal ulcer, and that he knew
that Captain Stevens was taking care of that
ulcer and was drinking milk when he went
out to see the chief medical officer in his
own home. In other words, Mr Speaker, all
that that means is that the chief medical
officer of the Navy knew that there had
been a medical history, knew that there had
been treatment for an ulcer, knew that the
condition had healed, and knew that the
officer was taking care of that condition.
This is now advanced in this House and is
twisted round to a suggestion that, because
of that, the chief medical officer knew that
some years later the late Captain Stevens
was unfit to retain command of ' Voyager'.
What credibility can we give to arguments
of this kind?
Then the Leader of the Opposition asks:
Should the Naval Board have known? He
answers his question-and he answers all
his questions, naturally, in a way that suits
himself, as I suppose we all do with our own
questions-in this way: In the light of
Stevens's known past history and his conduct
while in command of ' Voyager', it is plain
that there was a gross malfunctioning of
the system of check and control of naval
commanders. So the Leader of the Opposition
has decided that the royal commissioners
were wrong in their findings, because
what they found was that the Naval Board
did not know; that there was nothing
which came to its knowledge which should
have put it on inquiry; that the two naval
medical officers referred to in the report
had in fact not filled in the forms which
the regulations required them to fill in; and
therefore there could have been no possibility
of the Board, or responsible members
of it, knowing.
' Did responsible officers of the Navy
know of the condition which made him
unfit to retain command?', asks the Leader
of the Opposition. And he answers: There
is evidence that many more officers beyond
those criticised * n . the report were in fact 
aware of it. Aware of what, Mr Speaker?
aware of the fact that he had a duodenal
ulcer? Of course there were a number of
officers aware of that. There were alsoand
the Leader of the Opposition did not
care to tell us . this-a number of other naval
officers, members of the Royal Navy as well
as members of the Royal Australian Navy,
commanding and responsible for Captain
Stevens and other captains in charge of
ships, who were so satisfied with the way
in which he performed his duties as commanding
officer of ' Voyager' that they
reported on him as having properly and
thoroughly carried out his duties in command.
Those were not just officers of the
Royal Australian Navy, but also officers ol
the Royal Navy. Then we are asked by the
Leader of the Opposition: Did corroboration
exist for all or any of his statements at the
time of . the parliamentary debate last May?
That is a reference to Cabban's statements.
What corroboration was available, if any,
Mr Speaker? I suggest that there was none.
Oh, yes, there was corroboration by incidents
occurring when ships went close to
each other and when tow lines parted. But,
as I pointed out, this was not corroboration
of the underlying suggestion that this was
due to bad seamanship. Oh, yes, there was
corroboration that on 3 days, as the royal
commission found, out of the 180-odd days
of the cruise Captain Stevens was affected
by alcohol-slightly on one occasion, more
than slightly on another. Is that corroboration,
Mr Speaker? Would this House think
that that was corroboration of the kind of
impression that one would gain from a first
reading of the statements that the late
Captain Stevens was drunk all the time in
port, that he spent his time drinking, then
getting better so . that he could drink again?
Could that be called corroboration? For it
was not called corroboration by the royal
commissioners. Then we are asked: If there was corroboration,
was it known to the Navy Department?
It was, the Leader of the Opposition
tells us, because the Department had obtained
it. What the Department obtained.
Mr Speaker, was statements by Lieutenant-
Commander Griffith refuting completely the
claims made by Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban. What the Department obtained
which did to some extent support the claims
made by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban
was a statement made by the medical officer
14964/ 68-2 who had since left the Navy--Surgeon-
Lieutenant Tiller. The Leader of the
Opposition has attempted to make great
play with the suggestion that because
Surgeon-Lieutenant Tiller had made a statement
which tended to corroborate-as it
did-some of the statements by Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban, therefore Ministers in
this House were wrong because they suppressed
this statement, because they did not
let it come to the light of the day. What is
the truth of this, Mr Speaker? The truth
of this is that Surgeon-Lieutenant Tiller
made a statement long before there was
any question of a royal commission being
appointed and long before there was any
chance of his ever being held in the witness
box to sustain the evidence and the truth
of whatever he might put in the statement
that he then made. Subsequently, this
question of the royal commission arose, and
there also arose the question of sustaining
the truth and accuracy of the statement
previously made. And in those ciroumstances,
Surgeon-Lieutenant Tiller-not the
Government-said that he did not wish his
statement to be used; it was a statement
which was his personal property, and he
did not want it to be used. The royal commissioners,
in their judgment and in their
findings, found that this was a perfectly
reasonable attitude for Tiller to take and
that it was a perfectly reasonable attitude
for Mr Landau, the Secretary of the Department
of the Navy, who was referred to by
the Leader of the Opposition as ' this
creature', to respect the privacy of what
was in effect a private communication and
to get another statement, which was subsequently
made.
Mr Speaker, I do not wish to trespass too
long on the courtesy that the House has
done me in extending my time. I shall complete
what I have to say in these words: The
second royal commission was set up by the
Government as a result of statements made
by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban. Those
statements, on the royal commissioners' own
findings, were found to be untrue, though
not untrue as a result of malice. On the
findings of the royal commission, the implications
inherent in what the Leader of the
Opposition has said this evening about the
drinking habits of the late Captain Stevens
were fully rejected by the royal commissioners.
In their view, on the evidence 
of Cabban himself, the allegations as to bad
seamanship were fully rejected. In the view
of the royal commissioners, examining the
matter as a whole, the previous findings of
the first royal commission in relation to
Captain Robertson were rejected. And the
Government has already taken action to do
what was considered to be the just thing
in that case.
Mr Bryant-It would never have happened
without Cabban.
Mr GORTON-I would not contest that.
Mr Bryant-Then why do you not say so?
Mr GORTON-I am saying so, am I not?
How can I do more than say that I would
not contest that?
Dr J. F. Cairns-Give credit where credit
is due. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member for Yarra will cease interjecting. Dr J. F. Cairns-The Prime Minister
needs a lot of help, Mr Speaker.
Mr GORTON-If I needed a lot of help
I would not get it from the honourable
member for Yarra, Mr Speaker, and I certainly
would not seek it.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I have already
asked the honourable member for Yarra to
cease interjecting. If he continues in this
vein I will have to deal with him.
Mr GORTON-It is quite evident that
the findings regarding the causes of the
collision would not have been made if there
had not been a second Royal Commission.
I would imagine that this was evident to
a 2-year old child. There would not have
been a second Royal Commission if it had
not been for what were found to be misleading
accusations by Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban. This, again, I think would
be evident to the honourable member for
Yarra.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
VIETNAM: STATEMENT BY PRESIDENT OF
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 2 April 1968]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-Yesterday at noon, Australian
eastern time, the President of the United
States announced-decisions lately taken concerning
the war in Vietnam. Those decisions
were, firstly, to build up the South Vietnamese
armed forces to a planned target of
800,000 men-an increase of 135,000-and
to re-equip those augmented forces with
more modern equipment from the United
States; secondly, to maintain the United
States forces at the level of approximately
525,000 men, which is the level of the
United States forces in South Vietnam now,
and to dispatch some ancillary troops to
service troops which ' had recently been flown
to South Vietnam; thirdly, to renew a resolve
to continue the military struggle in South
Vietnam until such time as a just and lasting
peace could be worked out in that country;
and, fourthly, to cease or halt aerial and
naval bombardment over a major part of
North Vietnam in the hope that such cessation
might lead to the beginning of talks
designed to secure such a just peace. I made
a public statement on that matter, but I feel
that I should repeat it ' here in the House
before expanding upon it. The statement that
I made is as follows:
t4886/ 68 The statement-
I am referring, of course, to the statement
made by President Johnson:
re-emphasises two important aspects of the
approach of the United States.
One is that the United States is firmly resolved
to continue the military struggle to the point where
it becomes recognised that talks designed to secure
a just and lasting peace must take place.
The other is that the United States is prepared
now, as it has been prepared in the past, to enter
into such talks at once, and is prepared to make
concessions in an effort to bring about such talks.
The ' Australian Government has repeatedly indicated
that it would support peace negotiations
provided they held promise of leading to a
just and lasting peace which effectively safeguards
the security and freedom of choice of the people
of South Vietnam.
The Australian Government regards this initiative
by the American President as a further and
significant exhibition of willingness on the part of
the United States of America to engage in talks
aimed at that end. The halting of bombing over
most of North Vietnam, without insistence on an
indication from Hanoi of a willingness to negotiate
or of a reciprocal cessation of military build-up
by North Vietnam. will test the willingness of
Hanoi to enter into discussions aimed at a peaceful
settlement of a genuine kind. We must all bope
that this response by Hanoi is forthcoming quickly.
At the same time, the continuation of bombing
in the area to the north of the battlefields will 
continue to hamper the flow of troops and war
material from north to south and will not leave
allied troops at too great a military disadvantage.
I now propose to expand somewhat Upon
that statement of the Government's attitude.
The decision by the President to halt
the bombing of the larger part of North
Vietnam-a part where 90% of the population
lives and works--naturally has
attracted world attention. I say ' naturally'
because of the recent suggestions made in
many quarters, and supported, I understand,
by U Thant, that if the United States halted
its bombing of controlled and selected targets
in that area, the North Vietnamese
would be prepared to enter into discussions
aimed at securing a just, lasting and genuine
peace for the South Vietnamese. I say
, naturally' also because against that background
this gesture by the United States,
giving up as it does a military advantage,
is the most significant and generous gesture
yet made in the hope of starting such
negotiations. It is, Mr Speaker, an extension of the
offer made by the President of the United
States at San Antonio last September when
he publicly offered to halt* the bombing
of North Vietnam as soon as the North
Vietnamese had indicated that such a halt
would lead promptly to productive discussions.
That offer was rejected by Hanoi.
Now, the President has gone the second
mile. Instead of saying: ' Give us an indication
that you will begin peace talks and
we will then halt bombing', the President
is saying: ' We will now halt the bombing
and ask you in return to respond by beginning
negotiations'. This will provide, I
think, an acid test of whether Hanoi has
any genuine wish to enter into peaceful
negotiations or not. We -all hope they will
and that Britain and the Soviet Union, to
whom my Government has sent messages
supporting President Johnson's appeal, will
use their best efforts to see that they do.
At the same time it is important to realise
that not all bombing has been halted. In
those areas contiguous to the battlefields in
North and South Vietnam, those areas
where North Vietnamese troops and munitions
of war gather and flow towards the
south, the continuation of bombardment to
hamper, -hinder and reduce this flow will
continue. Reinforcement of men and supplies
will not be stopped by this. But if even
a ouarter of the troops destined for the South are disabled, if even a quarter
of the mortar bombs, missiles and
artillery shells are destroyed before they
can wreak their destruction in the South, if
the time taken to transport supplies is
doubled, then great assistance will have
been given to Allied troops in the South and
casualties among Allied troops which otherwise
would have been incurred will not be
incurred. That is why the President said:
I cannot in conscience stop all bombing
so long as to do so would immediately and
directly endanger the lives of our men and ouallies.
I imagine there would be few Australians
who would not agree with him. We for our
part have consistently made it clear that we
believe that there is a military advantage in
the bombing of controlled and selected targets
of military significance in North Vietnam.
We have as consistently made it clear
that we supported the concept of -halting
such bombing when the North Vietnamese
were prepared to enter into peace talks, subject
to the military build-up in -the South
by the North Vietnamese not continuing
because of the bombing halt. These latest
proposals which continue to offer protection
and support to Allied troops in the
northern battlefields but which deliberately
forgo the military advantage of more widespread
bombing in the hope of securing the
beginning of peace talks, also have our
support and we hope they will be successful,
for we in Australia seek, as was stated in
the Governor-General's Speech at the beginnipg
of this Parliament:
neither the destruction of North Vietnam,
nor the overthrow of the Government of North
Vietnam but merely the cessation of aggression
against the people of South Vietnam so that those
people may, by the exercise of a franchise they
have shown they know how to exercise even under
the most difficult and dangerous circumstances,
choose their own form of Government. We seek
a just and lasting peace based on these objectives.
We have supported and will support every effort
for negotiation of such a peace.
This latest initiative is an effort to begin
such negotiations for such a peace. We
hope, and I think all Australians hope, that
this objective will be attained. It is now
for Hanoi to respond and to show whether
this peace initiative will or will not be
rebuffed, whether this significant concession
will or will not be ignored, whether the war
will continue at its present tempo or
whether, if progress is made in peace talks.
it may abate. But we should not lose sight 
in discussing this phase of the President's
statement of that reiteration in it of a firm
resolve, should peace initiatives of this kind
be rebuffed, to continue the struggle until it
is clear to those who are aggressors that
there will have to be talks which will lead
to a true peace and not to something which
the President described as a fake peace.
We for our part are ready to stand with
our allies, as we have in the war's prosecution.
We are ready to support our allies
as we have in actions designed to seek talks to secure a true peace. It is our hope that
this latest initiative may be accepted and
that those people in South Vietnam may,
through it, gain those rights of self determination
for the preservation of which this
war began and for the restoration and
preservation of which the President's statement
indicates that this war will, if necessary,
be continued, but which, as a result
of the initiative he has . taken, offers a hope
of peace talks attaining this objective without
further loss of life.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH 13Y
The Rt lHon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
REPORT OF ROYAL COMMISSIONERS ON
STATEMENT BY LIEUTENANT-COMMANDER
CABBAN
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 2 April 1968]
Mr GORTON ( H-iggins-Prime Minister)
Speaker, we have heard tonight
from the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr
Whitlam) an exposition which appears to
attack and to seek to attack not only the
Naval Board, the Government and myself
but also and in particular the findings of
0\ Royal Commissioners who were set up
Sconduct an examination and who, being,
I imagine the honourable member would
agree, completely impartial, should not be
subjected to this kind of attack and to this
kind of denigration for the findings they
eon the evidence presented to them
-, ersuch a period of time. But of course
the attack was not confined to the Commissioners
and their findings. It was also -xtended
in a way in which no politician
ought to extend an attack in this place to
a public servant to the extent of describing
the Secretary of the Department of the
Navy as ' this creature'. This is a shameful
way for the Leader of the Opposition to
carry on. If there is to be some opposition
to a course that is taken by a senior public
servant, if there is to be some claim that
that course was wrong, let it at least be
made in a reasonable way and let it not
be attached to this kind of childish denigration
of a man who cannot support himself
in this place.
14964168 It has been pointed out to me by a member
of the Opposition that I have 18
minutes left; but there are a number of
other honourable members on this side who
have a lot more than 18 minutes left and
who will be well able to defend themselves
against the improper attacks made upon
them. Let me just indicate to the House the
approach that the Government makes on
this matter. A second Royal Commission
was, set up as a result of allegations made
by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban, who
brought into question the drinking habits
and the seamanship of the late Captain
Stevens. Because the allegations in the
statement were so serious and because if
they had been proved to be accurate they
could have had such a serious effect, it was
decided that the question would be reopened
and that there would be a second
Royal Commission. Mr Speaker, the Royal
Commissioners, who I know are not exempt
from attack by the Leader of the Opposition
but whom most people would regard
as being completely impartial, have stated
that any reasonable man reading the
Cabban statement as it was made some 6
months after the completion of the first
Royal Commission could not fail to reach a
conclusion that Captain Stevens was a
chronic drunkard, that he spent his time 
in port drinking until -he became ill, recovering
from ' that and then embarking
upon another drinking bout and that his
qualifications as to seamanship were such
that he should not have been in charge of
one of Her Majesty's vessels. This was what
the Commissioners said a reasonable man
reading the Cabban statement would conclude,
and this was what the Commissioners
specifically and completely rejected as being
a true history of the facts.
We in this House should now take this
opportunity to point out that the Commissioners
reached this conclusion af ter
examining all the relevant evidence and
they expressed their findings in these words:
This is not merely a ca'se where allegations of
frequent drunkenness are not proved. Not only
is there no evidence to support frequent drunkenness,
but the evidence positively establishes that
this was not the fact.
If it is true, as the Commissioners claim
it was true, that this officer of the Royal
Australian Navy, who perished in the performance
of his duty, has been held uip
whether wvith malice or not, and the Commissioners
claim no malice, before the
public as somebody who was in such a
state of drunkenness, it is essential to establish
here that the Commissioners have completely
refuted in the words I have just
stated any accuracy in this accusation.
Indeed, I can go further and state, as I
believe I should state, that Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban himself in his evidence
before the Commissioners disclaimed any
attempt to have drawn from his evidence
a conclusion that the late Captain Stevens
was in fact so affected by drink. It is essential
that this should now be stated in this
House. Similarly it is necessary to state that on
the question of the competence as a seaman
of the late Captain Stevens the Conmissioners
found that he was not in any way
incompetent as a seaman to command one
of Her Majesty's ships and indeed again
Lieutenant-Commander Cabban in his
statements and evidence before the Commission
disclaimed any intention in what
was in his statement to suggest that the late
Captain Stevens was in any way lacking as
a seaman. These two points should be made
clear, because : this officer has been subjected
to these accusations and these accusations
have been found by a judicial commision to be not founded in fact. I wish to make
that point in justice to an officer who is
no longer with us.
Now I move on to some of the strange
and inaccurate statements made by the
Leader of the Opposition in his address to
us tonight. One of the first and most inaccurate
statements, if there is a degree of
inaccuracy in these matters, was that the
Commission found that from January 1963
to February 1964 Captain Stevens was unfit
to retain his command. This is what the
Leader of the Opposition told us 10 minutes
ago. Yet when we read the report of the
Commissioners, from which I presume r
Leader of the Opposition was pretendi..
to quote, we find that they say: -t
We must answer this question as from * 1 t
December 1963.
They did not say as from 1st January b,~
as from a year later. Here we have b,)
told that the Commissioners have founa
something -to be true that the Commissioners
did not find to be true. What sort of
creditability can we give to this kind of
accusation? Mr Donald Cameron-None.
Mr GORTON-I agree. I thank the
honourable member for the answer. I1 prefer
to rely on : the findings of the Royal Commissioners.
Then we have the Leader of
the Opposition suggesting to this House that
the Naval Board did know of the alleggC
tions against Captain Stevens. Yet the finq_
ings of the Royal Commissioners are perfectly
clear on this point. They are:
We find-
' We' are the Royal Commissionersthat
the Naval Board did not know of the alx
Lions and there was nothing that casf..
to their knowledge which ought to have put them
on inquiry.
This is a different presentation from the
one we have received tonight from the
Leader of the Opposition. Again, one must
make one's own judgment on the relative
credibility of the Leader of the Opposition
and of the Royal Commissioners sitting in
impartial findings on these facts. We are
told, and it is true, that officers such as
McNeill and Tiller did not complete-the
forms which naval regulations required
them to complete. This is admitted. Both
these officers were out of the Navy by the
time the inquiry was set in train. But all
that this proves is that the regulations laid 
down by the Navy will, if they are followed
by the officers in it, bring to the attention
of the Board facts which the Board ought
to know. There is no military, Air Force,
Naval Board or other administrative
authority which can do more than lay down
regulations which, if they are carried out,
will fulfil the requirements sought to be
attained by that administrative authority.
I think one of the most serious derogations
of the Leader of the Opposition was
his attempt to suggest that the Attorney-
General ( Mr Bowen), the Treasurer ( Mr
McMahon) and the honourable member for
&gt; inbotham ( Mr Chipp), the former
, i mnister for the Navy, have in some way
r"'" ed this House during the last debate
u1Pon this matter. It is claimed by the
Leader of the Opposition that there was
2curoboration at the time of the statements
i de by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban
and that these Ministers knew of that
corroboration and that in saying there
was not such corroboration Ministers
deliberately misled this House. I do not
-believe there is any scintilla-I use that
word advisedly-of evidence to support this
statement. Let us look at what in fact was
said , by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban and
what in fact was said by the relevant
Ministers in this place and what was said
by those officers whom Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban said would corroborate him.
his statement Lieutenant-Commander
', abban said:
During the period in the Far East the situation
became more than trying, it was quite desperate,
as he drank for very long periods in harbour
until he became violently ill and then would
" d days in bed being treated by the doctor
S., i his steward until he was ft to again start
drinking. Lieutenant-Commander Griffith, the officer
who Cabban said would corroborate him,
stated: I had never seen Captain Stevens under the
influence of drink.
Mr Kevin Cairns-A bit different.
Mr GORTON-Well, it is not corroboration,
although at the mess dinner to which
Cabban refers in his statement, Captain
Stevens obviously did not look well.
Lieutenant-Commander Griffith said:
The general remarks made on or after the
dinner was that the Captain had drunk too much
but when Captain Stevens left the mess he was not held up. I do not remember any signs of
slurred speech or of actions to indicate drunkenness
such as mentioned by Mr Cabban.
Can the Leader of the Opposition truly
claim that this statement by Lieutenant-
Commander Griffith is corroboration of the
statement by Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban? Later Lieutenant-Commander
Griffith-this is the officer who was supposed
to corroborate Cabban, whom the
Leader of the Opposition said did corroborate
Cabban, whom the Leader of the
Opposition said the Minister knew corroborated
Cabban, and in respect of whom the
Leader of the Opposition therefore said, the
Minister misled the House-said:
My understanding is that Captain Stevens had
the reputation of being a heavy rather than a
moderate drinker. I know of no occasion on which
I have seen him intoxicated.
Is that corroboration of a charge
of drunkenness? Lieutenant-Commander
Griffith went on to say:
Subject to the qualification on the night of the
mess dinner, the Captain was obviously unwell but
whether this was due to alcohol I cannot say. I
have never seen Captain Stevens drink at sea and
although I have been in his cabin I have never
seen him drink there other than the ordinary issue
of lime powder and water.
Is this corroboration of a statement which
the Royal Commissioners claimed would, to
any reasonable man, indicate that the late
Captain Stevens was a drunkard? What is
this claim of corroboration tied to?
Let me move to the question of seamanship.,
In the statement made by Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban a number of incidents
are mentioned. There is the alleged collision
between two destroyers. This was the time
when one destroyer was berthing alongside
another destroyer which was static, not
moving. There was the incident when a towline
parted. There was the incident mentioned
when a ship drove in-I think that
was the term-between two other ships.
These incidents took place. Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban in his evidence before
the Commission said that he did not advance
these incidents as indications of bad seamanship
at all or of bad ship handling at all.
This was not in his mind and he did not
advance them in that way. But nevertheless
the Commission found that a reasonable man
reading the documents would have thought
they did tend to indicate some lack of seamanship
or some lack of ship handling, and 
they did take place. But on all the evidence,
including the evidence of Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban himself, they were not
either evidence of bad seamanship or
advanced as evidence of bad seamanship.
According to his evidence they were merely
advanced as an indication of the temperament
of Captain Stevens.
It is no corroboration of an incident to
say that that incident took place. If I were
to say here tonight-and of course I would
not-that yesterday I saw the Leader of the
Opposition walk through the door of his
office and he had had so much to drink that
he tripped on the carpet and fell flat on the
floor, and if later someone were to say, ' Yes,
he was walking through the door of his office
and he did trip on the carpet and fall over,
but I know he had nothing to drink the
whole day; he tripped because the carpet
was loose', then this second statement would
not be a corroboration of the first. It would
be quite different in content and in the
implications to be drawn from it. Yet, it is
that kind of suggestion which the Leader of
the Opposition claims to be a corroboration.
It is just not a corroboration at all. These
matters will be developed by the Ministers
who have been attacked. They cannot be
developed by the Royal Commissioners who
have been attacked, but they will be attacked
by those who can speak for themselves in
this House.
Let me refer to the questions which the
Leader of the Opposition asked in his statement
and to the answers which he has
given. The Leader of the Opposition asked:
Was Captain Stevens unfit to retain command
of ' Voyager'? The Commission said
he was. The Commission said he was as
from December 1963, not as from the date
which the Leader of the Opposition
advanced in this chamber as the time from
which he was unfit to retain command. The
Leader of the Opposition also asked: Did
the Naval Board know of his unfitness? The
Leader of the Opposition answered his own
question by saying: ' We know at least that
the Chief Medical Officer of the Navy was
aware of it.' Mr Speaker, what a misleading
statement that is. What an inaccurate
statement that is. Let us look at the Leader
of the Opposition's statem-ent that the chief
medical officer of the Navy was aware of
Captain Stevens's unfitness to retain command
of ' Voyager'. tExtension of time granted.] I thank the House for its courtesy
in granting me an extension of time. I shall
endeavour not : toe xtend my time too far.
The basis of this claim by the Leader of
the Opposition that the chief medical officer
of the Navy was aware of Captain Stevens's
unfitness to retain command of ' Voyager'
is that the chief medical officer of the Navy
knew that on one occasion Captain Stevens
had had a duodenal ulcer, and that he knew
that Captain Stevens was taking care of that
ulcer and was drinking milk when he went
out to see the chief medical officer in his
own home. In other words, Mr Speaker, all
that that means is that the chief med
officer of the Navy knew that there I.
been a medical history, knew that there
been treatment for an ulcer, knew that
condition had healed, and knew : that the
officer was taking care of that condition.
This is now advanced in this House and''
twisted round to a suggestion that, beca
of that, the chief medical officer knew that
some years later the late Captain Stevens
was unfit to retain command of ' Voyager'.
What credibility can we give to arguments
of this kind?
Then the Leader of the Opposition asks:
Should the Naval Board have known? He
answers his question-and he answers all
his questions, naturally, in a way that suits
himself, as I suppose we all do with our own
questions-in this way: In the light of
Stevens's known past history and his cond,"
while in command of ' Voyager', it is pla
that there was a -gross malfunctioning of
thl system of check and control of naval
commanders. So the Leader of the Opposition
has decided that the royal comrr; d-.
sioners were wrong in their findings, beck
what they found was that the Naval Boa-r%
did not know; that there was nothing
which came to its knowledge which should
have put it on inquiry; that the two naval
medical officers referred to in the report
had in fact not filled in the forms which
the regulations required them to fill in; and
therefore there could have been no possibility
of the Board, or responsible members
of it, knowing.
' Did responsible officers of the Navy
know of the condition which made him
unfit to retain command?', asks the Leader
of the Opposition. And he answers: There
is evidence that many more officers beyond
those criticised in the report were in fact 
aware of it. Aware of what, Mr Speaker?
aware of the fact that he had a duodenal
ulcer? Of course there were a number of
officers aware of that. There were alsoand
the Leader of the Opposition did not
care to tell us this-a number of other naval
officers, members of the Royal Navy as well
as members of the Royal Australian Navy,
commanding and responsible for Captain
Stevens and other captains in charge of
ships, who were so satisfied with the way
in which he performed his duties as commanding
officer of ' Voyager' that they
reported on him as having properly and
' Joughly carried out his duties in com-
_ jd. Those were not just officers of the
-' al Australian Navy, but also officers ol
tl. _ toyal Navy. Then we are asked by the
Leader of the Opposition: Did corroboration
exist for all or any of his statements at the
e of -the parliamentary debate last May?
_. It is a reference to Cabban's statements.
What corroboration was available, if any,
Mr Speaker? I suggest that there was none.
Oh, yes, there was corroboration by incidents
occurring when ships went close to
each other and when tow lines parted. But,
as I pointed out, this was not corroboration
of the underlying suggestion that this was
due to bad seamanship. Oh, yes, there was
corroboration that on 3 days, as the royal
commission found, out of the 180-odd days
of the cruise Captain Stevens was affected
alcohol-slightly on one occasion, more
) n slightly on another. Is that corroboration,
Mr Speaker? Would this House think
that that was corroboration of the kind of
impression that one would gain from a first
reading of the statements that the late
Itain Stevens was drunk all the time in
that he spent his time drinking, then
getting better so that he could drink again?
Could that be called corroboration? For it
was not called corroboration by the royal
commissioners. Then we are asked: If there was corroboration,
was it known to the Navy Department?
It was, the Leader of the Opposition
tells us, because the Department had obtained
it. What the Department obtained,
Mr Speaker, was statements by Lieutenant-
Commander Griffith refuting completely the
claims made by Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban. What the Department obtained
which did to some extent support the claims
made by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban
was a statement made by the medical officer
14964/ 68-2 who had since left the Navy-Surgeon-
Lieutenant Tiller. The Leader of the
Opposition has attempted to make great
play with the suggestion that because
Surgeon-Lieutenant Tiller had made a statement
which tended to corroborate-as it
did-some of the statements by Lieutenant-
Commander Cabban, therefore Ministers in
this House were wrong -because they suppressed
this statement, because they did not
let it come to the light of the day. What is
the truth of this, Mr Speaker? The truth
of this is that Surgeon-Lieutenant Tiller
made a statement long before there was
any question of a royal commission being
appointed and long before there was any
chance of his ever being held in the witness
box to sustain the evidence and the truth
of whatever he might put in the statement
that he then made. Subsequently, this
question of the royal commission arose, and
there also arose the question of sustaining
the truth and accuracy of the statement
previously made. And in those ciroumstances,
Surgeon-Lieutenant Tiller-not the
Government-said that he did not wish his
statement to be used; it was a statement
which was his personal property, and he
did not want it to be used. The royal commissioners,
in their judgment and in their
findings, found that this was a perfectly
reasonable attitude for Tiller to take and
that it was a perfectly reasonable attitude
for Mr Landau, the Secretary of the Department
of the Navy, who was referred to by
the Leader of the Opposition as ' this
creature', to respect the privacy of what
was in effect a private communication and
to get another statement, which was subsequently
made.
Mr Speaker, I do not wish to trespass too
long on the courtesy that the House has
done me in extending my time. I shall complete
what I have to say in these words: The
second royal commission was set up by the
Government as a result of statements made
by Lieutenant-Commander Cabban. Those
statements, on the royal commissioners' own
findings, were found to be untrue, though
not untrue as a result of malice. On the
findings of the royal commission, the implications
inherent in what the Leader of the
Opposition has said this evening about the
drinking habits of the late Captain Stevens
were fully rejected by the royal commissioners.
In their view, on the evidence 
of Cabban himself, the allegations as to bad
seamanship were fully rejected. In the view
of the royal commissioners, examining the
matter as a whole, the previous findings of
the first royal commission in relation to
Captain Robertson were rejected. And the
Government has already taken action to do
what was considered to be the just thing
in that case.
Mr Bryant-It would never have happened
without Cabban.
Mr GORTON-I would not contest that.
Mr Bryant-Then why do you not say so?
Mr GORTON-I am saying so, am I not?
How can I do more than say that I would
not contest that?
Dr J. F. Cairns-Give credit where credit
is due. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member for Yarra will cease interjecting. Dr J. F. Cairns-The Prime Minister
needs a lot of help, Mr Speaker.
Mr GORTON-If I needed a lot of help
I would not get it from the honourable
member for Yarra, Mr Speaker, and I certainly
would not seek it.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I have already
asked the honourable member for Yarra to
cease interjecting. If he continues in this
vein I will have to deal with him.
Mr GORTON-It is quite evident that
the findings regarding the causes of the
collision would not have been made if there
had not been a second Royal Commiss'
I would imagine that this was evident
a 2-year old child. There would not' -) e
been a second Royal Commission if it _, d
not been for what were found to be misleading
accusations by Lieutenant-Commander
Cabban. This, again, I think wc
be evident to the honourable member I,,
Yarra.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 43/' 1968
CONTACT BETWEEN4 U. S4 AND NORTH
VIET NAM
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
As a result of the President's peace initiative, the
Government of North Viet Nam has said that it is prepared to appoint
a representative to determine the unconditional cessation of United
States' bombing and all other acts of war against North Viet Nam.
The President of the United States has said that he will
establish contact with this representative.
Any contacts between the belligerents must contain the
seeds of hope that meaningful talks leading to a just and enduring
peace are possible and the Australian Government shares the hope
of the world that this may eventuate.
The United States Secretary of State, Mr Dean Rusk, who
is in New Zealand, is in touch with Washington by ' phone, and is
keeping the Australian Foreign Minister informed of developments.
Mr Rusk will be coming on to Australia at the conclusion
of his visit to New Zealand.
CANBERRA, 4 April 1968 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 44/ 1968
PORTRAITS FOR KING'S HALL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Prime Minister, as Chairman of the Historic Memorials
Committee, announced today that, on the advice of the Commonwealth
Art Advisory Board, the Committee had accepted two portraits which
will hang in King's Hall, Parliament House, Canberra. The portraits
are of the Governor-General, by Mr WN. A. Dargie, and of the Speaker
of the House of Representatives, by Mr WN. E. Pidgeon.
CANBERRA, 4 April 1968
BACKGROUND NO4TE:
The Historic Memorials Committee comprises
0 MSirr JM. Gli. s tGero rMtocnM, uPllriinm, e PMreisnidisetnetr o( fC thhaei rSmeanna) te
Mr WN. J. Aston, Speaker of the House of Representatives
Mr A. S. Hulme, Vice-President of the Executive Council
Mr E. G. Whit lam, Leader of the Oppos itioni
Senator Lionel Murphy, Leader of the Opposition in the Senate
The Art Advisory Board comprises:
Sir Daryl Lindsay ( Chairman)
Mr Robert Campbell
Mr WN. A. Dargie
Mr Douglas Pratt
Mr Russell Drysdale 



AUSTRA4IA'T BROADCASTING COMMISSION
FOUR CORNERS
The Prime Minister interviewed by John Penlington
EMBARGOED UNhTIL 9.30 P. M. SATURDAY 6TH APRIL_ 1968
Recorded 5/ L1/ 68
Penlington Prime Minister, you told your Press Conference
last Monday that this de-escalation was the greatest concession
' that the Americans had made. Now, did they make this great
concession without asking Australia whether we agreed they should
or not?
Prime Minister: Well, they informed us on Sunday morning that
the President was proposing to make a statement and in that
statement he would include the decision on removing the threat of
bombing, removing bombing, from all the northern part of North
Vietnam where 90 per cent of their population lives. This was
conveyed to Mr. Hasluck, in fact, because I was in New Zealand,
or just returning, but as soon as I got back it was also shown
to me. I suppose it would have been possible for us to raise
objections b'~ t we wouldn't have of' course done it.
Penlingto: Would it be fair to say though as it happened
we were informed and not consulted about this drastic change in
American policy?
Prime Mini~ tlD: I think that would be a reasonably fair way of
putting it. We were informed, we were informed in advance. We
could have raised objections. We were asked for our reactions
to the proposals but there was no week-long discussion beforehand.
Penlingto Well, had we thought that this was an unwise
concession to make at the time, do you think our decision would
have had any effect on the final result? 
-2
Prime Minister: Well, that's such a speculative question that
I couldn't answer it but we would have had time to make our objections
known had we had any objections.
Penlington: Can we assume then that as America has acted
unilaterally that the actual conduct of the war is completely out
of our own hands?
Prime Minister: The military conduct of the war in the sense of
military operations and moving troops around and that kind of thing
has, of course, not really been in our own hands except for the
control of our own troops up there which has been and will remain
in our own hands. I am not quite sure just exactly what
perhaps you could rephrase the question a little...
Penlington: Can we make any suggestion about the conduct of
the war and have a reasonable feeling that some action will be
taken as a result of them?
Prime Minister: I think we could make suggestions to the Americans
as to the conduct of the war and I am sure they would be taken into
consideration but that I think is all one can expect. One can't
expect, yes we will make suggestions and they'll automatically be
accepted. ienlington: Well, Prime Minister, with peace now hopefully
on the horizon, would it be possible for America to accept peace
terms which would not be peace terms we would like to have? Could
this happen?
Prime Minister: Could America accept peace terms which we would
think were peace terms which didn't give a true, just, lasting peace
to the people of South Vietnam? Well,. here again, you're asking
such a completely speculative question that I don't think I could
give you a meaningful answer to that. 
-3
Penlington: Will Australia be seeking a seat at any conference
which decides on peace terms?
Prime 11inister: Well, our thinking at the moment, this is the
thinking of Mr. H-asluck and of myself, is that we should be in the
days or weeks or however long it is ahead that these matters are
unaer discussion, that rather than sitting round with all the
nations which are engaged in the Vietnam conflict with Thailand
and the Philippines and South Vietnam and Korea and New Zealand
all constantly sitting round a table, that rather our interests
would be served and it would be simpler to have bi-lateral information,
exchange of information, with United States principally but
not leaving out the other matters but rather just bi-lateral talks.
Penliigton: Would you agree though that this would appear as
though we were letting peace be decided without our own opinions
being made thoroughly known?
Prime Minister: Well, I don't think there has been any suggestion
f-er peace conferences, has there? I think the only suggestion has
been that the North Vietnamese will appoint a representative to talk
0 with a representative of the United States. Now this is the only
proposal that I have heard of.
Penlington: Sir, where would we stand now, where would
Australia stand at the moment on the question of allowing the
N. L. F. some participation in the future government of South Vietnam?
Prime Minister: I wouldn't think of commenting on any sort of
possible peace terms or any possible proposals unless they were sort
of concrete and therefore could be commented on.
Penl ington: Prime Minister, you said in Hobart less than two
weeks ago and I'm using your words: " If there were great changes in
the United States' involvement in Vietnam I think the Australian 
people would be forced to accept those changes." Nowi, does this
mean that Australia simply has to go along with whatever happens
to be American foreign policy at the time?
Prime Minister: No, it doesn't mean anything of the kind. The
basis of that question was, it may not have been spelt out as
completely as I am spelling it out now but the whole basis and
implication was unmistakable, was that if there were a change in
the leadership and the administration of the United States and
if as a result of that change in leadership and administration
the United States in effect withdrew from South Vietnam, what
would Australia's position be? And the answer, I think, is the
answer I gave and quite self evident: " We can't stay there alone".
Penlington: But when you use the words " the Australian
people would be forced to accept those changes in Amrias
policy", are you areally saying that we can't be independent?
Prime Minister: I am really saying that if a situation arose
where other troops were withdrawn from South Vietnam that we are
not the sort of country that can leave our troops there going on
fighting without the United States or without the United
States, and I think that's pretty self evident.
Penlington: Well, if the United States, without a satisfactory
peaceful solution in South Vietnam, began to reduce its
troop commitment to Vietnam, would we be likely to do the same?
Prime Minister: Well, I'd again want to see whatever propositions
were concrcte Dropositions before I could comment on that.
PEenlington: Do you think the fact that you made various
statements earlier this year that our present commitment to
Vietnam is virtually at its limit? Do you think that could have
had any effect on whether or not President Johnson consulted you
about his decision not to stand again? 
Prime Minister: I am quite certain it couldn't have had any
effect at all. The Americans have 525,000 men in Vietnam, the
South Vietnamese army is around 800,000; there are lots of
others. Another 1,000 or 1500 or whatever it might be from
Australia would have no effect whatever, well, I won't say have no
effect whatever, a minimal effect on the overall military
effectiveness there.
Penlington: Prime Minister, can we look now at the long
term significance of President Johnson's decision not to seek
another term in office. Do you accept his statement that this
statement is irrevocable?
Prime Minister: Well, yes, I do. It's been stated firmly,
it's been stated definitely. There doesn't seem to me to be any
after-thought about it. I think one must accept it. I suppose
it is always possible at any time for anyone to change their mind
but it doesn't seem to me to be likely.
Penlington: If the next President of the United States has
an attitude towards American involvement in Asia which is very
different to President Johnson's, how ready are we to adjust to
that drastic change?
Prime Minister: Well, how ready are we to adjust to a change?
Are you asking again could we take on a burden of defence in Asia
if there was no United States?
Penlington: No, what I am really asking is, is the Government
already working out what it would do if a very different
President from President Johnson took a different policy towards
South Vietnam?
Prime Minister: Well, we would merely have to do all we could
to see that the United States remained interested in this part of 
6
the world, with the presence in this part of the world, because the
more that presence continues the safer Australia is.
Penlington: Well, how serious do you think is the present
need to persuade Americans to stay in South East Asia?
Prime Minister: And, again, you're talking of to stay in Vietnam?
Penliggton: Yes, Vietnam and South East Asia.
Prime Minister: Have a continuing interest in the area of
South East Asia. Well, I believe that they can contribute considerably
to the stability in South East Asia, particularly in
countries not engaged, I mean South Vietnam is war, but to
contribute stability in the way which the United Kingdom has, for
example, contributed to stability, though it didn't prevent
outbreaks of minor hostilities, contribute to stability in
Indonesia, Singapore and Malaya. But therefore if they do contribute
then they would hb1p, I would think, to the building up of
the living standards and the economies of these countries which in
the long run contributes much more to the stability. So I hope
that they would continue that interest and, indeed, we obviously
rely very heavily ourselves on the ANZUS Treaty as far as Australia
is concerned.
Penlington: Do you think Americans are going to need more
persuasion though to stay there? Do you think they are beginning
to wonder whether they should stay there?
Prime Minister: I don't think Itd have enough information to
answer that question, or I doubt if anyone would without just
making an assessment, a speculative reply.
Penlington: Prime Minister, if America's foreign policy moves
further towards isolationalism, should Australia's foreign policy
towards Asia do the same? 
-7-
Prime Minister: I don't think we should move towards isolationalism.
We have many contacts with Asian countries, many ways of
assisting them, and we are so close to them. We have.. I don't
mention just the Colombo Plan but I mean we have a technical capacity
which can help build their industries very much; we have an agricultural
know-how which has been effective up there; we have the
capacity to teach, a capacity to help; and also to a limited extent
a capacity to provide some Und o'f military training or military
assistance or whatever it might be; so I wouldn't I would hope
we wouldn't well, we would not move towards isolationalism.
Penlington: As a result of the events of this week, do you
think the leaders of South East Asia have any greater reason to
feel less secure?
Prime Minister: Not as a result of the events of this week. I
think some of them would feel perhaps less secure should the
Communists win a military victory in South Vietnam because they
have always felt the Domino Theory, which is disparaged by some
quarters in Australia, was a valid theory.
Penlirigton: Prime Minister, finally, this has been the most dramicnk
of yoar tcrn of effice so far.* How would you sum up how you
feel as you approach the end of it?
Prime Minister: Well, there has been an awful lot happening.
Yes, it's been a highly dramatic week, but there have been others.
After all, like Britain sort of accelerated its withdrawal from
Malaya and Singapore which again was a pretty dramatic move. Not
only accelerated its withdrawal but rethought the forces it would
have available to come here, and this too was pretty dramatic.
How do I feel as I approach the end of it? Well, its been a heavy
and dramatic week.
Penlington: Prime Minister, thank you very much for giving
us some of your time this week. EN D. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 45/ 1968
TALKS W. TH MR. RUSK
The American Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk, was at
the Lodge today from 10. 30 a. m. mtil 4. 30 p. m. No. statement
was issued after the talks.
The first session, from 10. 30 a. m. to 1. 00 p. m. was attended
by the Prime Minister, Mr. Rusk and the Minister for External Affairs,
Mr. Hasluck. Luncheon at the Lodge was attended by Mr. and Mrs. Gorton,
Mr. and Mrs. Rusk, Mr. McEwen, Mr. Hasluck, Mr. Fairhall,
Mr. Hulme, Mr. Sinclair and Mr. . and Mrs. Croik.
All the Australian Ministers at the luncheon attended the
afternoon discussions which lasted from approximately 2. 30 p. m.
to 4. 30 p. m.
The talks covered a variety of matters of common interest to
both countries. Mrs. Gorton was host to Mrs. Rusk throughout the day, and took
her shopping and sightseeing.
CANBERRA 6 April 1968 i}. 



NOT TO BE RELEASED BEFORE 10, 30 p. in. ON 8 APRIL, 1968
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 46/ 1968
ViS-iT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, will mak'-e
an official visit to Australia from 21 to 27 May at the invitation of the
Australian Government. In the course of her visit, Mrs. Gandhi will spend time in
Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne and the agreed itinerary is:
Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday Monday 21 May a. m.
22 May
23 Maya. m.
24 May p. M.
25 May
26 May
27 May a. m. Arrive at Sydney and leave by
air for Canberra
Canberra Canberra -Melbourne
Melbourne-Sydney
Sydaey Sydney Leave for New Zealand
Mrs. Gandhi had originally planned to visit Australia in
january but it was agreed that this be postponed to later in the year.
I am extremely happy that Mrs. Gandhi is coming to
Australia. Mrs. Gandhi represents a great nation and a great people
Australia attaches high importance to its relations with India and to
co-operation between the two countries, and Mrs. Gandhi will find great
friendship here among the Australian people no less than on the part of
the Australian Government. I hope that during her visit she will be able
to meet a wide range of Australians.
CAN~ BERRA
8 April 1968 



FOR PRESS Statement by the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Industry
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade
and Industry, Mr. McEwen, left Sydney to-day to lead the
Australian delegation to the International Sugar Conference
which will commence in Geneva on 17th April.
Before his departure Mr. McEwen said that the
conference had been convened by the Secretary-General of
Dr. Prebisch, with the purpose of negotiating
a new International Sugar Agreement aimed at improving the
conditions of trade for sugar.
Australia was the world's second largest exporter
of sugar and had a vital interest in the outcome of the
conference. Mr. McEwen said that for many years the free
market for sugar had been regulated by successive
International Sugar Agreements. However, in 1961, following
the breach in relations between the United States and Cuba,
the regulatory provisions of the then current I. S. A. were
suspended. Cuba is the world's largest sugar exporter and
before 1961 was the major supplier to the U. S. market.
Sugar prices had risen sharply following the
dislocation of production in Cuba after 1961, but in recent
years prices had declined to near disaster levels creating
considerable financial distress for the sugar industries in
most exporting countries, including Australia. 265 
-2-
Mr. McEwen recalled that an earlier negotiating
conference was held in 1965. At that time it had proved
impossible to reach agreement and undoubtedly this had been
an important factor contributing to the depressed prices
which had ruled in the world free market ever since.
Since 1965 a great deal of time and effort had
been expended by Australia and the other major sugar importing
and exporting countries in developing a basis for a new
international sugar agreement. Mr. McEwen said that some
fourteen such meetings had been held under the auspices of
U. N. C. T. A. D. and the International Sugar Council and it was
encouraging that Dr. Prebisch felt sufficiently confident to
call a new conference.
However, Mr. McEwen said a number of important and
difficult issues had still to be resolved.
Mr. McEwen said that the programme of expansion
which the Australian industry had embarked upon in 1963 had
been completed and exports totalling nearly 2m. tons were now
expected from the 1968 crop. In these circumstances the
greater predictability in the export prospects for sugar which
would result from an effective sugar agreement was of tremendous
importance to Australia.
Mr. McEwen said that he was very pleased that
Mr. J. C. A. Pizzey, Premier of Queensland, would also attend the
conference as Deputy Leader of the delegation. The sugar
industry was of vital importance to Queensland and Mr. Pizzeyts
attendance would be of great value. 
-3-
Mr. McEwen explained that if he was unable to
stay until the end of the conference, his place as leader of
the delegation would be taken by the Minister for Primary
Industry, Mr. J. D. Anthony.
The Australian delegation would also include the
following senior Commonwealth and Queensland officials and
advisers representing all sections of the industry:-
D. H. McKay
Sir Alan Summnerville
R. S. Livingston
0. Wolf ensberger
E. T. S. Pearce
A. B. Henderson
P. T. Wheen
A. J. Campbell Deputy Secretary, Department of
Trade and Industry
Agent-General for Queensland in
London
-First Assistant Secretary, Department
of Trade and Industry
-Chairman, The Sugar Board
-General Secretary, Australian Sugar
Producers' Association
General Secretary, Australian Cane
Growers' Council
Assistant General Manager, Colonial
Sugar Refining Coy.
Director, Export Development,
Colonial Sugar Refining Company.
Department of Trade and Industry,
CANBERRA. . A. C. T.
11th April, 196837/ 68T 



22 APR1968
FOR P2--". SS 269
VISIT TO' 1 WVX, HILL L ASS
( Sta tement by the Hon. 7' Wentworth, P.
iF inister I'L charge of Aborigi nal Affairs)
Latst 1' 1ondlay I visited Wa-ctie Creek, which is poirt of Wave Hill
Lease in the Northern Territory. While I w-s the re I hnd _-n
opportunity of imeeting repras~ jntntives of the Gurindji people,, some
of them are camcped in the grea. Previous to mygoing th-re I hoad
studied the reports of the Sessional Coilmittee of' the 1h. orthe: rn
Ter-ritory Legislotive Council upon the situation.
The Gurindji told me of their d6sire to hcld ' and devt. lo-p a sma-xll
araof some eight s.-uire iles as their ai-home a-real nnd of their
plans for iniprovingc, it. 7" ith -them I inspected the rrer) which they
woante d. -lso told me thnt if -they ha d this hea-dqurte-rs, which
would be availcble for the women nd child.-r(-n nndj *. hair e1lerly folk
while they wzere awlay at worlh, they would be ? ble to org -nise contract
foncing nC rauste.-rin--rand. t. o sup". o--t themselves. They saoid they
plarn-ed' to develop their own fruit and veget'ble gardenif and that the
site ii! s suitrble fo-2 this.
In consaquence Iam now, as a tiatter of urgency, e:-xamining with
jll the interested pa rties the im., plicitions and the methods of
r*-sur., ing this aro,-fromi the . aive Hill Letis.-, and making it availrible
for thc purp-) se f'or which it n-s been -eque. st._ d. This would, of
course, require the pcyraent of equitable com-ipnsation to the present
les sees. Should -this arabecome -vnila. ble, it i:., ould ba necessary to
provide aissistalnce on aself-holp Osis vi~ th f_ ncing *~ dbuildfing
mate riaql, so th.-t the &amp; uidican develop their home arcoein thc w~ ay
which they hav-: said they would do.
Ul those suggestions ar, inL. line w-, ith those ma7de by the
Sessional Cot-ii-ttee of the3 1Eorth rn ;. 2ez. ritory Legislrtivo Council.
FricaavQ 1 2th April, 1968. 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 47/ 1968
VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RIGHT HON U FXLE J. G. GORTON, M. P.
At the invitation of President Johnson, the Prime
Minister, the Right Honourable J. G. Gorton, M. P. will visit the
United States next month.
The Prime Minister will leave Australia on 23rd May
and will be received by the President on his arrival in Washington DC
on 27th May. Mr Gorton will remain in Washington until Wednesday
morning, 29th May.
The President has advised the Prime Minister that
this will give time for good personal talks as well as for the
conversations which the Prime Minister will have with the President's
colleagues. Further details of Mr Gorton' s itinerary, which will
include a visit to New York City, will be available later.
CANBERRA, 18 April 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 48/ 1968
PROPOSED VIETNAM SUMMIT
The Prime Minister authorised the following oral
comment on the reports that South Vietnam was sounding out its
allies about a new Vietnam Summit meeting:
* We have not received an invitation to a Summit conference.
* We have been asked for our views on the desirability of holding
a. Summit conference.
* We cannot see what useful purpose a Summit meeting could serve
at this stage.
( This was a spokesman comment not in the Prime Minister's
name). 18 April 1968 



61,
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 50/ 1968
ATTITUDE TO NUCLEA-R NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY
Spokesman Comment for Background
The Australian Government has indicated its
support in principle for a nuclear non-proliferation treaty
provided such a treaty is fully effective and provided complete
and satisfactory guarantees of protection against nuclear
attack can be achieved. The matters to be discussed in the United Nations
General Assembly will bear on whether or not such a treaty and
such conditions can be achieved.
23 April 1968 



EMBARGO iJO T FOR PUBCAT. Or-J BROADCAST~ r4G OR--
CABL_ 1 G BEr_, FORE M. IDiNLGHT 23 APRIL
FOR PRESS: BRITISH GIFT TO CANBERRA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mvr John Gorton
An Australian firm, Messrs Cameron, Chisholm and
Nicol of Perth, has won the competition conducted by the British
Government to select a design for a structure to house a carillon in
Canberra's Lake Burley Griffin.
The carillon and the structure to house it will be built
on Aspen Island in the Central Basin of Lake Burley Griffin. The cost
will be met from a gift of Fœ ( stg. ) 200, 000 made by the British Government
in 1963 to mark the 50th anniversary of the foundation of Canberra.
Six firms of architects, three British and three
Australian, were invited to compete in a limited design competition.
The British firms were Messrs Ahrens, Burton and Koralek of London;
Messrs Eldred Evans and Denis Galley of London; and Messrs Robert
Maguire and Keith Murray of Richmond, Surrey. The Australian firms
were Messrs Cameron, Chisholm and Nicol of Perth; Messrs McKay
and Cox of Sydney; and Messrs Ancher, Mortlock, Murray and Woolley
of Sydney. Their designs were assessed by Lord Holford ( a past
President of t-he Royal Institute of British Architects); Sir Donald
Gibson ( Director-General of R.=-search and Development of the British
Ministry of Public Buildings and Works and former President of
R. I. B. A. and Sir John Overall ( Chairman of the National Capital
Planning Committee, Canberra).
The assessors, in commenting on their unanimous
choice, stated
" The winning entry is a design which is simple, ingenious and
impressive. From the point of view of playing the carillon
and hearing the bells from all sides, the design is convenient
and practical The three triangular elements reflect the
geometry cf the layout of Canberra, and as a monument
possesses a timeless quality.
The Government is naturally delighted that an Australian
firm has won the competition. It is a happy omen that this British gift
to our National Capital will be designed by Australians.
The carillon and its structure will be a notable additioin
to the National Capital and all the designs which were submitted to the
assessors will be brought to Canberra where arrangements will be made
for their display, after they have been on exhibition in Australia House.
CANBERRA, 24 April, 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 51/ 1968
SYDNEY MARCH PAST
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I was extremely pleased to see such a big crowd to watch
our men back from Vietnam.
The contingents from the three services gave an impressive
display. They are men of whom Australia can be proud.
In talking to some of them later, I felt they were men who
believed they had been doing a job that needed to be done. They were
justifiably proud of their contribution.
CANBERRA 26 April 1968 



STATE ZIONIST COUNCIL OF N. S. V1.
JSRAEL'S NATIONAL DAY
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY, N. S. W. 28 April 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Charge d'Affaires, Mr. Speaker, Rabbi Porush,
Distinguished Guests and Ladies and Gentlemen:
Three days ago in Israel, near Gaza, there was dedicated
a memorial to men from Australia and New Zealand and you may be
sure that among them were many of the Jewish faith who rode and fought
in that storied land a little more than fifty years ago, and who are still
remembered by the people and the Government of Israel. They left behind
them for some reason, in the country which is now Israel, feelings of
friendship which have grown and flourished in the years since then as the
eucalypts they planted there have grown and flourished and increased in
those years. And it is possible, it can be argued, that the events of those
days so long ago began not to lead to the seed of the State of Israel, because
that seed had been nurtured in dreams for centuries, but perhaps with some
first faltering steps to the germination of that seed, which thirty years
later, and twenty years ago burst into life as the infant Jewish homeland
began to grow. Now twenty years later you, as fellow Australians, have
done me the honour to ask me to come and participate in your rejoicing,
not at the establishment but at the re-establishment of the Jewish State.
And so here in this city, this capital, where our ow;: i nation some
years ago began, we all to. night, as I think it is fitting that we should, in
this place where we began,, celebrate thne new begi: nin-1g of Israel some
twenty years ago. This, Mr. Chairman, is a night to remember a nation that
faith made real. A dream, that being cherished in hearts through centuries,
ultimately became a concrete fact. And this is a night, too, to rerre mber
that these kinds of developments come only through brains, devotion,
dedication, unremitting effort and hard work and the willingness to sacrifice
and fight to keep the reality a growing, pulsing entity. And that's been done.
Sir, what a story is here what a story comes to mind,
not just of that culmination of twenty years ago but of all the years and
hundreds of years before that. A people conquered when? 2,00
years ago a people which in spite of conquest adhered to their spiritual
faith and their religious beliefs and which, because they adhered to their
spiritual faith and their religious beliefs in that time, had their holy places
defiled and'their cities destroyed and their nation dispersed to the corners
of the earth. A people which can look back in those days on such epic
stories, which can draw strength from reflecting on that human greatness
which led to such actions as that thousand strong garrison of the fortress
of Masada who fled, after the destruction of Jerusalem, to a high plateau
and there were besieged by the Romans for two and a half to three years
and held out against them all that time and then when the situation was
quite hopeless, and the night before an inevitable conquest came about,
killed their women and their children and themselves because they preferred
to be dead than to be slaves. A people who can look back in sorrow to
victimisation, persecution, massacre, injustice, in many of the lands
/-3 
will be strengthened. So this is no time for me to talk for long. I have
mentioned things, I have spoken of things which I believe must be deep
in the consciousness of all people of the Jewish faith but whiCh are as
true and as valid in the consciousness of people of any faith. And if in
the course of speaking to you, as may be possible, I've touched on
sentiments which I can feel but dimly, compared to the way they must
be felt in the blood aid bone and hearts of many here, and if I have
thereby trespassed perhaps, I ask your pardon. But I have done this
for two reasons. Firstly because, however imperfectly, I think I have
enough imagination, I think I have enough sentiment to begin to understand
the pride and joy which you, as Jewish people, must be feeling today.
And I want you to know this. And secondly, because I tall,, to you as
Australian citizen to Australian citizen, as part of my n-ation yours
and mine as I would talk to Australians of Scottish, or Irish, or
Scandinavian, or whatever-it -may-be descent because in this we are
one and I feel some right to rejoice with you.
We have much to do here, you and 1, in this country of
ours just as there is much to do in Israel, and as in Israel our far
tomorrows may see greatness, if we have the passion to live and create,
joined with a willingness to sacrifice and if need be die to preserve.
In one sense, the creation of Israel might be regarded as
a miracle, but as a great Jewish writer many years ago pointed out: " A
miracle cannot prove that which is impossible. It is useful only of a
confirmation of that which is possible". Perhaps everything is possible
for Israel -and Australia, given the spirit, given the endurance, given
the willingness, given the sacrifice, and I hope th at, both here and in
Israel, things now thought to be impossible will be shown to be possible
even if people may regard that as a miracle. One thing is sure and
having said this I'll sit down one thing i3 sure, that the values of a
human individual, the rights of a man to live ' his own' life without fear
of those eternal allies of totalitarianism, the secret police, the torture
chamber and the hangman, are rights which must be defended to the
death, are rights which if they are defended will lead to that full,
peaceful, happy life which yet eludes us, but for which you, as people of
Jewish faith, have striven and will strive, and for which you, as Australians
in Australia, will strive with me.
I thank you. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. L No. 52/ 1968.
VISIT BY THE EMPEROR OF ETIHIOPIA
As announced earlier by the Prime Minister, Mr. John
Gorton, His Imperial Majesty Haile Sellassie I of Ethiopia will visit
Australia from 13 to 17 May.
His Imperial Majesty, who is scheduled to arrive in
Canberra direct from Djakcarta at 4. 30 p. mn. on 13 May will be accompanied
by an official suite of 16. He will also visit Melbourne and Perth.
CANBERRA PROGRAMME
Monday, 13 May
Details of the programme for Canberra are as follows:
4. 30 p. m.
4. 43 p. m.
45 p. m.
7. 45 p. m.
9. 30 a. m.
9. 55 a. m.
00 a. m.
11. 30 a. m.
1.00 p. m.
4. 30 p. m.
8.00 p. m. Arrival at R. A. A. F. Fairbairn
Artillery salute 21 guns
Met by:
The Governor General
The Prime Minister
Inspects Guard of Honour
His Imperial Majesty and the Governor-General will leave
for Government House
The Prime Minister will make a formal call on His Imaperial
Maj esty
Dinner at Government House
Tuesday, 14 May
His Imperial Majesty visits the Australian W-7ar Memorial
and lays a wreath on the Stone of Remembrance. Visits
the 1-4a11 of M. emory and sigais the Visitois' Book.
Leaves for Parliament House
Discussions with Ministers of the Cabinet
The Governor-General presents to His Imperial Majesty
the Heads of Diplomatic Missions
Attends lunch given by the Australian Government. His
Imperial Majesty will reply to speeches of welcome
by Government and Opposition Leaders
Holds a Press Conference at Hotel Canberra
Dinner given by His Imperial Majesty at Canberra-Rex
Hotel / 2 
" O 2.
Wednesday, 15 May
9. 20 a. m.
9. 50 a. m.
Please note: His Imperial Majesty and the Governor-General leave
Government House for R. A. A. F. Fairbairn
After inspecting the Guard of Honour and being farewelled
by the Governor-General and the Prime Minister, His
Imperial Majesty leaves for Melbourne
Melbourne and Perth
The Premiers of Victoria and Western Australia will each
announce details of the programme for Melbourne and
Perth.
CANBERRA 29 April 1968 



6g 1
FOR PRESS: P. Mi No. 53/ 1968
VISIT OF THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH
The Australian staff of The Duke of Edinburgh for his
visit between May 11 and June 5 were named in Canberra today.
In charge of the visit arrangements will be Mr. J. H.
Scholtens, C. V. Assistant Secretary, Ceremonial and Hospitality
Branch, Prime Minister's Department.
Press Liaison Officer is Mr. H. R. Rayner, a former
New South Wales journalist, who is at present Director of Public
Relations for the Department of Defence.
Equerry to His Royal Highness will be Commander D. J.
Orr, R. A. Assistant Director of Plans, Department of the Navy.
CANBERRA 2 May 1968
0 



CON4FERENCE OF P~ tESIDENTS OF CHAMBERS 0~
MANUFACTURES AND OF FEIRAL MANUFACTURERS'
ORGANISATIONS
A. C. Mi. A. C~ nference Centre, Canberra 2ND MAY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr President and Gentlemen: What I have to say to you, because of the time in
which I can say it, will not be very deep, nor would you expect it to go
very deeply into any of the many subjects which will be occupying your
own minds during the course of the Conference. But you will, I ' know, be
hearing from the Treasurer on matters financial, and I think the Minister
for Denfence will be talking about those aspects of defence which impinge
upon the manufacturing industry inside Australia. You will get from the
acting Minister for Trade and Industry comments in that field of activity
which are of interest to you. So really, the object of my being here is,
firstly, to show publicly the respect and regard which the Government, on
behalf of the people of Australia has for the Associated Chambers of
Manufactures and for what they are seeking in one way or another to do
for the growth of our country. It is a tribute to come, and that I think, you
realise is the main object of my presence with you.
I did notice that this was supposed to be a two-way
flow of ideas that is, a flow of ideas from the Chambers to the Government,
and on other aspects, a flow back from the Government to the Chambers.
It will, I think, be a three-way flow of ideas because I have no doubt that
at the meeting here itself, there will be a flowing of ideas from some people
with some ideas as to what should happen and they in turn will be tne subject
of discussion with others. You can do, and have done and can do more to
dvance the possibilities of Australia's becoming more quickly than she
otherwise would, a significant national power. I think it was Sir Robert
Menzies, some time ago, who said he doubted whether any country had
grown so quickly in so many fields in such a relatively short length of time
fis has Australia since the end of the Second V~ orld ' Var. I don't thin.-
that anyone could deny that the building-up of our manufacturing industry,
the provision of new fields of endeavour inside it, has given to this country
industrial muscles which, for a variety of reasons, are essential in these
days, and has given that employment which makes possible the continuation
of immigration policies which in turn make possible the growth of the
nation. There will be argulrents as to how this can best be done,
as to what price should be paid for what is being contributed by you. Of
course there will. But that there has been a contribution, I think nobody
can doubt. And so I hope you will take further advantage still of
such export incentive schemes as have been or will be provided and take
further advantage, too, of the ability to raise capital throughout the world
in this comparatively safe haven of the world, in order further to expand / 2 
-2
manufacturing activities. i don't suppose that twenty or twenty-five years ago
it would have been possible for this nation to have gone through the
period of drought in its most productive areas, which it has but recently
gone through, without having been most visibly affected, and badly
affected in its economic life. I think it is the growth of alternative
avenues of employment, the growth of manufacturing which has not wiped
out, but minimisect the economic effects of this drought which recently has
hit us. Well, how best to continue these matters is first
going to be the subject of discussion amongst yourselves, and secondly
the subject of submissions made on your behalf to us, some of which,
as you have indicated, may be difficult; some of which, it is not
impossible, might not be accepted, but all of wich will be very carefully
studied. We have for our part and I make this just a very
brief thumbnail sketch we for our part have to try, as n-anagers in the
way in which you are managers, to choose between what are in some
respects contradictory requirements. I think we maust see that those of
our citizens in Australia who are, as a result of the slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune, crippled by illness, unable to live a full life in their
age, invalids during the course of their productive life, are looked after
by the community to a degree which provides a respectable life for these
people. I know we have to supply for this country, more
than ever before, a proportion of our production going towards defence
greater than we have ever had to supply before except in tim. e of war, but
one which must be kept down and is not allowed to grow disproportionately.
Indeed, although the expenditure on defence will inevitably grow because of
commitments already entered into in this coming financial year and possibly
the one after, any increase in proportion must in the future be checked
against the other requirements we have got.
We have, at the same time as having to meet those
requirements amongst many others, to endeavour to see that we leave in
the hands of the individual citizen of Australia, and those who mobilise
the individual citizen for work, such as yourselves, sufficient reward for
what has been earned or what has been done to see that an incentive,
a financial incentive for future advance still remains.
We have to provide, and there are some here who
have been active in urging that this must be provided, and rightly so
we have to provide for even better educational levels than is provided
now, and particularly seek to build up technical education at all levels.
I would think that at a gathering of significant people in Chambers of
Manufactures, I do not need to underline the essentiality of technical
and technological education, in which I include such matters as retraining,
and such matters as managerial training at various levels.
All of these things, and of course many more are those
between which governments as managers have to choose. On one occasion, / 3 
-3
I said something of this kind to a Chamber of Commerce, and for some
reason which I find it impossible to understand, was reported in the
newspapers with a big headline saying :" More Taxatbn is Threatened".
What I am really doing is putting before you all the different requirements
which you want, and showing how, as managexs, one must choose between
them all, and that is all I am doing. In a way, it is trying to do what each
of you in each of your industries do
Whatever choices we finally make, whatever area. it is in
which we finally decide to try first because all of them cannot be all
overcome at once I can tell you this, and I believe that you will believe
me. We will, in this managerial role make choices which we arrive at
on a completely honest assessment, right or wrong, but completely honest
assessment of what we think to be the best for the present and future
growth of this nation, and I would think that you gentlemen would do the
same. If through your efforts, and if thrwugh the efforts of governments
throughout Australia, we can infuse into the Australian people a belief
that each one of them as an individual, in whatever it is that he is called
upon to do by way of employment, that each one of them should follow
the rule :" Whatsoever thy right hand findeth to do, do it with all thy
might" in production, on the land, wherever it may be; if we can
infuse into them the belief that in doing this they are contributing as much
to the growth of a great nation, and a nation in which it is good to live, as
is a soldier on the battlefield protecting Australia in Viet Nam, and that if
they are doing this, they are doing it not merely for their own material
advancement but also for the provision of a better material and spiritual
m-ilieu for their children, then really, Sir, we will have done a great
deal to make this a greater country than it is.
I hope that out of this conference which I now declare open
may come steps in that direction. 



FOR PRESS: 7 Y 19 PM. No. 54/ 1968
PARIS AS SITE FOR VIET NAM TALKS
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Australian Government welcomes the fact that a
site for talks has now been agreed between the United States and Hanoi,
and that a date for beginning the talks has been set.
The selection of the sit accords with the views of the
Australian Government which has been kept constantly informed over
the past few weeks by the United States Government as to suggestions
for a site, and which has publicly and privately expressed the view that
we thought it preferable for the site to be one which was neutral.
Our views on this matter have also been exchanged in
communications with the Government of the Republic of Viet Nam and
with other countries contributing forces to Viet Nam.
We believe that what has been agreed is a step forward.
But it is only one step and it is likely that long and hard negotiations
lie ahead before we will know whether those negotiations will in fact
lead to the hoped for just and lasting peace.
CANBERRA, 4 May 1968 



FOR PRESS: PM. Soc. 55/ 1968
PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT SOUTH-EAST ASIA
The Prime Minister is to visit Viet Nam, Singapore,
Malaysia and Indonesia next month.
He plans to leave Canberra on 5 June, only three
days after arriving back from the United States. The South-East
Asian visit will last twelve days, and he will return to Canberra on
17 June. Precise details are not yet available but the Prime
Minister is expected to spend three days in Viet Nam, about two days
each in Singapore and Malaysia, and three and a half days in Indonesia.
He will travel in an R. A. A. F. BAC-111 aircraft and
will break his outward journey at Darwin where he will stop the night
of the 5th. He will spend much of the next day in Darwin.
The Prime Minister will be accompanied by Mrs Gorton
and a small group of officials and personal staff.
CANBERRA, 6 May 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 56/ 1968
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES
Arrangements for the Prime Minister's visit to the United
States at the en~ d of this month are now well advanced.
Mr. Gorton will leave on 23 May, returning on 2 June.
President Johnson is putting a Presidential jet at the Prime Minister's
disposal from Honolulu, and Mr. Gorton will be a guest at Blair House
during his two days in Washington.
Mrs. Gorton will be accompanying the Prime Minister.
There will also be a small party of officials and personal staff.
The itinerary is as follows:;-
Thursday, 23 May
Saturday, 25 May
Sunday, 26 May
it
Monday, 27 May
Tuesday, 28 May
Wednesday, 29 May
Thursday, 30 May
( Memorial Day)
Friday, 31 May
Sunday, 2 June pm Depart Sydney
am Arrive Honolulu
am Depart Honolulu
Overnight transit stop in San
Francisco
am Depart San Francisco
pm Arrive Washington
am Official welcome to White House
Talks with the President
pm Wreath laying ceremony at
Arlington National Cemetery
pm Talks with other members of
the Administration
Dinner at the White House
am Talks with members of the
Administration
Address National Press Club
luncheon
pm Talks with Secretary of State
Dinner with Australian Ambassador
am Depart Washington
am Arrive New York
Address American -Australian
As sociat ion luncheon
Reception by Pilgrims
Lunch given by Mr. David
Rockefeller in country
am Record NBC " Meet the Press"
TV/ radio interview
Lunch at the United Nations with
U Thant
pm Depart New York
am Arrive Sydney
CANBERRA 6 May 1968 



ph hlo. -79/ tq
APPOINTNENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONER
Statement by the Prime Minister,
The Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton. M. P.
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, i
announced tonight that the Government had. appointed
Mr. A. B. McFarlane, as a Commissioner
of the Public Service Board. Mr. McFarlane, Secretary,
Department of Air, for the last twelve years, succeeds"-.:.
Mr. K. E. Grainger, who retired on 21st March on
reaching the age of 69.
Mr. Gorton said that Mr. McFarlane, a law
graduate of the University of Melbourne, joined the
Commonwealth Public Service in 1948 after serving
throughout the War period in the R. A. A. F. He had command
of No.' 2 Squadron in Darwin during 1942 and achieved the
rank of Group Captain in 1944. On his appointment to the
Commonwealth Public Service, Mr. McFarlane joined the I
Department of Civil Aviation and was promoted from the
position of Assistant Director-General ( Air Transport Policy)
to Secretary, Department of Air, in October, 196..
The Prime Minister said that Mr. McFarlane
was ideally suited for this appointment and that he
would bring to it the wide range of skills and knowledge
gained from his twenty years of experience in Cobmonwealth
Departments. Canberra.
7th May, 1968. 1 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 58/ 19 89
THE LODGE PREPARES FOR EXPRESSWAY
Preliminary surveying began around the Lodge in Canberra
today in preparation for the widening of Adelaide Avenue.
The roadwork, which is necessary to complete a dual
highway lining Canklerra with new suburbs in the Woden Valley, will
extend into a large section of the large gardens. The Prime Minister,
Mr. Gorton, gave authority for the acquisition of the land so that there
would be no delay in the expressway project, which will convert the
present two-lane roadway into a six-lane highway. The four additional
lanes will run through what is now part of the Lodge grounds.
Work will begin later this month on the foundations of a
new boundary wall to be bailt around the Adelaide Avenue and National
Circuit frontages of the Lodge. The wall will be off-white in colour,
seven feet high and has been specially designed. to act as a baffle to
traffic noise. National Capital Development Commission architects
have given close attention to the design and finish of the wall to ensure
that it blends into the parkland setting.
The main entrance to the Lodge from Adelaide Avenue
will be resited to facilitate ease of access from the expressway. Because
of the re-arrangements of traffic flow, this will be an entrance only. The
gateway in National Circuit will be widened and will be the only exit for
vehicles. To minimise inconvenience, the NCDC will start clearing
and excavating during the Prime Minister ' s absence overseas at the end
of this month.. The wall and associated work on the boundaries will
take about six weeks to complete.
CANBERRA 8 May 1968 



FOUNDATION STONE CEREMONY AT THE
BETH RIVKAH LADIES' COLLEGE SADIE ELLINSON
SECONDARY SCHOOL,
MELBOURNE. 12 MAY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen:
It is for me the second occasion in quite a short time that
I have had the pleasure and the honour of speaking to Australians who
are of Jewish descent or of the Jewish faith. Not long ago, I had a
similar opportunity in the Town Hall in Sydney, and there I said, as I
will now repeat, because your Headmistress mentioned something
concerning debts that any debts that are owed by people of the Jewish
faith to Australia, are reciprocated by debts from Australians to people
of the Jewish faith who in the First and in the Second World War, and
indeed in the present troubles which beset our nation, are taking their
full place as Australians as they should, and as they are, and Madam
Headmistress, the books are completely balanced, if indeed there is in
these things to be talk of balances.
But I am here to congratulate you on opening here today
not opening on continuing the growth here today of your independent
schools. There was a time when it was a common occurrence for me to
appear at the opening of independent schools, particularly if they had
anything to do with science blocks, but this has recently been interrupted
and it is a pleasure to come back again to have the opportunity to see the
growth taking place here in the centre of this community.
I do not need to expand upon my own beliefs concerning
the value of independent schools, and indeed in this congregation, in this
gathering, there is no need for me to do so because there is nobody who
needs to be converted. If it were not true that you all believe that it was
proper and right for those who wished to do so to graft on to the education
that is given by a State the particular beliefs and particular teachings and
particular spiritual inheritances which you wish your children to have,
then you would not have done what you have done and made this school
possible. But, of course, in schools such as this throughout the
countryside, it is necessary not only that there should be great academic
attainments, and I think you will agree when you look at the figures, that
this school has shown great academic attainments, academic attainment
in those subjects required by a State education system but also that it
should, as I know it does, inculcate those beliefs, those spiritual
sustenances about which I shall have a little more to say later on. It
teaches not only academic subjects, not only the requirements of
spiritual beliefs, but what is in fact the great strength and joy in Australia,
that whether people are of Scottish descent and the Presbyterian faith or
of Irish descent and the Roman Catholic faith, or of English descent and
adhere to the Church of England, or of Jewish descent and adhere to the
Jewish faith, yet they are all Australians in the one community, working
together for the one ultimate objective, that all of them may maintain
their faith without fear, that all of them may inculcate that which I believe
is one of the major things this faculty in this school seeks to inculcate, and
that is a faith in the individual human spirit, the individual man, a belief
that that is the cornerstone alone on which a great and enduring
civilisation can be built. / 2 
2.
But what a doubly special occasion it must be for you, for
here just a short time ago, there was the celebration of the twentieth
anniversary of the re-founding, the re-establishment not the
establishment of the State of Israel. just as those others of whom I
have previously spoken can look back as Australians to the lands from
which they came, and can remember the deeds their forefathers did, and
can remember the struggles in those countries, so can you now look back
to such a land. And looking back, remember for the teaching of the young,
so that the future may be maintained in freedom, of what happened over
the 2, 000 years since Israel ceased to be a State in its own right; look
back upon a nation which being conquered kept faith, kept bright its
spiritual ideals and because of that had its holy places defiled and its
temples torn down and its peoples dispersed to the four corners of the
earth, and there being dispersed, still keeping faith, still keeping a
dream of a country which would one day be re-established, still keeping
t~ ie beliefs which to them were beliefs for which one lived or which, if
one revoked, one died either physically or spirfitually, still keepipg those
beliefs, were forced into separate communities in the countries in which
they lived, were persecuted, were massacred, had all that could be done
to destroy them done to them, at least in many of those countries in which,
homeless themselves, they sought to make their homes.
All through this period of time was kept not only this belief
in the inherent importance of the individual man, not only this belief in
the overriding importance of the spiritual existence of a man as against
his material existence, but also the seed of a dream of some day which
would come when just as others can look back to lands from which their
forefathers came as still a country, so could the people of Israel, as
they hoped, look back to the land from which they came, their forefathers
came. And this happened, and this came to pass. This has been protected,
and even though today Israel is still under the shadow of attack, under
the shadow of threat. Ihere must come a time when the whole of that
area of the Middle East will agree: " Here is a place in which there are
Arab States, in whiczh there is the State of Israel. By working together
economically, by co-operating with each other, by recognising the
inalienable existence of each other, surely we can do more for the people
living there than by living in a state of tension and of febrile argument
which now pervades the region. And I think that day will come.
The first step towards it must be a willingness for those
from the Arab States and those from the State of Israel to sit down and
talk over the problem which now exists and come to a reasonable
agreement on how this matter can be settled. It has been of some surprise
to me that for a long time I have heard, when international disputes have
broken out: " Sit down and talk about a solution of matters in Korea. Sit
down and talk about the solution of the fighting in Malaya. Sit down and
talk about the solution of the fighting in Vietnam". I haven't heard enough
about: " Sit down and talk about the threat which is now posed to the State
of Israel", and yet it is essential that this should be done, and while my
Government cannot do much towards it, it will urge it, it will support
it, it will do all it can to see it comes about.
Then you, and the children that you will educate here,
in the school you are building will have a country not one, I hope, that
will attuact first fealty, but a country in which you can have pride, will
have a country from which you can say: " Our traditions sprang", a
country in which you can say: " Our faith is centred, and you look
there, as Australians, just as 1, perhaps, as an Australian would look
to England from which my parents came. / 3 
This, I think, will be helped by schools such as this. When
we walked in, we heard a choir singing " Open to us the Gates of
Righteousness". I don't think I quite understood the words. They were
translated to me, but this is what I am told they were singing. And it is
for schools such as this a major task to open to children the " Gates of
Righteousness" and to show them that the " Gates of Righteousness", as
all gates, need to be guarded without hatred of those who seek to break
them down. This is all I wish to say now. I think it was one of your
great writers who said something like this: " A miracle does not prove
that which is impossible. A miracle merely confirms that something in
fact was possible". There are many things we now think impossible.
There are many things we think it may require a miracle to change, but
it won't require a miracle, it will just require a belief that in fact things
we think are impossible are possible, and they will then be achieved,
just as this school has been achieved, as other schools will be achieved,
and as I hope and trust and pray, in the Middle East, a safe, progressive
area will be created in which the State of Israel will play its full and
proper part. 



STATi. V1S. T B[ T-E EMPEI. OR OF ET OP;. A
LUJC.: EOi I AT PAR1AlvEi _ T OUSi,
CAJBER-.' A, A. C. T. 14 MAZ 1368
Speeci Dy ti. Prime Mvlinis cr, W. G. Gorton, MP
Your Imperial Majesty, Your Excellencies, Ministers, Parliamentary
Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen
This, I think, as far as the history of our land is concerned,
is a unique occasion, for it is the first time on which, although our land
itself is age old and worn down with erosion of the centuries and the more
than centuries, it is the first time on which a people with a histioryof something
less than two hundred years has had the honour and the privilege
of having had a visit, Sir, from the ruler of a nation whose history goes
back into the mists of time and which was, with one foot in the Mediterranean
basin from which Western civilisation sprang how many thousand years
ago? a nation which affected that growth at that time.
That alom, Sir, is sufficient reason for us to extend to
you, as we do, the warmest welcome which we could possibly extend to
a visiting emperor. There is something about the land of Ethiopia which I
think all Australians, indeed all people of British descent my own
father included.., knew more about, had. heard more about not in
detail but had heard more about in general, the land of Ethiopia than of
any other land in Africa, or indeed, most other lands in the world.
Our minds go back to that fabled Queen of Sheba,
apparently, Sir, an extremely attractive woman, who had heard of the wisdom...
( she was an Ethiopian) of the King Solomon, and being a woman because
they haven't changed over these thousands of years decided to find out
whether indeed the wisdom of that King was as great as it . was reputed to
be. So she set out as chronicles tell us to prove King Sdomon with
hard questions.... something which women still continue to do and which
is not indeed unknown, Sir, in the precincts of the House in which you
find yourself. I like to think and again I go back to chronicles that
amongst the gifts taken by the Queen of Sheba were not only many shekels
of gold, not only large measures of precious jewels, but something which
chronicles describe as an algum tree. Now, Sir, I am not quite sure what
the prefix " al" means. I think it is an Arabic prefix which may be " el" or
may be but in either case means " the". So perhaps it was that the
Queen of Sheba took to King Solomon " the gum tree", that perhaps because
of erosion disappeared, and Sir if that is so, we like to think that because
in your land this grows so prolifically that it came back so many thousands
of years later from us.
But it is not only because of the storied land, it is not
only because from this visit derived the title ' Lion of Judah" which
Menelek I, five or six thousand years ago assumed or was given, and which
you Sir still bear in direct descent, it is not merely because of this and 
-2
policy, and indeed, they are responsible for carrying out policies decided
by governments, governments being elected by the people of Australia because
we are, as I think you have been told, a country which is wedded to democracy.
The theme of this confer.. nce is, as I understand it, how to make
a machine work for the good of man, rather than to have men existing to
serve machines, how to harness the industrial development and invention
which takes place so that that industrial development and invention, causing
as it nearly always does, disruption initially, will nevertheless eventually
provide a better life than was possible before the invention took place.
This question is one which has bedevilled man for far back in
history. In Great Britain, the country from which my father came, I remember
reading of Luddite riots which took place when, for the first time, the cottage
industries which had employed people in weaving and other methods of making
their living were threatened by the incipient factories Mhich at that time were
brought in because it was found that things could be made cheaper, and in
many cases better. But although things could be made cheaper, and in many
cases better, nevertheless a pattern of life was disrupted and a pattern of
home employment was put in jeopardy, and so there were riots.
Yet, the eventual results of the invention, of course, advanced
immensely the material standard of living of those in that country
In the case of the Industrial revolution which swept the world 1 suppose, if
I may oversimplify beginning with the invention of steam, in that time also
we had the same problem repeated, with great industrial capacity created,
with infinitely more efficiency brought to bear on the production of the needs
of individual people, but with individual people indiscriminately being herded
into those " dark Satanic mills" about which words were written at the time.
Well, we have moved from those days. We have moved to understand,
as this conference will discuss, how we can use the new inventions which come
pouring in upon us, which must in many cases disrupt existing patterns o
empbyment how we can use them so that we avoid human distress, so that
we avoid human displacement, so that we achieve the benefits that the new
inventions will bring to us.
In order to do this, we need more than a mcre understanding of
the inventions themselves, than a mere understanding of the application of
new principles, important though this may be, for these new scientific
achievements, these new technological achievements are bringing to us
as human beings a capacity for good which I think has not been known in the
world before to the extent to which it is, and a capacity for evil, which I
think has not been known in the world before to the extent to which it is.
just as the invention of fire was the invention of something which could be
used on the hearth of a home to warm a fami ly during a winter's night, or
to provide a meal which was not raw and half-burnt, so the invention of fire
could be used, and has been used, to destroy cities and irreplaceable
libraries. just as the understanding of the atom has enabled immense
advantage in medical techniques and in industrial techniques, and I think and
hope for the future, provided a chance for dry continents such as our own
to take water from the sea and turn that water into the fresh water that we
need, so the understanding of the atom has also given an opportunity for
cities and regions to be laid waste. / 3 
-3
Therefore, it is more than n-arely understanding the
scientific changes, more than merely understanding the technological
changes which are required. It is an understanding of human hearts.
It is a call to educate human beings to see that these great powers now
being released are used for good and are not used for evil.
Beyond that, and I think below that, but nevertheless of
immense importance, is this requirement to understand what human needs
are. I know they vary; of course they must from individual to individual.
But there probably must be, I think, some common human requirement
if an individual is to feel himself fulfilled, if he is to feel that he is living
a not merely materially successful, but a satisfactory life.
These things, I think, we do not yet know, but because
one of the by-products of the scientific revolution is that there is goi ng to
be more and more leisure, more and more capacity for an individual to
move away from the hourly requirement to earn and leave him more time
to develop I did not say " ejo" but to develop oneself must be regarded
as enjoyment we need to know more about what it is that people wish to
do in this way, and to provide that along with the harnessing of the
scientific and technical advances made.
That I think, Your Royal H-ighness, is one of the basic
ideas underlying the whole of this conference, and indeed, the other
conferences you have held. Because these are problems which are not
confined to one country but problems which in varying degrees already
encompass the countries of the world and will in the future encompass in
greater degree more countries, it is time and more than time that people
gathered, as you have gathered, to discuss these matters. And it may
be that if from. your discussions come some ideas which, as ideas are
inclined to do, filter slowly, but filter through a community and then to
a government, then it may be that you will be providing for your children
or your grandchildren a world in which the great advances which have been
made will be understood, will be used in a proper way in the world, and
what I think we all seek more than anything else the individual can feel
he is contributing to the community in which he lives, can get satisfaction
from that, can feel that whatever it is inside him which is able to be developed,
whether it be musical talent, artistic talent, literary talent, or any -other
talent, is being full opportunity to burgeon and develop, If this harp. ns,
then a great service will have been done to mankind.
And so I wish you well in your deliberations. I have
great pleasure in welcoming you again, if I may, to the National Capital,
and I hope when you disperse to the cities of this Commonwealth that you
will see for yourselves the problems still remaining and perhaps suggest
some solution. If in your discussions you disagree as to the precise
solutions or even as to the precise problems, well, Sir, that will be not at
all surprising because it is not unknown for us to disagree amongst ourselves.
I thank you. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 59/ 1968
EXPO ' 70, OSAKA, JAPAN
AUSTRAL IAN ADVISORY-CMMTTEE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. ohn Gorton
The Government has appointed an Advisory Committee to
help develop plans for Australia's participation in the World Exhibition
to be held in Osaka, Japan in 1970.
The twelve-man committee comprises prominent
Australians representing a wide cross-section of our community,
ranging from industry and commerce to academic life and the arts. This
Committee, under the chairmanship of Sir John Overall, Commissioner
of the Nationial Capital Development Commission, will act as an advisory
panel to Rear Admiral T. K. Morrison, whose appointment as Australian
Commissioner -General for the Exhibition was announced last January.
Serving on the Committee with Sir John Overall, will be:-v
Mr. H. R. Bonython, Director, Bonython Art Gallery; Executive
Member, Adelaide Festival of Arts, Foundation Member,
Society of Collectors of Fine Arts.
Professor J. Burke, Professor of Fine Arts, University of
Melbourne.
Mr. G. F. Cardno, Chairman, Cardno and Davies, Consulting
Engineers, Member, Export Development Council.
Professor S. Crawcour, Head, Department of Japanese, Australian
National University.
Sir Maurice Mawby, Chairman, Conzinc Riotinto of Australia;
Chairman, Japan-Australia Business Co-operative Association;
Chairman, Hammersley Holdings ( which controls funds for the
Sainji-Hammersley scholarship, a prestigious grant to take
Australians to Japan).
Mr. Ranald McDonald, General Manager and Editor-in-Chief,
Melbourne Age.
Sir Charles McGrath, Chairman of Directors, REPCO Ltd.;
Chairman, Export Development Council.
Mr. R. W. Norman, General Manager of the Bank of New South
Wales, Sydney.
Mr. H. J. Souter, A. C. T. U. Melbourne.
Mr. T. B. C. Walker, Chairman, Australian Wloolgrowers and
Graziers Council.
Sir Edward Warren, Chairman, joint Coal Board; President,
Australia-Japan Business Co-operative Committee. / 2 
Planning is now under way for Australia's contribution to
the Exhibition, and this will be greatly assisted by those who have so
generously agreed to serve on the Advisory Committee.
The Exhibition will be educational, scientific and cultural
in character, taking as its central theme " Progress and Harmony". This
is the first such exhibition to be held outside Europe or North Americai.
and will be one of the largest of its kind staged anywhere in the world.
The Exhibition is expected to attract 50 million visitors during the period
March to 13 September 1970.
CANBERRA May 1968
L 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 60u1968
NATIONAL EXPORT WEEK
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
A National Export Week will be held from 14th 19th
October of this year. The Week, which will be sponsored by the Export
Development Council, will be aimed primarily at an expansion of exports
of manufactures. There will be extensive contacts with manufacturers
during this week in each State in the Commonwealth. These activities
will include seminars, workshops and lectures on all practical aspects of
exports and marketing. The Export Development Council will be responsible
for organising the Week and the venture will have the full support and
encouragement of the Government. I will launch the National Export
Week at a gathering in Canberra on 11th Oc-tober.
While a number of Australia's manufacturers have
demonstrated outstanding export performance, there is a surprisingly
large number exporting very little or nothing at all. In a growing country
such as Australia, increased exports of manufactures will do much to
strengthen the economy.
CANBERRA, 16 May 1968 



2 1 ^: M
HRH THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH'S THIRD
COMMONWEALTH STUDY CONFERENCE.:
CANBERRA THEATRE, CANBERRA
Welcoming Address
by the Prime Minister, the lit, Hon, J. G. Gorton 16 MA I' 1968
I don't really think that-what I am proposing to do this morning
is to give a lecture. 7That I thought I was doing was to give
a welcome, and indeed, that is what I do with great warmth on
behalf of the Government of Australia and the people of Australa
to all of you who are gathered together here in what is our
National Capital.
We haven't had a national capital for very long. It is only,
I suppose 67, 68 years I'm not very good at precise
mathematics of that kind, but early in this century that what
were previously six completely separate and sovereign states
federated in this nation of Australia and chose Canberra as
the capital of the nation. I think it has probably only been
in the last fifteen years that the people of this country as
a whole, whether they come from Perth, or Darwin, or the north
of Queensland, or wherever it may be, have come to look upon
this city as a national symbol not as one which they would
like to see their tax money spent in, in preference to the
particular region from which they come, but es one in which they
would like to see tax money spent in preference to most other
regions from which they don't come. As a consequence, it has
grown, and grown in a planned way.
I think, Sir, that when you visited this city first it had some
28,000 people. It now has 100,000, and we expect that early
in the 1980' s it will be a quarter of a million. It was the
idea of a young man, that is to say, the planning of it was the
idea of a young man 34 years old at the time when he first
drew the circuits, the streets, the general way of getting
around Canberra which has resulted in almost every tourist who
comes here getting lost at least twice. Sut which, nevertheless,
has oiven a feeling of space, a feeling of ovnership, a feeling
of pride, I think, to most of those who live in the capital.
It is more than merely a capital city. It is the place in which
those leading members of the public service wvho, I understand,
are to speak to you at a later hour this day, live and work, and
for the most part, have their being. Of course, some of them
have still not yet been brought to The capital.
It is the seat of government at any rate of Commonwealth
Government which, in a Federal system as any of you who come
from federated countries know, is a government which bears all
the odium of anything vyhich has to be done in order to raise
taxation and gets none of the credit for any of the benefits
which flow from it. Nevertheless, it is here that , reat
government decisions are made, and it is on the advice of those
who will be speaking to you that those government decisions are
at any rate sometimes based. Niow that I will leave for them
to talk about. They will sa7y how it is that a government service 
( 2)
in Australia operates. They will explain, better than I could
explain, the duties and responsibilities which lie upon them
and they will, no doubt, very carefully point out that while
they are responsible for advice, they are not responsible for
policy, and indeed, they are responsible for carrying out
policies decided by governments, governments being elected by
the people of Australia because vie are, as I think you have
been told, a country which is wedded to democracyj
The theme of the conference is, as I understand it, how to make
a machine work for the good of man, rather than to have men
existing to serve machines, hov,,' to harness the industrial development
and invention which takes place so that that industrial
development and invention, causing as it nearly always does,
disruption initially, will never~ theless eventually provide a
better life than was possible before the invention took place.
This question is one which has bedevilled man for far back in
history. In Great Britain, the country from which my father
came, I remember reading of Luddite riots which took place when,
for the first time, the cottage industries '-, hich had employed
people in weaving and other methods of making their living were
threatened by the incipient factories which at that time were
brought in because it was found that things could be made cheaper,
and in many cases better. But although things could be made
cheaper, and in many cases better, nevertheless a pattern of
life was disrupted and a pattern of home employment was put in
jeopardy, and so there were riots.
Yet, the eventual results of the invention, of course, advanced
immensely the m6terial standard of living of those in that
country. In the case of the industrial revolution which swept
the world I suppose, if I may oversimplify beginning with
the invention of steam, in that time also we had the same problem
repeated, with great industrial capacity created, with infinitely
more efficiency brought to bear on t-he production of the needs
of individual people, but with individual people indiscriminately
being herded into those " dark Satanic mills", about which words
were written at the time.
' Well, we have moved from those days, We have moved to understand,
as this conference will discuss, how we can use the new inventions
which come pouring in upon us, which must in many cases disrupt
existing patterns of employment how we can use them so that we
avoid human distress, so that we avoid human displacement, so
that we achieve the benefits that the new inventions will bring
to us.
In order to do this, we need more than a mere understanding of
the inventions themselves, than a mere understanding of the
application of new principles, important though this may be,
for these new scientific achievements, these new technological
achievements are bringing to us as human beings a capacity for
good which I think has not been know,, n in the world before to the
extent to which it is, and a capacity for evil, which I think
has not been known in the world before to the extent to which
it is. Just as the invention of fire was the invention of
something which could be used on the hearth of a home to warm 
( 3)
a family during a winter's night, or to provide a meal which
was not raw and half-burnt, so the invention of fire could be
used, and has been used, to destroy cities and irreplaceable
libraries4 Just as the understanding of the atom has enabled
immense advantage in medical techniques and in industrial
techniques, and I think and hope for the future, provided a
chance for dry continents such as our own to take water from
the sea and turn that water into the fresh water that we need,
so the understanding of the atom has also given an opportunity
for cities and regions to be laid waste,
Therefore, it is more than merely understanding the scientific
changes, more than merely understanding the technological changes
which are required. It is an understanding of human hearts.
It is a call to educate human beings to see that these great
powers now being released are used for good and are not used for
evil. Beyond that, and I think below that, but nevertheless of immense
importance, is this requirement to understand what human needs
are. I know they vary; of course they must from individual
to individual. But there probably must be, I think, some
common human requirement if an individual is to feel himself
fulfilled, if he is to feel that he is living a not merely
materially successful, but a satisfactory life.
These things, I think, we do not yet knowi, but because one of
the by-producats of the scientific revolution is that there is
going to be more and more leisure, more and more capacity for an
individual to move away from the hourly requirement to earn and
leave him more time to develop I did not say " enjoy", but to
develop oneself must be regarded as enjoyment we need to know
more about what it is that people wish to do in this way, and to
provide that along with the harnessing of the scientific and
technical advances made.
That I think, Your Royal Highness, is one of the basic ideas
underlying the whole of this conference, and indeed, the other
conferences you have held. Because these are problems which
are not confined to one country but problems which in varying
degrees already encompass the countries of the world and will
in the future encompass in greater degree more countries, it
is time and more than time that people gathered, as you have
gathered, to discuss these matters. And it may be that if
from your discussions come some ideas which, as ideas are
inclined to do, filter slowly, but filter through a community
and then to a government, then it may be that you will be
providing for your children or your grandchildren a world in
which the great advances which have been made will be understood,
will be used in a proper way in the world, and which
I think we all seek more than anything else the individua~ l
can feel he is contributing to the community in which he lives,
can get satisfaction from that, can feel that whatever it is
inside him which is able to be developed, whether it be musical
talent, artistic talent, literary talent, or any other talent,
is being given full opportunity to burgeon and develop. if
this happens, then a great service will have been done to
mankind. 
( 4)
And so I wish you well in your deliberations. I have great
pleasure in welcoming you again, if I may, to the National
Capital, and I hope when you disperse to the cities of this
Commonwealth that you will see for yourselves the problems
still remaining and perhaps suggest some solution. If in
your discussions you disagree as to the precise solutions or
even as to the precise problems, well, Sir, that will be not
at all surprising because it is not unknown for us to disagree
amongst ourselves.
I thank you. 



0 FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 61/ 1968
DESIGNERS FOR OSAKA EXPOSITION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Robin Boyd, a well-known Melbourne architect and
writer, has been appointed by the Government to design and supervise
the construction of the exhibits for the Australian pavilion at the World
Exposition to be held in Osaka, Japan, from 15 March to 13 September,
1970. Mr. Boyd was the designer of the exhibits for the
successful Australian presentation at Expo ' 67 at Montreal, Canada.
The interior decor of the Montreal pavilion attracted world-wide
attention and won high praise for Mr. Boyd's work.
The pavilion to house the Australian exhibit at the World
Exposition 1970 is being designed in the Canberra Branch of the
Commonwealth Department of Works by a design team under the
leadership of Mr. James MacCormick. The design for the pavilion is
well advanced. Because of language and other problems, the Department
will appoint a firm of Japanese architects to prepare contract documents.
The same Departmental design team was responsible for
the Australian pavilion at Montreal for the 1967 World Exposition. This
pavilion was regarded by the authorities as one of the best designs at the
Exposition and was retained on the site for future use.
CANBERRA 17 May 1968 



VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA
MRS INDIRA GANDHI
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA 22 MAY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton
Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is my very pleasant task to propose the toast of our
distinguished guest. I think it is impossible for me edequately to express
on behalf of myself or of those Australian people who are here, or Prime
Minister, who are in their thousands watching you now and waiting to hear
you speak the intense admiration which we have of you as a person, and
the great pride and excitement that we feel in this nation because on this
occasion we have been visited for the first time by the Prime Minister of the
great Republic of India. I think that when August comes this year, it will be just:
twenty-one years since the flag of India flew from the old Red Fort at Dell~ i,
as a symbol of the political independence which had been gained as a result
of a struggle of some quarter of a century, a struggle, Prime Minister, in
which you and your distinguished family, together with countless other of
your countrymen were engaged in, a struggle which occupied all the thoughts
of your early life. I have heard, and you have confirmed to me that the story is
not apocryphal, that at the age of three or five or some very early age of that
kind, you began to make political speeches standing on a table at the home of
your distinguished father, with a captive audience, and I have not only envied
you this early start, but I have also had borne in upon me the fact that fromn
that time until the time the flag of free India flew from the old Red Fort
Delhi, you were entirely engaged upon this struggle. In it you lived and
breathed and had your being, and in his heady excitement of striving against
sone thing, which appeared stronger at the time, for an ideal which you believed,
and those with you believed to be more important than the hardships which
struggling against it entailed, because you believed that, eventually you
achieved that political freedom which for so long you had sought.
It was a struggle, I like to think, Prime Minister you
may not agree with me not against a harsh, oppressive, overbearing,
corrupt power, but against an alien power and one which was in your coun try,
and one which you respected but wished to leave your country so that politically
you could run your own lives.
I can only, as from a distance, feel in myself the excitement
there must have been, the heady wine there must have been during those
years, and congratulate you on having with your countrymen finally achieved
that for which you had so long fought. But this was just the beginning, this
attainment of political freedom.
That freedom having been attained, then those who had b~ een
successful were at once faced with the immensely significant requirements of
economic freedom, ( for political freedom of itself is not enough) and faced with 
-2
immense problems problems which to a country like ours almost stagger
the imagination of seeking to take and raise the standards of what is now
530 million people in a nation which each year adds to its population, the
same number as is the total population of our nation of Australia. Having
to build up almost from nothing an industrial base and industrial muscles,
having to face in such a vast country the terrific incursions of drs~ ughts in
particular areas1 having to provide for those whcq having followed your
banners toward political freedom now required some material advancement
as a result of having achieved that, having at the same time to provide for
the defence of that political freedom and those boundaries of India against
incursions which were first feared and then in fact occurred, having all
these problems to cope with, you had to show that a democratic country
because through all these times you remained a democractic country could
cope with these kinds cf problems and could provide for the citizens of
their nation an improving standard of material things.
So from that first struggle, that first excitement of seeking
political freedom, these problems came upon your country and in time you
became the leader who must decide how best they could be met. During
that time, you have managed, Prime Minister in your country to increase
the average expectancy of life from 32 years to, I think, 49, you have
mai~ eI to build up an industrial capacity much greater than that with which
you started, you have managred to resist and to repel incursions upon your
frontiers. It looks as if you will, in this present plan, overcome the
agricultural disadvantages which have dogged you for so long and will manage
to be able to provide from within the borders of India the food which India
requires. These are no mean achievements, Prime Minister, and
these if they are maintained, as 1 am sure they will be, will stand as an
example to other nations in Asia that great problems can be met by
democratic processes, that great problems can be overcome by democratic
processes, that there is more than one way to improve and increase the
economic well-being of a nation, and that it is not necessary to surrender
political liberty in order to do this, If this indeed turns out to be the fact,
Prime Minister, then I can think of very little that would be of more
significance for the future of the world and the peoples who will live in
the various countries of the world.
I" is not for me to speak long, Prime Minis ter, in this,
but may I take your mind back to a time when you were left alone because
your family were all in gaol, and when you had written to you by your
distinguished father a poem which I know must lose much in translation
but which yet I would like to express to you who have not forgotten it and
to others who have not yet heard it:
Wlhere the mind is without fear
And the head is held high.
Where knowledge is free
Where the world has not been broken up into
fragments
By narrow domestic walls
WVhere words come out from the depths of truth
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards
perfection
VWhe re the clear stream of reason
Has not lost its way into the dreary desert sands of
dead habit
Where the mind is led forward by thee
Into ever-widening thought and action
Into that heaven of freedom, my Mther,
Let my country awalke. / 3 
-3-
Prime Minister, the man who wrote that poem did much to
see that it was translated into fact. Prime Minister, you are doing much
to see it is translated into fact. it is something which your country and
mine can both ta., e as something of a guidance for the future, and i wish,
Prime Minister and hope, Prime Minister, that for many years to come you
will be aole to continue to try to see that the se. itiments expressed in your
father's verse are expressed in actual fact in the country that you lead and
that you lead it with the same high courage, political perspicacity, elegance,
modesty and grace with which you have led it so far. 



F OR PRESS: PM. No. 62/ 1968
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Arrangements have now been completed with State
Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the Australian
Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Thursday 27 June and
continuing, if necessary, on Friday, 28 June.
I will preside at the Premiers' Conference and
Mr McMahon, as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the Loan Council
CANBERRA, 23 May 1968 



VISIT TO THE U. S. 1968
SAN FRANCISCO
ARRIVAL PRESS CONFERENCE AT AIRPORT
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON MAY 1968
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, could you tell us what you hope to accomplish on
this visit?
PM. Yes. I hope to have a much better understanding of the thinking of the
President, of the Administration, of the officials concerned with policy
making, and if the primaries permit, which is always pretty doubtful,
of the thinking of other possible candidates.
Q. Will you be discussing the F -Ill and its higher price?
PM. I won't be. No.
Q. What about trade controls and the restrictions?
PM. Well, trade is down for discussion.
Q. How about specifically the Australian Government commitment to Vietnam?
PM. Well, I don't think it's down for discussion.
Q. Do you anticipate discussing it?
PM. Well no, we've got our commitment there and it's not bad.
Q. Will Australia have somebody in Paris watching the exploratory peace talks?
PM. Yes, we've got a man from External Affairs there who is liaising with
WGovernor Harriman. Well, it used to be Governor once'ac~ overftor..
al~ ays~ a . G.( vekmor, eh?
Interjection: And once a Senator, always a Senator?
PM. Except when you become a Prime Minister:' We've got our Ambassador
here expressing our own views to the people at various levels of the
State Department and Mr. Anderson's in Paris, keeping in close touch
with the negotiators over there.
Q. In view of the withdrawal of the British Government from South East Asia
earlier than was expected, will you be discussing Australia's new role in
South East Asia?
PM. Somebody might bring it up.
Q. Such as a naval base outside of Fremantle?
PM. You're getting so specific:' 



VISIT TO THE U. S. 1968
WASH INGTON
ARRIVAL STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, AT ANDREWS AIR FORGE BASE 26 MAY 1968
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, said on arrival
at Andrews Air Force Base in Washington today that one of the main
purposes of his visit to the United States would be to establish the
same contact with President johnson and the United States Administration
as that held by his predecessor, Mr. Holt.
" I want to discuss the trend of thinking in the
Administration on matters of mutual concern and if possible to draw
Australia and the United States closer together, and we are pretty
close together now, he said. 



V-IS04T-THE U. S. 1968
WASHINGTON
EXCHANGE OF REMARKS BETWEEN PRESIDENT
JOHNSON AND THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN
GORTON IN THE EAST ROOM OF THE WHITE HOUSE
JU16 27 MAY 1968
THE PRESIDENT
Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton, Secretary and Mrs. Rusk,
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
Mr. Prime Minister, it is a very great pleasure for Mrs.
Johnson and I to welcome you and your most charming wife to our country.
We have very little to offer in the way of surprises. Mrs. Gorton is a
native of New England. We have some New England weather for her this
morning. But she already knows all of our secrets anyway. Even if she
did not, you, yourself, Mr; Prime Minister, are the Prime Minister of
Australia and the Australians and the Americans have so much in common
that we seem to understand each other almost on sight anyway.
Our people have been moulded by the same forces. Both
of our continents are vast. Both of our histories are young. Both of our
Governments are free. All of our people were drawn from many lands.
We both enjoy an abundance which, for most of the world, is yet just a
dream. We share a common vision. We see a world where might
does not make right. We strive for a world where nations can live together
in peace and freedom under the rule of law. We have been fighting for this
dream for a long time now. Twenty-five years ago we fought side by side
from the Middle East to the South Pacific. Today we are fighting side by
side in the rice fields in Vietnam.
I do not know how close we may be to success in our
common and our historic cause. But I do know that you, Mr. Prime
Minister, come here at a moment of very historic importance. Cur
American aim is now, as it has been from the beginning, to achieve
peace with honour, a peace which will permit the people of Asia and the
South Pacific to work out their own destiny in their own way. We have
never sought anything else, and we will not accept anything else. I
believe that Australia shares that aim, and I look forward with a great
deal of anticipation to our conversations about this and about many
other common concerns. Mr. Prime Minister, you and your countrymen are always
welcome in Washington. I think you will soon find that although you are
half a world away from Australia, you are still very much at home.
Thank you very much. / 2 
PRIME MINISTER
Mr. President, Mrs. Johnson, Secretary Rusk and Mrs. Rusk, Distinguished
Guests:-Thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of all Australians, for
the honour which, through me, you do my country. We value this the more
since it comes from a power which is not only great, but which, since the
end of the last world war, has assumed all the burdens and responsibilities
of being great. You helped reconstruct Europe. In large measure, you
financed the constructive work of the United Nations. You have without
stint given blood and treasure to protect small nations from subjugation
by force or by threat. And you seek to raise the living standards of people
in every corner of the world. For this your country has received scant
thanks yet at one time, through sole possession of atomic power, you
could have imposed your will upon the world and did not. You could have
chosen to conquer, but chose to set free. You could have looked inward,
but instead you chose to look out. If the United Nations has not bro ught
that end to war which its founders sought, if the world is still torn by
strife as it is, that is the fault of others, not of yours.
You have assumed, Sir, as I said, many burdens, and today
one dominates our minds, Even as we stand here, out men fight in Vietnam~ r
together, as they fought in other wars, to protect smiall nnrinnn from
overthrow by force of Governrnenrs elered by rhe people. Even as we
stand here, diplomats in Paris seek to discover whether there is hope of
ending that fighting and securing a peace just, lasting and honourable
giving to the people of South Vietnam a chance thernselves . to choose
their future path without fear or threat.
You, Mr. President, bore the lonely weight of decision to
continue to resist force with force. You, Mr. President, by your recent
gesture, brought the North Vietnamese to talk. You, Mr. President,-
relinquished chance of further office to give those talks such chance lof
success as they may have. And for that we admire and salute you. * It is
that struggle which engrosses us today, but when it is decided, that
solution will be one step only in the solution of other problems to which
men and nations are born, which have arisen in the past, which exist now,
and which will arise in the future in a world in transition.
So the Revolutionary War decided whether America would
or would not be independent. The War between the States decided whether
the union would continue or fragment. The Second World War decided
whether the world would be subject to fascist tyranny. just as those
decisions engrossed the hearts and consciences of those then living, and
decided a particular matter but did not provide solutions for future confli zt
or for progress, so will the outcome of the war in Vietnam decide that
matter but not those questions for decision arising in the years ahead.
As Australians see it, those problems, although worldwide,
are likely to be most acute in Asia. We see there an area which needs
an economic and technical base such as Europe already has. We see there
an area where development and progress are essential if the peoples of
those divergent nations are to support and defend something dynamic and
developing not something stagnant. We see there an area crying for
technical skills, a more experienced administration, a more equitable
sharing of an increasing incom-e and we see there an area subject, above
/ 3 
3.
all, to the threat of subversion, terrorism, and aggression. In some
way, Sir, because of internal division, parts of Asia are reminiscent of
the Balkans before World War I and in some ways they may pose the
same dangers, dangers aggravated by the eagerness of agitators to exploit
divisions. Perhaps, Mr. President, though I don't think so, we
Australians see this out of perspective because it is here that we,
contiguous to Asia part of the South East Asian region live and breathe
and have our present and our future. It is here that we feel that we can
best contribute to stability and to progress and to preserving its political
freedom which seeks economic freedom as its concomitant. It is here
that we can play our part. But we cannot effectively play it alone. As
for ourselves we are not a great power, thou~ gh we are destined so to
be. In our nation are new frontiers and boundless opportunities for those
who will risk in order to win; for those who will work in order to build;
for those who will endure initial hardship to gain distant goals. We shall
grow in numbers and in industrial power, and further develop the use of
our natural resources, and in growing, Mr. President, will grapple with
existing problems and prepare for those which wait in the corridors of
the future. But for the present, we, who for two centuries were shielded
by the British Navy, have as our major shield the ANZUS pact, and behind
that, and because of that, we can the sooner grow to that stature we shall
reach, we shall the sooner reach a po sition to repulse * any attack the futur e
may hold from any quarter, and by any means. We can the sooner grow
in capacity to offer more economic and technical assistance to the
Governments and peoples of our region. I do not mean that we do not now
play our part in defence, as we do in aid, or in seeking to foster trade
which may be more important than aid. But I do mean that becausc of your
assistance, because of the ANZUS Treaty and what it implies, we cant
divert to building a future strength, resources which would otherwise: be
now diverted to defence, to the future detriment of defence, and to thp
future diminution of our ability to render as much help in the region as
we would wish. This is to us the virtue of the ANZUS pact. And allied
to it is the sure knowledge that you while providing that shield recognize
that behind it we, as we build our country, are free to make and will make
our own foreign policy decisions subject only to our treaty obligations.
Sir, I have not been here before in my present off ice, yet
I f eel I come not as a stranger. On too many fields of battle we have
stood together fighting for the concept of freedom, fighting against
aggression. On too many occasions we have co-operated in the economic
plans to help the worldrs underprivileged advance their standards of living.
There is too much common heritage of a system under which Government
is chosen by a majority, dismissed by a majority, protect minority rights,
yet refuse to be coerced by organized minority demonstrations. There are
too many bonds for any Australian Prime Minister even to feel that here he
is a stranger. And so as in the past, so may it be in the future. Looking
down the vista of the years, I hope that you in your greatness now, and we
in our present strength and our greatness to come, will together give
protection, stability, advancement, encouragement, will help to foster,
along with and depending on the people who live in that region a new
world in Asia to redress the balance of the old. If this can be done, if
we can do this together successfully, the price to be now paid will, in the
future, be thought by humanity small.
Thank you, Sir. 



VISIT TO, THE U. S. 1968
WASHINGTCN
EXCHA-NGE CF TCASTS BETWEEN PRESIDENT JOHNSON
AND PRIME MINISTER GORTON IN STATE DINING ROOM
OF WH-ITlE HOUSE 27 MAY 1968
THE PRESID~ ENT
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Go: 2-ton, Secretary and Mrs. Katzenbach,
Ambassador and Mrs. Wailer, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and
Gentlemen: Mr. Prime Minister, I have a confession to make tonight...
I have been talking quite privately to your wife. I hope and I believe this
was not a violation of protocol. But I needed advice. Two years ago,
your predecessor--our late and beloved friend, Harold Holt--made a
promise to me. During our visit prior to the Manila Conference, in the
cool of the evening over a mint julep, he very generously said that if
things ever went wrong here in the United States, I would always have
a political future in Australia. Mr. Prime Minister, I have been somewhat
curious to know whether that might still be true.
Bettina, as you know, Mr. Prime Minister, is a daughter
of New England. She said, " Mr. President, you will always be welcome.
But Australians are a lot like you Texans--you are never as bad as they
say you are when they're mad and you are never as good as they say
you are when they love you. Mr. Frime Minister, let me assure you
tonight that I do not intend-I may reassess that a little later-I do not
intend to stand for office in Canberra. This is a considerable sacrifice,
since I can truthfully say there is no place outside my own native land
where I really feel more at home.
Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton, I hope that you will
feel equally at home here in America and I hope that you will come to
visit us often. Lady Bird and I are pleased and honoured that we should
have this opportunity to be the first to welcome you to our country as Prime
Minister. The friendship that joins our two countries is a vital force
in the struggle to transform the world's hopes into tomorrow's realities.
It is a partnership which grows stronger and deeper with the passage of
time. It extends from trade and mutual defence to man's newest frontierthe
exploration of outer space. Right now that partnership is being tested--
tested in the hardest way that the ties between nations can be tested, and
that is by the commitment of our men to combat. Tonight we are in a
decisive phase of the struggle for peace and order in South East Asia.
Talks have begun, but the other side is forcing the pace of battle; it is
pouring men and supplies into South Vietnam at an unprecedented rate.
Let me tell you this
-in Paris we shall remain patient but firm in the quest for an
honourable peace. Ambassador Vance will be here in the morning
to report to me and the security council, and to report to you,
Mr. Prime Minister, on the developments there. / 2 
-In Vietnam tonight your men and ours--and the gallant South
Vietnamese, the South Koreans and the Thais who have fought
so long for the right of self -determination--and all of our allieswill
turn back this offensive.
-In time;--and I pray it may be soon--the other side will turn
from fantasy to reality; from violence to genuine peacemaking.
I know there are some in Asia and elsewhere who are
wondering tonight whether the United States will maintain its commitments
in Asia; who are wondering tonight whether the strains of this struggle
will lead us to withdraw and leave two-thirds of humanity to its fate
without American assistance or American support. As you so well know,
Mr. Prime Minister, with your years in political life, I cannot speak for
my successor, but I can speak for myself, and the answer is no; we will
not withdraw until there is an honourable peace. I do not think that my
country will permit us to do otherwise.
If you look back over the years since 1941, you will see
how steady the performance of the American nation has been. We must
put aside the Senate speeches that have been made and the debates that
have gone on and you will see that from one Administration to anotherfrom
Republican to Democrat--the United States of America and its
people has steadily understood its interests in Asia and has acted on them.
I deeply believe that this will be true in the future as it has in the past.
All the energy and influence that I can command will be in that direction.
I think, Mr. Prime Minister, it will be true for a very simple reason:
every year that passes brings us closer to Asia and brings us closer
really to the other regions of the world; closer in terms of military
technology; closer in terms of communications; closer in economic ties;
and closer in terms of simple human friendships.
If I may depart, Mr. Prime Minister, I think you will be
interested to know that this afternoon I saw a report that on the list of
choices for R and R--rest and recreation--in Vietnam, Australia was the
first choice of the American fighting man. I think you will also be pleased
to know that of the thousands who have gone there, who have been taken into
your homes, and they have been entertained as if they were their own sons,
that so far as we have been able to ascertain, there has not been one, single
misunderstanding or violation of your hospitality or your courtesy--and
that is saying something of Vietnam fighting men who are on rest and
recreation in Australia. In the years ahead, we hope that the new Asia that is being
born will be increasingly organized to shape its own destiny. It should be
able to do more for itself and rely less on the United States. But I have no
doubt that there will be no return here to isolation. I have no doubt that
America will remain the partner of Australia, and I have no doubt that
Australia will continue to give leadership to the new Asia and the free
Asia as far ahead as any of us can see. One of the comforting and pleasirg
developments of the last few years has been to see the leadership that the
Government of Australia has given to this huge population that makes up
two-thirds of the world; that this little country, through its leaders, has
gone out and met with them, visited with them, exchanged views with them,
and let them know that we are one and that we are trying to build toward a
better day where we can fight the enemies of hunger, disease and poverty
that are rampant in that area. / 3 
3.
Mr. Prime Minister, your presence tonight is proof that
this partnership is still vital and still growing. We are so pleased that
you could bring your Maine lady with you and join us on the boat last
night and that we could find all the differences that we had and solve most
of them before the dinner tonight. We think this visit of yours, so soon
after you have taken over the responsibilities of the Prime Ministership,
will be of great help to us and will endear you to this country.
Mr. Prime Minister, we hope that your visit here--and
you will be visiting other parts of our country--will give you an insight
into the affection that the American people hold for the Australian people.
In sunshine and in sorrow, we have stood side by side. Alt hough Ed and
Ann Clark found it so pleasant out there that they dared not take more
than two years of it we are sending you some other Texans who we hope
will be representative of this country and be concerned with the future of
Australia. The young Ambassador said to me, Mr. Prime Minister,
when I talked to him about two or three countries, " Why are we so high
on Australia?" I said, " If I could be Ambassador--and I am not sure I
can under the next Administration-if I could be, the one country that I
would want to be Ambassador to is Australia. That is when he made
his choice. That is when he decided he wanted to go to Australia.
So, Mr. Prime Minister, we welcome you and your party.
We know that our talks will be fruitful. We assure you of our continuing
co-operation and friendship. We now ask you to join us in a toast to the
great lady who symbolizes our common heritage.. Her Majesty, The
Queen. PRIME MINISTER
Mr. President, Mrs. Johnson, Members of the Diplomatic Corps.,
Distinguished Guests:-I must first of all thank you, Sir, for extending such a..
warm welcome to myself and to my Maine lady--that is spelled with an
You know, Sir, you have spoken tonight of a number of matters
which beset us today. But in doing so, you have mentioned other matters
which beset us in the past and which you will remember because you came
to Australia at the time when these things were threatening then.
You went on missions over Papua and New Guinea in the
defence of Australia at the time these things were threatening. I flew
at that stage in company with pilots of the United States Air Force who
had come to see what was threatening then did not prevail--and it did not
prevail. These difficulties, these problems, are borne on me tonight
more than they ever have been before, because I stand here in a historic
residence and my mind goes back to the time when, for example, one
former President sat here and mourned the loss of more Americans in
conflict than have been lost in all the wars since between 1860 and 1865,
and exercised will and exercised judgment in order to see that a nation
due to become great did become great, and did not become split. I can
imagine well--because you showed me today upstairs, the room in which
this great man slept--what those five years or six years, however long
it was that man sat there, beset not only by an enemy across the potomacand
I am bound to say that I speak as a convinced confederate; at least
/ 4
I 
I would have been then--but not only by an enemy across the potomac, but
by the cooperheads inside the union, by the riots taking place in New York
so that regiments had to be brought back from the army of the potomac
to put it down by the vilification and attacks of Horace Greeley and the
newspapers--and newspapers are now much the same as they were then--
and through it all, because the end was an end that was good, he saw
that whatever was required to be done was done, and it was. If it had not
so been done, then there would not now be a United States of America.
Things don't change that much. I know that at one subsequent
stage, part of the house in which I stand apparently inadvertently caught
fire. But that has, of course, nothing to do with Australia, Sir. I dare
say that people responsible for it eventually finished up in Botany Bay as
transportees. I don't think that I should, on this occasion--which is a
happy and a festive occasion--for too long talk about matters that are too
serioust I tried this morning to set forth what Australians think about
what you are doing in the United States. When you speak of leadership
that we give, we give that leadership, if we do, and we try to because we
are protected and shielded by a gr. eater power. We will give greater
leadership in the future because we will have in the past been protected
and shielded by a greater power. * rhe coat of arms of my own country,
Sir, is borne on one side by a kangnroo and on the other by an emu.
Ileither one of these creatures, so tile botanists tell me, is physically
able to move backwards; they can only move forward. We will and we
have. There is little time for figures to be presented to a meeting
such as this, but at least in the last decade one can say that the grosE
national product of my country has doubled at an average rate of five and
a half per cent; that the expenditure on foreign aid has doubled; that the
expenditure on defence has trebled; that our population has increased by
one third. But that is all in the past. I remember, Sir, if I may translate
it a little later into idiom, something which struck my mind when I was
young. All of the past is prelude, which means " You ain't seen nothing
yet". But still we, like you, do have to contribute more than we
would wish to to the protection of other peoples against attack, to the
building up of a region which you could have said, which was once said
by a British Prime Minister, was a faraway region of which we know
nothing, but which, as far as we are concerned, is a close region of which
we know much. We have to contribute to that because unless it happens,
unless the people living there have a greater chance to improve their
living standards to be able to live a reasonable and decent life, then in
the future there is little hope for a reduction in that money necessary,
but in one sense wasted for defence.
So, we have to do it, and you make it possible for us to do
it. But if this is achieved, if it is possible to beat the swords into plowshares,
if it is possible to translate the aircraft into factories, if it is possible to
take people out of uniform to be productive, then we can see in that area of
the world something growing, something growing not only for their own
benefit, but for our own because we will sell them things, for your own,
because you will sell them things, for our own, because we will buy from
them that which they peculiarly can produce. And we may-who knows,
becaus~ e man is born to travel as the sparks fly upward--but we may achieve
an era nearer to a time when men can live in peace, when men can live in
peace throughout the world, when these great political schisms which, for 
so long as I can remember, have torn the world to pieces may become
muted and instead of people saying... " I will run through facism all the
people of the world" or " I will run through communism all the people in
the world", we may have instead a brotherhood of men. Who knows?
I don't, but I am sure that what you are doing and what we are trying to
help you do in a minor way is the only method by which this shining goal
might eventually be achieved.
Sc I do not, as I say, wish tonight to make too serious a
speech, but I would like to repeat a tribute that I made this morning, and
that is..... that the power inside this country, utilized as it is being
utilized by this country, is to me the only sure--not sure--the only
hopeful beacon, not only for this country, or for mine, but for the
peoples generally of the world. Well, the " Maine Lady" of whom you
spoke, long ago said to me something which she said I was to remember
on any occasion when I spoke to a gathering of people. It is a little
quatrain. It " I love the finished speaker, I really truly do. I
don't mean one who is polished, I just mean one who is through".
Mr. President, though I could for an hour go on expressing
the same feelings that you have expressed, I think it is unnecessary
because I think between friends short exchanges are understood and
detailed explanations are not required.
Therefore, I am through. 



VISIT TO THE U. S. 1968
WASHINGTON
JOINT COMMUNIQUE.
ISSUED BY PRESIDENT JOHNSON AND
PRIME MINISTER GORTON 28 MAY 1968
At the invitation of President Lyndon B. Johnson of the
United States, the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, Prime Minister of Australia,
paid an official visit to Washington on 27 and 28 May. This was Prime
Minister Gorton's first visit to the United States since assuming office.
It afforded the President and the Prime Minister an opportunity to exchange
views on matters of mutual concern, including the situation in South East
Asia. Australia-U. S. Relations
The President and the Prime Minister reviewed the current
state of Australia-U. S. relations. They expressed profound satisfaction
that the historic partnership between their two countries was continuing to
deepen and grow in significance for the security and progress of the Pacific
region. They re-aff irmed specifically the importance of the ANZUS Treaty
as an expression of the United States' continuing strategic interest in the
region and the continuing co-operation of the two Governments in the
maintenance of stability and security in Asia and the Pacific.
The Prime Minister and the President expressed their
gratification with the existing scientific co-operation between the two
countries. Such co-operation has advanced the state of science not only
to the benefit of both countries but to mankind generally. They agreed
that the special assistant to the President for science and technology and
a team of leading United States' scientists would visit Australia soon to
meet with the Australian Minister for Education and Science and his
colleagues, to identify additional areas appropriate for co-operative
activities and explore ways in which the close co-operation between the
American and Australian scientific communities could be broadened and
extended. Stressing the importance of the soundness of the dollar to
the maintenance of prosperous international economic conditions, the
Prime Minister reiterated his full support for the President's programme
to reduce the United States' balance of payments deficit. The President
assured the Prime Minister that the United States would strive to avoid
undesirable effects on Australia or other nations of measures taken under
the programme.
Vietnam The President and the Prime Minister reviewed in detail the
situation in South Vietnam, where Australian and American forces are
fighting side by side to assure.-the right of the Vietnamese people to
determine their own destiny free of outside interference. They agreed
that the establishment of a just and viable peace called both for a strong
military posture and for intensive diplomatic efforts. / 2 
2.
The Prime Minister expressed his gratification that the
President's initiative of 31 March had led to conversations with North
Vietnamese representatives. The President reviewed in detail the progress
of these talks to date. He re-affirmed that the United States Government
would continue to consult fully with the Australian Government and other
allies as the talks proceed. They agreed that the allied nations which
have helped to defend the Republic of Vietnam should participate in any
settlement of the conflict.
At the invitation of the President, the Prime Minister joined
him this morning at his meeting with Mr. Cyrus Vance, who returned from
Paris last night. Mr. Vance reported to the President and the Prime
Minister on the course of the discussions in Paris with the representatives
from North Vietnam. The President expressed particular appreciation for the
warm hospitality which the Australian people have extended to American
servicemen on leave from Vietnam.
Pacific Regional Co-operation
The President and the Prime Minister reviewed the
favourable trends in regional co-operation in the Pacific area which had
been noted at the ANZUS and SEATO Council meetings in April 1968.
They expressed satisfaction that, despite communist expansionism, many
constructive forces are promoting social and economic development in
the area. They re-affirmed a hope that the impressive growth of regional
groupfngs in Asia would continue, and expressed willingness to assist in
every appropriate and feasible way.
The President and Prime Minister recognized that the
United Kingdom's decision to accelerate withdrawal of its military forces
from South East Asia increased the need for regional consultation and
co-operation in the security field. The President welcomed Australia's
interest in the area, and assured the Prime Minister of his keen interest
in the progress of the consultations and in the outcome of the forthcoming
Five Power Conference in Kuala Lumpur. 



VISIT TO THE U. S. 1968.
WASHINGTON
PRESS BRIEFING GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTCN AT BLAIR HOUSE 28 MAY 1968
Q. Can you tell us anything of substance about today's talks
with the President?
PM. I cannot go into any sort of-any sort of detail, or any sort
of substance, really, other than what is covered in the communique.
Q. In general, Sir, would you say that you have achieved the
objectives which you brought here with you?
P. M. I think that I have a much better idea in my own mind, I
think on matters on which I wish to have ideas, and I think it has been.
and will be of Considerable assistance to me. And I think probably that
was a major objective.
Q. From what Mr. Bundy told us at the White House Conference,
he defined the ANZUS Treaty as applying to forces of all the signatories
in the Pacific area. But he left ambiguous, whether this would apply to
Australian forces in Malaysia, Singapore under a new setup such as would
emerge ultimately from the June conference. Have they in fact expressed
any opinion on whether ANZUS does apply in that?
FM. I wouldn't say any definite--I don't know I can give you any
definite answer to that either. ANZUS is a treaty--I think it does apply
in the three defined areas.
Q. It does or does not?
FM. I think it applies in certain defined areas. But I would want
to check this with the External Affairs people before I was sure that that
was correct. But by and large, I thinkC it has been, what shall I say-I
cannot think of the exact words--a matter--never spelled out whether it
applied in Malaysia and Singapore area or not.
Q. But that is exactly the point. It has never been spelled out.
The point is have you made a judgment in your mind now as to whether it
would apply to these two countries?
PM. Well, you are asking really the sort of questions which one
can pursue it to the point where it is the whole sort of subject of discussions.
And I do not think I am free to do that.
Q. Can I ask you this, then. This question, was it raised with
the President? Can you say this publicly?
PM. I do not think I am going to say anything about specific
questions raised with the President. / 2 
S 2.
Q. Possibly you would feel free to do it if I asked the question
in a different context. Are you in a position now to make a judgment on
the suggestions by the Tunku, Mr. Lee, that Australian forces should
remain in the Singapore -Malaysia area?
PM. I would answer that question saying I think I am in a
better position to form judgments on the whole of the area, Far East
Asian area, not just confining it to the part of that area which you asked
about.
Q. There is no reference in the communique to any statement
of Australian views on the nuclear non -proliferation treaty?
PM. Our position I think is known to the American Government.
They have been transmitted before. They have been made clear in the
United Nations by our spokesmen there. I would in a shorthand way
express what our man in the United Nations said--" Yes, but. Yes in
principle, but. And that is well-known. The " buts" being quite significant.
Q. Yes. Vie get back to asking you about the but. Was it
discussed?
PM4 I think the whole var~ iety of questions were discussed, and
if we get down to the question of whether this one was or was not, or the
other one ' was or was not, by an elimination contest we get down to me
saying--disclosing things which I do not feel free to disclose.
Q. Are you going--has it been decided that you will definitely
go to Texatom--on Thursday?
PM. Cn Thursday. I think this definitely has been. This has
been. Yes--we will be flying down from New York to the ranch and back
again. We will only be there for a couple of hours. I will be missing a
lunch I was otherwise going to attend, although not missing I gather
seeing Governor Rockefeller who we had hoped would be at the lunch but
who in fact is apparently not going to be. But there it is.
Q. What do you see as the value of this? I know apparently
General Westmoreland is going to be there. Can he give you aniy more
of an up-to-date picture of what is going on than Mr. Rusk or Mr.
Clifford must have given you?
PM. Can I answer that question in my way. If a Head of State
is visiting Australia, and I asked that Head of State to come down to my
farm and that I would arrange a meeting with somebody I considered
important for him to meet, I would expect that He-ad of State to accept
the invitaticn that I gave. Cn your specific question as to General
Vlestmcreland, I do not kAnow that I could s. ee any direct information
that would not be available in other ways, except perhaps a fresher
and more up-to-dato and more immediate report on the situation as
he saw it--he having within a matter of hours I think, having left it.
But that kind of information I suppose would have been available in a
day or two anyway.
Q. When are you seeing Rockefeller Sir? Would that be
Friday?
PM. WNe are still trying to work that out. You mean the
candidate? Z / 3 
3.
Q. Yes.
PM. Yes. We are still trying to work that out.
Q. But you plan. to be back in New York by Friday morning?
PM. No--Thursday night.
Q. Ch, I see.
M. This is a very rushed, very hurried visit. I gather it is
sort of a lunch. And then away again, back-to New York.
Q. Were you able to make any arrangements with Mr. Nixon?
PM. No. He is down in Texas, and he will be down in Texas
on the Thursday when we are there, at Dallas. But he is fully engaged
in his primaries until ter, o'clock at night on that Thursday night. And
this time change makes it impossible to fit that in. We then have to be
back in New York. We have to fly back. I think that--I am~ suff iciently
short of sleep as it is
0 He won't be gping up to New York on Friday?
PM. No, he is down campaigning down there. So, so far, the
only people that I am sure to be seeing are the President himself and of
course candidate Humphrey. And I would hope that one could see Rockefeller,
and if it were again possible on the way back through California, where I
think he is still going to be, Mr. Kennedy. But these primary campaigning
seem to be pretty solid sort of jobs. I will miss seeing as many candidates
as I should ideally have liked to see.
1Q. Sir, getting back, you said earlier that you had a much
better idea of the matters which brought you to Washington. Have you
made up your rWd on these matters, or are they still fluid?
PMi . I think I have got impressions and beliefs which would--which
will help in the e ventual making of decisions. Does that answer your
question? I think it does. I think it answers it precisely.
Q. Ycur talks with Mr. Vance, or the brief ing that you attended
this morning given by Mr. Vance, can you discuss this?
PM. Only in the most general terms, I think, But-it was a
progress report, I think you can describe it, if that is the right word.
It was a report on the attitudes which the North Vietnamese have been
taking up. In fact, after the point of refusing point-blank to admit there
were any North Vietnamese troops at all in South Vietnam, an indication
of what the North Vietnamese had refused to admit, and the intransigent
attitude they had taken, of a certain disappointment that what was thought
to be constructive suggestions by the United States on " Let us get this
established and try and start from there, had just been turned down--
and I suppose one could say forecast or speculations or hopes of what
might or possibly might not happen in the future.
Q. Did ' yot feel rhpt Mr. Vance was not very hopeful about
what ccould evenririe? o. / 4 
PM. It seemed to me that he thought it would be a long time
befoe-~-long time before the present phase might finish. Although again,
the thing is unpredictable.
Q. Sir, can you tell us something about the talks you had this
afternoon with the Secretary of Commerce Smith and the Secretary of the
Treasury Fowler?
PM. Well, we discussed-expressed Australian interests, and
our hopes that such things as our export of meat to the United States would
not be affected by any action, that the international agreement might be
proceeded with--expressed our hope that it would be proceeded with,
expressed our interest in sugar, international sugar agreement business
in Geneva coming to a successful conclusion. And that kind cf those
are examples of the matters upon which we put forward arguments designed
to indicate that we felt that any prevention of our access to this market,
any additional prevention would go badly in our interests, and eventually
not really be good for the United States interests, either.
Q. Did you discuss the equalization tax, Sir?
PM&amp; No, no--it was commodity matters.
Q. W,' hat about the wool tariff? Did yoU discuss that?
rFM. Well, that falls in with--yes--wool and neat.
Q. Are you -any more hopeful?
PM. Well, we put cur case as strongly as we could. But there
are a lot of difficulties, as you know, inside the United States, as you know
indeed inside our own country, the particular interests involved.
Q. Along the same direction, but I am going to do it in a different
way--and ask if you are under any compulsion to revise your warning to
your Party meetings that the forward defence policy of the Menzies era may
have to. be amended?
PM. Well, the report of what I was alleged to say at the Party
meeting indicated that there were a number of possibilities in front of
us, but the situa, 3tion was not as clear-cut as it has been, and those
possibilities are still possibilities. And I do feel that, at the beginning,
that I am in a better-I feel inside myself I am in a better position to
form judgments on which of these possibilities we should eventually
decide to do.
Q. Do you fore see a defence review in Australia, Sir, after
you go back?
PM. Not a defence review, I do not think. We will be looking
at defence in context of the budget. But sort of, you know-I am not
quite sure what you mear, by defence review.
Q. Well, a general review of Australia's strategic pcsiticn
in South East Asia.
PM. Ch, well-I daresay that that will be a subject of Cabinetdiscussion,
yes. But that is not a strategic paper or anything, a three
year plan or anything of that kind. 
S
Q. Could you give us a hint, however slight, what this ultimate
judgment might be?
PM. No. I would want to talk to my Cabinet colleagues. I would
want to make a full report to them. I think they after that should make it
on behalf of the Government to the Parliament any statement that might be
made. We are both in a very awkward position, I think--you as newsmen
and me as somebody being interviewed, because you are really asking
questions which are quite proper questions to which you ought to have the
answers, but I am in a position where I cannot give them. We have been
having conversaticons which were essentially private conversations.
Q. To put it another way, are you thoroughly satisfied in ycur
cwrn mind as to the future role the U1aited States will play in that part of
the globe?
PM. In Asia?
6 Yes.
PM. I feel the United States will not lose interest in South East
Asia.
Q. That is pretty vague.
PM. Well, I said that much.
Q. Was the private nature of the talks your idea or Mr.
Johnson's, or sort of mutual?
PM. I do not think you could say it was mine or Mr. Johnson's.
I think in the very nature of things, discussions, if they are to be completely
open and full and free and frank between two Heads of State, must be
private and must not be discussed afterwards, or : if they are, then there
are no further such discussions. But really, the val ue of them is if they
are completely open and free. And I cannot talk about what they were
about. It is self -defeat ing.
Q. There is a secticn in the communique that deals with the
support of the dollar. " The Prime Minister reiterated his full support
of the President's programme to reduce the United States balance of
payment deficit", which is three to cne in the United States favour. Vlhat
is the point of that?
PM. Well, to. tell you the truth, we did not go into that. But in
the communique, it sort of slipped past. This refers to, which it should
refer to, our belief that the taxation proposals of the Administration and
their involvement in supporting the National Bank, and the need to reduce
the United States over-all deficit, were all necessary if thle power of the
United States was to continue. Now, there was no great discussion on
those points. But this arises, I would take it just in passing noting that
we do believe that the stability of the United States dollar needs to be
maintained in the world. This has been stated departmentally, and that
I think did not engage our attention, because it was agreed.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, do you see any possibility that
Australia will adhere to ASEAN or one of those regional groupings that
are beginning to emerge in your part of the world there? / 6 
6.
PM. You say do I see any possibility of it. We are interested
in the region. It would need careful studies by the External Affairs
Department to see whether a particular regional grouping upset some
other type of regional grouping in the same area. But we would be
interested I think. We would see a possibility in the future of participating
in arrangements which were designed to assist the progress of the region.
I think we would be interested, But then the particular proposals, whether
it was Asian or something else, would need study. But in principle, we
would be I am sure--the possibility of us being interested in regional
arrangements.
Q. Through inadvertence, the three of us were waiting outside
for the conference to begin--not realizing it was under way.
PM. You did not miss anything.
Q. I wanted to ask you about the ultimate judgment quotewhat
that might have referred to.
PM. The what what? You want to ask me what?
Q. A reference to an ultimate judgment that would have to be
reached.
PM. It was in answer to a question that was asked. Is that
what you meant?
Q. Yes.
FM. You came in just as I was answering, somebody's question.
I do not remember what the question was, but I think it was along the
lines of-I cannot remember what it was.
Q. You said you were in a better position.
PM. That is right--that I felt I was in a better position to form
an ultimate judgment, or an ultimate decision with my Government--form
an ultimate judgment and ultimate decision.
Q. If you do not get to see Senator Kennedy--and it does not
look like you are going to--and Rockefeller now has become doubtful
or more doubtful than it has appeared in the last couple of days, you will
only have seen the President and Vice-President Humphrey. Don't you
think this visit will kind of lose some of its value?
PM. I think it would be more valuable. I don't think there can
be any question that it would have been more valuable had I been able to
see more candidates. But that does not mean that it is in any degree not
without great value to have seen those I have seen.
Q. It might be better if you do not see any candidates, because
you might call on the wrong ones.
PM. It has great va lue, too, in seeing officials. I know
secretaries of the various departments change, but there is some
continuity in them, and I thin~ k there has been some value in that,
too--for the most part sitting in c~ n discussion. / 7 
7.
The President the other night made a specific point that he
could not speak for his successors. But you still feel that you have learned
enough from here to make your ultimate decision.
I think I am in a much better position, I think are the words
I used, to make an ultimate decision. And of course nobody can tell what
August or November will hold. It may be a completely satisfactory
position to form an ultimate judgment. But on the other hand it may be
just in a better position.
6
4' Q. PM. 



VISIT TO THE U. S. 1968
WASHINGTON
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CL( i i JU] 096B
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORI&amp; 18 R
28 MAO 1968
Mr. President, and Gentlemen:-
I suppose this is the most daunting audience to whom it
would be possible for a politician to speak, because quite clearly, every
word that is said, and particularly if it is said off the cuff--and in any
case it has to be said off the cuffi because I have not got anybody to write
my speeches for me, I haven't got time to do as many as I should--but
every word that is said off the cuff is listened to, and interpreted; I won't
go so far as to say misinterpreted, but at any rate, very, very closely
examined. The other thing about it is that all of you know so much more
about international and economic affairs than any speaker who came to
talk to you could possibly claim to know. So there are considerable
difficulties facing me.
Now, this has brought to my mind a delightful mental
picture, when you talked about the sequoia, and coupled with the words
" duchessing" and " arm-twisting". And I could not help but wonder what
the duchess was having her arm twisted for. But I do not think either of
those things in effect happened. I do not wish to talk to you for a long
time. Initially, when I first came and spoke at the reception I
was given at the White House, I sketched out in short compass the feelings
that we in Australia have about what the United States is doing in various
parts of the world, and, by implication, what we hoped the United States
would continue to do in various parts of the world. But there are one or
two things that I do want to say.
I do want to say that as a representative of a small nationit
is all right-later on I will tell you how big we are going to be in the
future--but just at the moment a comparatively small nation I
wonder if anybody has thought what the situation of comparatively small
nations in the world today would be if there were not in existence a United
States, with a heritage of democracy, and with a willingness to see that
small nations, who otherwise might not be able by themselves, were given
some shield and some guarantee that they would be able to run their own
affairs in their own way. just imagine what the situation in the world would
be if there were not a great and giant country which were prepared to make
those sacrifices for that end. And the end is not negligible.
For a long time, for as long as my study of history extends
into the past, and indeed for as long as my vista of the future extends,
there is likely to be, as there has also been, a deep division of opinion
among mankind as to whether it is better for a country, any country, to
have political freedom, to have Governments which are chosen by
majorities and dismissed by majorities, or whether it is better to have
some Government which is not so subject to dismissal, and which is a
state above the individual. This is the cleavage which for so long has
continued: Is the state designed to serve the individual or is the individual
designed to serve the state? / 2 
Now we have seen in the past this struggle in the Second
World War, when those who believed that the individual was merely
something to serve the state--when those who believed that you could
not have political and economic freedom, but had to submit yourself to
some arbitrary authority in order to gain a loaf of bread, sought, under
black fascism to have it around the world. And that kind of division
of opinion still exists.
If it is true, as I believe that it is true, that in the future
mankind, as a whole, and in all the nations of the world, can only reach
a state of enduring peace and proper progress if it is realized that the
individual must dominate the state and not the other way around, then
what was done in the Second W-orld War was something which serves the
future of humanity. Now, I go further.
As we see it in Australia, this is the basic question in
Vietnam. It is claimed this is a civil war. We do not see it that way.
We see it as your President sees it, and as I believe your President's
predecessors saw it, as another test of whether small nations are to be
subdued by force, as another test of whether the state or the individual
is to be the unit by which humanity progresses. And because we see it
that way, we contribute. We do not contribute a great deal, but we do
have Navy, Air Force, Army there. We do what we can to help, because
we think that what you are doing to help the South Vietnamese is right.
I do not mean that all the people in my country feel this
way, because I do not. But I do mean that the vast majority of them, the
last time they had a chance to express their opinion, felt this way. And
I am confident that the next time they have a chance to express their
opinion, they will feel this way--though in the interregnums I have no
doubt that minorities will protest, will carry banners, will get television
coverage, will get press coverage, but will not represent the feelings of
my own nation. Now, let me tell you a little of my own nation-those of you
who have not been there. I know there were thirty or so who recently came
through--we were delighted to see them. We are a country of some 12
million people. We are a country of immense national resources which
have not yet been properly or fully exploited. We are a country, as I
believe, where frontiers lie for those who are willing to come and live
with us, for those who are willing to provide that capital we need to help
us develop into a significant power--a more significant power. Let me
tell you some of the things that have happened in the last ten years in this
comparatively new country.
In that time, our gross national product has risen from
5003 million to $ 18, 800 million--an eighty per cent increase. Despite
the growth, the average annual increase in our gross national product
has been five and a half per cent. Our fixed capital investment has
doubled, from 500 million a year to 000 million a year. And ninety
per cent of that capital investment comes from our own resources--ten
per cent from abroad. We have invested twenty-six per cent of our gross
national product in this kind of growth. VWe have increased our population
over a period--give or take a year or two--from nine million to twelve
million. Well, Mr. President, I do not think that is too bad a record.
And if I sound as if I am bragging, it is because I am. But it is only the
beginning. 
They have already discovered most of the oil, sixty per
cent of the oil that we are going to require for our present needs, and
there will be discovered all that is going to be required for our future
needs. The mineral resources already uncovered are fabulous. And
yet I believe the surface has scarcely been scratched.
I am certain that given ten, twenty years, we will be able
to provide a nation of twenty million--twenty-five million people--and
we will be able to give to each individual in that nation that kind of social
justice which we believe must be a part of any successful country. We
must see that those who are subjected to the " slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune", to illness and old age, ( against which they have been
unable to provide) to invalidism, are properly looked after, and we will
do this. We will play our part, as we grow, along the lines I have
roughly sketched, in the region in which we live, because I think that not
only we, but all the wealthy countries of the world must, if they are in
the future to be understood-must, if they are, in the future, to see the
kind of Governments which will serve their people established in Asia,
be prepared to help contribute and establish those countries in Asia for
the benefit of the people there and for the benefit of ourselves and of our
children and of our grandchildren.
I think that in this task that lies before us, we have been
enormously helped by the United States. I believe the completion of this
task will be brought the more quickly to fruition by the continued help of
the United States in the area--not the United States alone but by the United
States, with us, and such others as will join in that area in the economic
development, the raising of the living standards of the Asian people, the
raising, therefore, of the requirements, the material requirements of
the Asian people, and the protection of what I began to talk about as
political requirements, but will finish talking about as spiritual
requirements. Because in fact, that is what political freedom meansit
means that economic freedom must be provided through political
freedom, but it also means that the innate desire of every individual to
deVelop to the top of his bent, to the best of his capacity, in h ichever
way he wants to go, must be encouraged and permitted, subject only to
his not exploiting those others among whom he lives.
Well, Sir, you have got a lot of questions set down there,
and perhaps I have talked long enough. But I did want to let you know
just the gratitude we feel to the United States, just the certainty of
development in the future we feel for ourselves. And I think there is
almost no Australian and no Australian leader who would not say to you,
even if he is in a different party--and different parties are not much
good--but if he is in a different party, he would at least join with me in
this, to say we are going to grow, we are going to try to provide an
example of a nation along the lines I have indicated to you. We are already
on the way. I do not know where the end of that way will be, but I do know
this--that a nation's reach must exceed its grasp, or what is a future for.
And our reach is pretty great, I think.
I thank you.
President romley: Mr. Frimne Minister, please tell us what you can
about the results of your talks with the President and his advisers. / 4 
Prime Minister: I would be delighted to, Mr. Secretary. We had
some most interesting talks on a whole variety of subjects. But of course
since they were private talks, it is difficult to say any more than that, or
they would cease to be private talks.
Q. It has been reported, Mr. Prime Minister, that you envisage an Israeli
style defence posture for Australia in the future, relying on the ability to
launch punitive forays to discourage aggression. Is this so?
PM. This was never a statement made by me publicly. This was
a statement attributed to me by interpreters of what had been said at a
private meeting. And I cannot discuss or disclose what was said at a
private meeting--that is a Party meeting. But I would be prepared to say
this--that we, in Australia, when I talk of an Israeli-type capacity for
defence, mean a citizen army, properly armed, properly quipped, and
ready to be able to go at a moment's notice into action, just as the Israelis
were able to go at a moment's notice into action. This does not necessarily
mean that such an army is to be used only in Australia, because we have
treaty commitments with the United States, and we regard those as our
greatest shield. But it does mean that I would like to see allied with
mobility of forces, spearheads able to be used immediately, and a build-up
of that kind of citizen military force. which means that for a large part of
the year an individual carries out whatever his occupation may be, but is
available for call-up, is trained for part of the time each year) and is
properly armed and equipped should an emergency ever arise.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, what will Australia do to bolster Malaysia -Singapore
defence after Britain leaves?
PM. Mr. President, that is a matter which is to be discussed on
June at the Five Power Meeting to be held in Kuala Lumpur, between
Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore. Until
that Five Power Meeting has been held, and indeed quite possibly this first
Five Power Meeting may only lead to future discussions amongst the
same powers--but until those matters have been hammered out, a precise
answer to what I take to be a question of defence rather than economic help
and other help just simply could not be given. It is on 10O June that talks
begin to see what all the various countries concerned in the region are
prepared or able or willing to do.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you proscribed defence, but indicate
you leave open economic. Would you care to discuss that.
Pm. Well, we already provide considerable economic assistance
to the area, and not only to Malaysia and Singapore, but to the area which
includes Indonesia, our nearest neighbour, and our most populous
neighbour. Through the Colombo Rlan, a considerable amount is provided.
A great deal of technical and scientific training and training in public
administration is given in our own universities. We have in Australia
some 130, 0,00 Asian students at the moment--not all from Colombo Plan.
But we have the equivalent of one complete Australian university devoted
to training Asian administrators, Asian doctors, whatever it might be. We
of course will continue to do that. I think the United Nations or somebody
in the United Nations has suggested that all countries ought to give one per
cent of their gross national product--not all countries--that a number of
countries ought to give one per cent of their gross national product to a lot
of other countries. We do not see any particular point in picking out a
specific figure like that. But we are, per head, I think, from memory,
something like the third ranking country in the world in the provision of
foreign aid of various kinds. 
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, with : Emerson, Roche, and Newcombe,
all professionals now, is Australia prepared to surrender the Davis Cup
to the United States?
PM. Well Mr. President, can you tell me when a tennis player
is an amateur and when he is a professional, and when you can, I will
answer that question!
Q. With the United States having second thoughts about the
F-li! aircraft, is Australia considering cancelling its purchase rather
than to be saddled with an inferior machine?
PM. Now, Mr. President, I would hate to get into an intercompany
argument about the capacities of any particular aircraft, Whoever wrote
that question states that this is an inferior machine. On the other hand,
there does seem to be quite a body of opinion that it is an extremely good
machine indeed. I understand that at this stage of development, the F I11
has had rather fewer accidents than the Phantom had at the same stage
of development. This at least is what I am told. And the specific answer
to the first part of your question, Sir, is no--we have contracted to buy
F-111aircraft. We have a team over here now seeing whether there are,
as with most developing aircraft, some bugs that need to be ironed out.
When they are ironed out to the satisfaction of our own team, then we
would propose to continue with the purchases that we have already
undertaken to make.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, do you think the peace talks in Paris
should include representatives from South Vietnam?
PM. I cannot answer for South Vietnam, and I would not propose
to. But as far as my own country is concerned, at this stage of the peace
talks in P-aris, which I imagine are really talks to see whether there is
a base for any peace tallks--we see at this stage no requirement for
Australian participation. ' We do have there an External Affairs
representative--that is a State Department representative using your
terms--and he is in close consultation with Mr. Harriman and Mr. Vance.
But this does not seem to me to be the sort of exercise where a lot of
people s it around a table-it ha s not reached anywhere nea r that pointto
work out an old-fashioned Versailles Peace Treaty. Rather it is a
circumstance where the United States' representatives, the North
Vietnamese representatives are having discussions. We have the
opportunity to express our views to the United States' representatives
as various aspects of those discussions arise. That is all we wish. And
I cannot speak for South Vietnam.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, do you endorse Prime Minister Holt's
position of " All the way with LBJ". Are you all the way with LBJ, another
questioner asks?
PM. Two of them. Let me perhaps answer it in this way as in a
sense I answered it when I first came. We think that the United* States has
in its history so far done more than any other country to protect the rights
of small nations and the liberties of the individual. We have treaty
obligations under the ANZUS pact with the United States. We form our
own judgments and make our own policies on aspects of foreign affairs
as they may arise in the future. But I think it likely, on past example,
that the objects of the United States would be likely to be the same objects
as those of the Australian people. And that, I think, is what I will say on
that. 
ti er Do you plan to visit Vietnam and other Asian countrieq
PM. Yes, Sir, I will be arriving back in Australia on 1 June,
and leaving--if my memory serves me right--on 5 June for Vietnam,
and from Vietnam to Malaya, Singapore and Indonesia. And I ought to
make it clear that the only reason that the other Asian countries are not
included is because there just are not enough hours in the day or days in
the month to make this possible when there are also local political
requirements. They will come later.
Q. Could Australia's prosperity survive a recession in Japanthat
is, is the Australian economy now too reliant on exports of ore?
PM. I think if there were a serious recession in Japan, that it
would have some effect on the purchases of our iron ore. But the
Australian prosperity I thinkc would still survive. It is now so much more
broadly based than it used to be. Certainly Japan in many ways is one of
our best customers. The United States is our third best customer. Vie
can even survive a recession in the United States. But I think neither
one of those possibilities is likely.
Q. In the interests of promoting tourism to Australia and the
South Pacific, do you contemplate modifying the ban against air charters
to Australia?
PM. Look, this frankly I do not know. I would have to talk to
my Minister for Civil Aviation about that, and get all the pros and cons
of it. I will write you a letter.
Q. How do you feel about reports that New Zealand wants to
become a state of Australia?
PM. Well, I feel they are inaccurate, and grossly exaggerated,
like Mark Twain said about the report of his death. I have just recently
been in New Zealand, and spoken to their Government, and they, I am
quite sure, Sir, do not want to become a state of Australia. I do not
know whether I should go any further and raise any queries as to whether
Australia wants them to be a state anyway, because there are difficulties
about federal governments which plague us as it is. But I do add to that
that what we are arranging with New Zealand, and what New Zealand is
arranging with us is closer and closer economic ties, and a kind of free
market, as it were, where a factory established in New Zealand can have
products in Australia entering either free of duty or with less duty than
many other countries. But they are quite properly a very independent
and proud nation.
Q. Is the American duty on Australian wool hurting that
industry badly, and have you askXed the United States to modify it?
PM. The answer to the first part of that question is, it is hurting
it, and the answer to the second part of that question is yes, frequently.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, are you in any way disturbed by the
anti-Vietnam, anti-war sentiment being expressed in the United States?
PM. It is difficult for somebody at as great a distance as I
am to assess the real depth of the anti-Vietnam sentiment being expressed
in a country 3, 000 miles away, or however many thousand miles away it is.
/ 7 
7.
But we do have the same kind of expression in our own country, and it is
an expression of a very small minority. My mind, Mr. President, goes
to a quotation from a speech by one of your former great Presidents,
Theodore Roosevelt, who said that the dangers to freedom in the sort of
society that the United States has or would have do not come so much.
from majorities as from organized and fanatical minorities who attempt
to impose their will or their wishes by other than constitutional means
or the ballot box. This I think is the situation in my own country as
regards those who express, violently express, anti-Vietnam sentiment.
What the situation is in the United States, I don't know. There are, of
course, others. I speak of people who make violent protests. There
are of course others who have doubts in my own country, and no doubt
in yours. There are people who see this as a civil war in my own
country, as no doubt in yours. I do not agree with them. And they are
not worrying in Australia because they are not in a majority in my view.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, we have writers from all segments
of industry here. How is oil prospecting going in Australia? You mentioned
oil in your speech. Would you elaborate?
PM. Yes. Well, the two major finds, or the major find so far
has been under the sea, between the state of Victoria, where a combination
of companies--Esso, one of yours, Broken Hill Pty., one of ours-has
discovered really what looks like being, but not yet fully proved to be,
very, very great oil deposits indeed. It is estimated that they have found
oil on Barrow Island in Western Australia, thousands of miles away, and
some other smaller fields at Moonie. already provide sixty per cent of
our present oil requirements. Oil prospecting is continuing, and I
believe, though there is nothing but faith behind this belief-that more and
more will be found, and that we will be able to be completely independent
in this field.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, is the fact that you have an American
wife a disadvantage to you in Australian politics?
PM. Mr. President, it would be quite impossible for any man in
this room ever to say that a wife he had of whatever nationality was a
disadvantage. But I can add to that, and say that not only is it not a
disadvantage-it is in my view a great advantage, particularly since we
discovered, much to her and my surprise, a year or so ago, that she is
not only an American citizen, but also an Australian citizen. So we get
the best of both worlds.
Q. Mr. P-rimie Minister, when would you say the next election
will take place in Australia?
PM. The time at which the next election should take place, if
the House of Representatives runs its full term, is towards the end of
1969. That is the time when it would take place, if the House of
Representatives ran its full term.
Q. Someone asks--when will the Sydney Opera House be
finished? Will you have that open house so we can all at least come and
visit?
PM. Well, I would hope that you would all come and visit before
the Sydney Opera House is completed, because the last party we had
through was thoroughly enjoyable from our point of view, and I think from
their point of view, and gave us extremely good publicity coverage. But
/ 8 
8.
there -does seem to be some argument about the precise date at which the
Cpera House to which you refer will be f inished. Indeed, Sir, some of
the more disrespectful citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia are
referring to the F-ill1 as a flying opera hotse. I am not. But I think
within a year or two. It is really taking shape. It will be something when
it is done, and something worth coming to see. But don't wait for it--just
come.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, before the last question, we want to
extend to you our certificate of appreciation awarded for meritorious
service to correspondents of press, radio and television in the capitol
and our traditional press club official silk necktie.
PM. Thank you very much Sir.
Q. Finally, Mr. Prime Minister--is it true that Matilda has
stopped waltzin-g, too, in Australia, and is now doing the. frug?
PM. No, Sir, that is completely untrue. Mind you--what did
you call that-
Q. It is a dance.
PM. I know it is a dance. I rather think that occasionally some
foreign ministers get photographed doing it. But we are quite versatile,
quite versatile, and the young people and the not-so-young people certainly
do whatever that last dance you mentioned was. But they have not stopped
Waltzing Matilda, because Waltzing Matilda is not our national anthemit
is our national song. There have, I think, been no occasions on which
Australian troops have marched to war except to the strains of Waltzing
Matilda. There have, 1 think, been no occasions when vanguards of
Australian' troops entered cities, such as Bardia, and with a certain
braggadocio, hauled a slouched hat to the top of a flagpole, when they did
not do it to the strains of Waltzing Matilda. There won't be everybody
in Australia who agrees with me on this. But my own mind goes back to a
time in London during the blitz, when a few of us waliked into a nightclubbecause
in those days we were young enough to walk into night-clubsin
Air Force uniform, Australian Air Force un-iform, and as we entered
the band, no doubt because it had run out of other tunes to play, suddenly
struck up Waltzing Matilda, and I think that all Australians, with me, were
stirred, and will continue to be stirred by this song--even though we do
this other dance you mentioned in the intervals. 



VISIT TO THE U. S. 1968
TEXAS
PRESS CCNFERNM HELD AT LBJ RANCH
N 30 MAY 1968
THE PRESIDENT
Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton, General Westmoreland, Ladies and
Gentlemen: We are delighted to have you here with us today. I have an
announcement or two to make.
First, I should like to announce the promotion of Lieutenant-
General Bruce Palmer, to the full rank of General. General Palmer
will be retiring from his current position as Deputy Commanding General,
U. S. Army, Vietnam, to become Chief of Staff of the United States Army
with Headquarters in Washington. He will serve as the Vice Chief of
Staff to General Westmoreland, who will be Chief of Staff. General Palmer
has a distinguished . military career spannirg thirty-one years of service.
He has been in Vietnam since March 1967, serving as the Commanding
General of the Second Field Forces and as the Deputy Commanding General.
In addition, I am announcing the re-assignment of General
Ralph E. Haines, Jr., as Commander in Chief of the U. S. Army in the
Pacific. He will replace General Dwight E. Beach, who is retiring. General
Haines presently serves as Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Army.
I am alsc announcing numerous other promotions which will
be supplied to you by the Press Secretary.
We are delighted to have with us today the distinguished Prime
Minister, Mr. Gortcn, and Mrs. Gorton, from I! iustralia. Although Mr.
Gorton and I had met before in Canberra, this was cur first meeting since
he became Prime Minister. Vie took the occasio~ n to spend a gccd deal of
time together since his arrival last Monday.
As all of you know, the ties between Australia and the United
States grow stronger each year. As part of this shared vision, and to
honour our common interests and commitments, our nr-n are now fighting
side by side under General Westmoreland's leadership in Vietnam. So we
have reviewed together, with Ambassador Vance, who returned from the
Paris talks, the progress of the Paris talks. This morning, with General
W~ estmoreland, we reviewed the course of the battle on the ground. As a
result of our talks, I am confident that we have strengthened the bonds
between our two countries as we face together the hard but the productive
tasks which lie before us in the months ahead.
It now gives me very special pride to award a Presidential
Unit Citation to the D Company of the 6th Battalion cf the Royal Australian
Regiment for extraordinary heroism while serving in Vietnam. I have long
had reason to know personally what we have learned as a nation over the
past half century since the world war. That is, that in a fight, there is no
better man to have by your side than an Australian. Only yesterday morning
/ 2 
2.
I received a typical report of Australians in combat. A very small unit
of the Third Royal Australian Regiment was blocking an infiltration route
towards Saigon twenty-six miles north-east of the capitol. About 1, 030
of the enemy, some fresh from North Vietnam, threw themselves against
this Australian base. Heavy fighting took place over two hours. The
enemy withdrew, laving 44 dead and 32 weapons on the battlefield. Seven
prisoners were: captured. General Westmoreland sent a message of
congratulations to Major-General MacDcnald who commands the Australian
forces in Vietnam. That is the kind of steady courage that we have come tc
expect from the Australians. I think this is a very good moment to remind
all of the American people of this fact. The war is not being fought in
Vietnam simply by Americans; it is being fought by the South Vietnamese,
the Australians, the New Zealanders, the Koreans, the Thais and the
Philippinos. Together, we shall bring a just and honourable peace to
South East Asia, for that is cur objective--and I want to repeat, that is
cur only objective. From last summer to the end of March of this year, we
have made a very special effort to move this war to the conference table
and to peace talks. On 31 March, in a speech to the nation, I said that
we would undertake a major unilateral act of de-escalation. We would
lift the bcrpbing from most of the territory and population of North Vietnam,
including Hanoi and Haiphong, and we would free cur hands so we could
concentrate every resource at our command in the search for peace. At
that time I announced I would not seek or accept the Presidential nomination.
I felt that these two steps might--just might--bring Hand to the conference
table. A month went by, but that has now happened, and these talks are
being conducted in Paris. I cannot report to the American people any
substantive progress, nor can I even report that Hanoi has matched our
restraint with theirs. But if Hanoi will take responsive action, we are
ready to go far and fast with them, and with others, to reduce the violence
and to build a stable peace in South East Asia. We have done everything
that we know how to do to bring us to this point. We shall continue to do
everything that we know how to do to bring peace to the world.
Now it gives me great pleasure to present the Presidential
Citatcn to the distinguished Prime Minister. We would be glad to have a
word from him if he cares to.
PRIME MINISTER GORTON
Mr. President, Mrs. Johnson, General Westmoreland, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
I accept with a feeling of very great pride in my countrymen
this Presidential Citation which has been awarded for their heroism in action.
So I shall take it and hand it to the Chief of Staff of the Australian Army.
He and all Australians will feel the same pride that I do, that this has been
presented for what they on that day did.
I would like to thank you, too, Sir, during this brief visit
tc the United States, for I shall leave tomorrow, for all the time that you
have put aside for discussions with me, and for all the time which your
senior officials and secretaries of relevant departments have put aside
for discussions with me. 
0 3.
I feel that this has been of great advantage to me, and I
believe that we know each other's minds as to the problems of the South
East Asian area generally, and as to the future we both wish to see in the
South East Asian area generally--a future where prosperity is able to be
based upon peace and peace is able to be based on an absence from fear.
I thank you, Sir.
THE PRESIDENT General Westmoreland arrived here earlier this morning
and briefed me and Prime Minister Gorton; and together we heard a somewhat
detailed report from the Prime Minister of Australia of developments in
South Vietnam. I should like to ask him to summarize for the American
people and for those of you who have come here today that report he has
given to us.
GENERAL WESTMCRELAND
Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
I am happy to summarize my discussion on the situation in
Vietnam. First, what are the current objectives of the enemy? In my
opinion, his primary objective is to destroy the Government of South Vietnam.
This has been his objective since 1958, but Hanoi is now emphasizing this
objective more than ever before. Secondly, he wants to develop an image
of strength in the eyes cf the people of the United States and the world in
the hope that this will bring about an attitude of futility toward the success
of our objective of a free and independent South Vietnam.
How is he attempting to accomplish these objectives? First,
by resorting to terrorizing the people, creating refugees, and attempting to
coerce the people to demonstrate against the Government. Second, by wagng
a massive world-wide propaganda campaign based on distorted informaticn,.
Third, by defeating Vietnamese troops and isolating them from the Amtxican
and free world forces. Fourth, by defeating the United States units for
propaganda purposes. Finally, by seizing territory and thereby strengthening
his posture in the South.
The enemy is having to deploy ever-larger numbers of men
from the North, and the war is destined to become increasingly more and
more cf a North Vietnamese invasion of the South. The North Vietnamese
are strangers to the people in the South and are unfamiliar with the area.
In fact, now over 72 per cent of the organized combat forces, excluding
guerillas, are North Vietnamese. It is estimated that there are approximately
000 North Vietnamese soldiers in the South, with more arriving every day.
The facade that the enemy has carefully created, that this is a war of the
people, has been destroyed with the influx cf hordes of North Vietnamese.
But in spite of this total effort, his only victories of the last few years have
been in the propaganda field. In this connection, I am confident that the
enemy is receiving false reports from his field commanders. This partially
explains his alleged and exaggerated battlefield successes, which are distorted
by a factor of from three to twelve, and in some cases even more. / 4 
In summary, the enemy seems to be approaching a point
of desparation; his forces are deteriorating in strength and quality. I
forecast that these trends will continue. Cn the other hand, the South
Vietnamese armed forces are becoming progressively stronger and more
effective. Our troops and those of our free world allies continue to perform
in magnificent fashion. However, we must be prepared for continued heavy
fighting ahead, especially in the northern area, the highlands, and around
Saigon. But time is on cur side. Endurance on the battlefield and patience
at home are required.
THE PRESIDENT Thank you very much, General Westmcreland. It is very
difficult to give, in a few minutes, the full report that you have made today.
I have asked the General to take the statement that he dictated
and reviewed with the Prime Minister and I and to make it available to you.
You will have an opportunity to review the details of it much more at length
than he has been able to go over with you now,
0 We are very happy General Westmcreland is returning to
Washington to take the place formerly occupied by General Blackjack
Fershing, George Marshall and Dwight Eisenhower as Head of the Chief of
Staff of the United States Army and the leader of the United States Army
in this country. His performance has been exceptional and brilliant. I
look forward to working very closely with him in the days ahead.
If there are any questions that you care to ask, I will be
glad to receive thenm.
SQuestion: Mr. President, in view of the step-up of the war on the enemy
side, the unprecedented infiltration of men and supplies, do you have any
plan to reconsider your partial bombing pause?
PF resident: We have under consideration appropriate actions every day.
They are constantly being considered. What is the proper course to bring
peace in the world? What is the proper course to bring an end to the war
in South Vietnam?
Q. Mr. President, this week the House took action that would
indicate the sense of the Congress is to tie a six billion dollar cut inFederal
spending to any tax increase. Would you be prepared to sign a Tax Bill that
has that big a Federal cut in it?
A. Yes. For nearly two years I have urged the Congress to pass
a Tax Bill. That tax amounts to about one cent on the dollar. With it,
though, I think America could follow a sound fiscal course, and I have
repeated those recommendations week after week and month after month.
Without it, the gates of economic chaos, I think, could open, and I think
the country would face several serious problems. First, an inflation tax
of at least four cents on every dollar. Second, interest rates could go up
as high as ten per cent. Third, a severe housing depression would be in
the offing. Fourth, the disappearance of cur world trade surplus. Fifth,
the end of cur unprecedented 87 months of prosperity in this country. Now
the nation and the Congress are faced with a Tax Bill. But it has coupled
with it a six billion requirement in a reduction of expenditures. I deeply
regret that we are faced with such a choice, as I have said on several 
occasions. The Budget that I submitted in January blended fiscal
responsibility with what we considered urgent national purpose. That
tight Budget was my best judgment in January, and that is my best judgment
today. Nevertheless, the President does not make laws alone. He only
approves measures that the Congress has passed. I have indicated that I
would approve a tax increase with a four billion cutback in 1969 expenditures.
Yesterday, however, the House of Representatives defeated a motion to
limit the expenditure cutback to four billion. So the only choice remaining
now is whether the need for a tax increase is so urgent that we must accept
the six billion reduction. I believe that the need for a tax increase is that
urgent. I believe that the national interest requires the tax increase as
soon as possible, Therefore, if the Congress will vote for the conference
report containing the tax increase and the six billion expenditure cut, I
shall approve it. I urge the Congress to adopt the eonference report at as
early a date as possible, and give me the opportunity to sign the measure.
Q. Mr. ' President, do you share the belief of Cyrus Vance that
because North Vietnam is at the conference table in Paris, it eventually wants
peace and that, therefore, these talks are going to, as Mmi Vance put it,
move to the end and go into full-scale peace negotiations?
A. We feel that as a result of our statement back in March, as
I repeated earlier, that we had two steps to take. One was to try to get
Hanoi to the conference table. That has been done. How far are we going
to get in those conferences is pure speculation. We don't know. We hope
that we can have a satisf ' actory. conference that will produce results. I
don't care to speculate. I do not feel it has produced any substantive results
to this date. I think we must all continue to try to expore every possible
avenue; get down to substantive discussions as soon as possible. But as
to what the outcome might be, I think I would rather let developments take
care of that.
Q. Mr. President, could you tell us wlie re, if you get this Bill
now through Congress, you feel you would be forced to make most of these
cuts in human terms, what the country is likely to lose from that kind of
a spending cut? We will have to make announcements on that. I wouldn't
want to make an announcement on a measure that I have not seen, and
expenditure cuts that have not been made. After the measure gets to me,
if it is in the amount that the conference report contains, I will sign it.
Then we will ask the Budget Director to review with all the departments
the cuts. We generally feel that they will be divided in non-Vietnam defence
expenditures and other Budget expenditures. But I do not have the time or
the information that would permit me to outline in specific detail how they
would add up.
Q. Mr. L-President, today, in light of what has been happening in
France, there is quite a run on the French franc. I wonder if you could give
us your judgment on whether that will increase or decrease the pressures on
the U. S. dollar.
A. We are very hopeful that the leadership of France and the
people of France will find ways and means to bring stability in that country.
we realize that the developments there not only have a serious effect on
France but on the entire world. The leadership of France is taking certain
steps and putting in motion certain actions. I don't care to speculate on how
successful those actions will be or what their outcome will be. I do know
that it is very important to the American people and the rest of the world
that we have stability in France. We deeply regret the problems that face
the French people. / 6 
6.
Q. Mr. President, is the Administration determined to accept
aanti-Crime Bill even if amendments remain which would authorize
wiretapping and attempt to limit Supreme Court decisions?
A. The Administration strongly favours an anti-Crime Bill
and has for several years, and has urged the Congress to take action on
the Crime Bill. Both Houses have now acted. That measure is in conference.
When the conferees reconcile their views, we hope the measure will come
to the President. Then I will review'fthe details of it and take the action
that I believe is in the best interest of the American people, I hope the
conferees can worlk out the differences between the two bodies and reconcile
their different viewpoints. I would, of course, express the hope that the
measure that comes to me is as near the measure that I recommended
as possible, although I know that that is too much to expect. Mr. Kilpatrick?
Q. Did General Westmoreland report that his position on the
ground has been weakened by the partial halt in bombing, Mr. President?
No.
Q. Mr. President, last night you advocated that the right to
vote be granted to eighteen year olds across the country. Since the States
set this voting age, is there anything you can do or intend to do in the time
you have left in the Presidency to bring this about?
A. Over the weekend, Mr. Davis, we will be working on a
very special message to Congress. A constitutional amendment will be
required. The President will send that message to Congress I hope next
week, making his recommendation.
Q. Mr. President, in view of the reports of increased casualties,
and General Wiestmoreland's teport to you on battlefield conditions, does
the Administration foresee any needs for a stepup or an increase in our
troop strength in Vietnam beyond what you have already announced?
A. General Wiestmoreland has made no such recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. 1President. 



EMBARGO_ NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 6AM FRIDAY 31 MAY
FOR PRESS PM. No. 603/ 1968
AWARD OF UNITED STATES PRESIDENTIAL UNIT
CITATION
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr J( chn McEwen.
The Acting Prime Minister announced this morning that the
United States Presidential Unit Citation has been awarded to Company,
6th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, by the President of the United
States. President Johnson presented the Citation to the Prime Minister
( Mr Gorton) at the President's Ranch in Texas on Thursday.
The Citation which is the highest United States award that
can be given to a military unit, has been conferred on Company for
extraordinary heroism in the action fought at Long Tan on 18 August, 1966,
During the battle, I'D" Company was attacked on all sides by
an enemy force of regimental, size, supported by accurate and intense
mortar and recoil-less rifle fire. The leading platoon of the Company was
cut off. Numerous enemy attacks were halted and later the Company with
the support of artillery batteries and a squadron of armoured cavalry
forced the enemy to withdraw leaving behind 245 dead.
Australian casualties were 18 dead and 25 wounded.
This is only the second occasion on which this high American
honour has been conferred on an Australian Unit; the first being to the
3rd Battalion Royal Australian Regiment for outstanding gallantry at
Kapyong, South Korea on 24-25 April 1951.
The Acting Prime Minister said:
III congratulate the Officer Commanding and all members of
Company. W*% e are proud of them. The Citation adds fresh
lustre to Australia's military tradition."
The citation reads:
" By virtue of the authority vested in me as Presdent of the
United States and as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of
the United States, I have today awarded the Presidential Unit
Citation ( Army) for extriaordinary heroism to Company Sixth
Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment, the Australian Army.
Company, Sixth Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, distinguished
itself by extraordinary heroism while engaged in military operations
against an opposing armed force in Viet Nam on 18 August 1966.
While searching for Viet Cong in a rubber plantation northeast of
Ba Ria, Phuoc Tuy Province, Republic of Viet Nam, Company
n-iet and immediately became engaged in heavy contact. As the
battle developed, it became apparent that the men of Company
were facing a numerically superi or force. The platoons of I'D"
Company were surrounded and attacked on all sides by an estimated 2 
-2-
reinforced enemy battalion using automatic weapons, small
arms and mortars. Fighting courageously against a well-armed
and determined foe, the men of Company maintained their
formations in a common perimeter defence and inflicted heavy
casualties upon the Viet Cong. The enemy maintained a
continuous, intense volume of fire and attacked repeatedly from
all directions. Each successive assault was repulsed by the
courageous Australians. Heavy rainfall and a low ceiling
prevented any friendly close air support during the battle.
After three hours of savage attacks, having failed to penetrate
the Australian lines, the enemy withdrew from the battlefield
carrying many dead and wounded, and leaving 245 Viet Cong
dead forward of the defence position of Company. The
conspicuous gallantry, intrepidity and indomitable courage of
1D" Company were in the highest tradition of military valour
and reflect great credit upon Company, Sixth Battalion, the
Royal Australian Regiment and the Australian Army.
A number of British awards for gallantry in the Long
Tan action have already been aninounced. Members of Company won
a Military Cross, a Distinguished Conduct Medal and three Military
Medals. Four members were Mentioned-in-Despatches.
CANBERRA,
a 31 May 1963 



THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS 8 JUL 96B3
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
As some Premiers requested that the financial assistance grants
arrangements be listed for discussion at this Conference, I think it would be
useful if I were to say two things:
* First, to indicate by how much these grants are likely to grow next year
under the formula agreed between us three years ago; and
* Secondly, to indicate the Australian Government's attitude towards any
suggestion that we should change the five-year agreement to which we
have all subscribed and which obtains until 30 June, 1970.
Formula Grants for 1968-69
In the present financial year we now know that the agreed formula
provided the States with grants amounting to $ 907, 539, 000. This was
5 million more than the amounts estimated a year ago and included in the
budgets of both the Commonwealth and the States. As compared with the grants
paid in 1966-67 the formula produced an increase this year of approximately
$ 81 million. The formula for determining the grant to each State next year,
that is 1968/ 69, will take account of the estimated rise in average wages in the
twelve months to 31 March 1969 and the increase in each State's population
during the calendar year 1968 while the grants so produced will be increased
by a betterment factor of 1. 2 per cent.
It is not possible at this stage to make a reliable estimate of the
future movement in average wages. Nevertheless, for purposes of planning our
budgets we need to make an estimate of the grants and for this particular purpose
we have calculated the effects of an increase of 5. 5 per cent in average wages
in the twelve months to the end of next March. On this basis, and with he added
assumption that the increase in each State's population will be the same * in 1968
as it was in 1967, the grants payable to the States in 1969 will be about
$ 989 million, or $ 82 million more than in the year just ending. If the increase
in average wages proved to be 6 per cent, the grant would amount to about
$ 994 million; if the rise in average wages were as great as 6-1 per cent, the
grants would be about 1, -300 million. I mention these latter figures to illustrate
a broad range of possibilities.
For purposes of our discussion, I suggest that we use the estimate
of $ 989 million as the prospective amount of the grants next year. This would
represent an increase of about $ 82 million or 9 per cent as compared with
the formula grants paid in the present financial year. I am circulating a table
giving details of these figures for each State.
Commonwealth's Attitude to Revisions of Formula
" The Commonwealth's general attitude towards the formula grant
arrangements themselves is that we wish the agreement made
between us and the States to be kept. The present formula grant
arrangements are designed to operate for a period of five years
as from 1 July 1965 and they therefore do not come up for review
until 1973. It is fair to say that, from the States' standpoint, the present
agreement represents a great improvement on the arrangements which operated
prior to 1965. When the grants were reviewed at the Premiers' Conference in
June 1965, two main improvements were effected in the grants formula namely,
/ 2 
-2
a trebling of the betterment factor and a reduction in the time lag before changes
in population were reflected in the grants. At that Conference, a special
addition of 2 million was made to Victoria's formula grant for 1965-66
resulting in further increases in subsequent years and it was agreed to increase
Queensland's share of the grants by adding 0 million to the amount on which
Queensland's grant for each of the five years of the arrangements would be
calculated, In 1967, two further concessions were made by the Commonwealth
in the grants arrangements an amount of $ 5 million was added to the grants
on which the formula operates and arrangements were made to reduce the time
lag before increases in wages are reflected in the grants. This latter revision
gave effect-to a proposal which the Commonwealth had advanced at the June
1965 Premiers' Conference as being desirable but which the States preferred
not to agree to at that time.
As a result of these changes, the grants formula has now been
improved to the point where it virtually ensures that the grants to the States
will increase at a faster rate than Gross National Product. It is, I think, alsd
worth pointing out that, under the present formula, the grants not only rise in
proportion to increases in the two main factors causing increases in State
expenditures rises, in the wage costs and increases in population but also
provide an element for improvement of standards of State services, nan-ely,
a betterment factor which increases the grants by 1. 2 per cent each year.
We recognise that, even under the improved grants formula,
these grants have not been growing quite as fast as the growth in State
expenditures desired by the States. Clearly, however, the Commonwealth
could not undertake a commitment to underwrite any rate of growth by which
State Governments might decide to increase their expenditures. This is
particularly true at a time when the Commonwealth's commitments in other
fields particularly defence have been increasing at a rapid rate. Nor should
we overlook the assistance which the Commonwealth has been providing in other
directions to the States. Commonwealth assistance in such fields as education,
roads and railways has been increasing at a rapid rate. In fact, in recent
years, total Commonwealth assistance to the States has been increasing at a
faster rate than Gross National Product and it has also been absorbing an
increasing share of Commonwealth tax revenues.
In this regard, in addition to the formula revenue grants to the
States, specific purpose capital payments to the States, about which the
Treasurer will have something to say in more detail at the Loan Council,
have also been increasing. For the moment, it is sufficient for me to, say
that these additional payments to the States are expected to increase next
year to $ 330 million, equivalent to an increase of 20 per cent on the payments
of $ 275 million this year.
It is sometimes suggested that the revenue grants should increase
at the same rate as what is described as the " natural" growth in Commonwealth
income tax collections. It has also been suggested that this natural growth
of income tax collections is in the region of 10 per cent per annum. Between
1959-60 and 1966-67 Commonwealth income tax collections did, in fact,
increase by 10 per cent per annum. That increase, however, reflected a
significant effective increase in tax rates. In actual fact, there is no clearly
definable " natural" growth rate of Commonwealth income tax collections and,
by choosing different periods, different answers can be produced. Between
1956-57 and 1966-67, for instance, the average rate of growth of
Commonwealth income tax collections was only about 8 per cent per annum.
In short, our attitude is that requests for variations in the
agreement reached between us on the grants formula can not
be considered until the present arrangements come up for
review in the course of 1969-70. Clearly, there would be / 3 
-3-
little point in having arrangements which were agreed to
run for a certain period of time if such arrangements were
to be altered, or be subject to review, every year."
Action to meet Special Difficulties
At the same time, the Commonwealth is always ready to consider
making assistance available outside the formula grant arrangements if any State
is faced with serious financial difficulties arising from circumstances beyond its
control. I illustrate this fact by referring to the assistance which the
Commonwealth has provided to help those States who have been facing major
problems arising from the recent drought. Over the last three years, the
Commonwealth has provided about $ 84 million for this purpose.
The Commonwealth has been helping in two ways. First, we have
made available over the last two years special revenue assistance amounting to
about $ 25 million to help offset the effects of the drought on the revenues of the
States concerned. ( This year, such assistance amounted to $ 14 million.) We
have also been meeting virtually the whole cost of the drought relief measures
which have been instituted to help farmers and to provide employment grants in
the drought areas. We have done this in co-operation with the States.
Commonwealth reimbursements to the States in respect of these relief measures
have amounted over the past three years to nearly $ 60 million of which
approximately $ 23 million has been expended in the current financial year. These
relief measures will co. tinue for a period in 1968-69, and as there will also be
large claims arising from commitments made in 1967-68, our reimbursements
to the States next year will again be substantial.
General I conclude on this note. These days, all Governments
Commonwealth and State are faced with heavy commitments and with increasing
demands for the provision of Government services. I appreciate that the State
Governments are called upon to discharge important responsibilities. But I am
sure that the Premiers will appreciate that the Commonwealth, in its approach to
the problems we are discussing today, must also consider very carefully its own
national responsibilities. In saying this, I am not referring simply to our
increasing defence c: ommitments though these are important enough in
themselves. I am refer; rng also to much wider responsibilities for the economic
health of the nation. We must keep the Australian economy moving strongly but
not unhealthily ahead, we must maintain a sound external financial position in
these unsettied times and we must avoid inflationary conditions which could
undermine our efforts in all these directions.
JUNE 1968 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE 1968
STATE TAXATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr john Gorton
I thinkLl it is the proper time for me to make clear the
Commonwealth's attitude on this question of possible extension of the areas
in which the States levy taxation. In particular, I think i must ma-ke clear
our attitude towards the imposition of States receipts duties on wages and
salaries and similar receipts of personal icome which we regard as income
tax. We take as our starting point the arrangements which were
made in 1965 governing the payment of the financial assistance grants.
These arrangements, like the ones that preceded them, were made on the
' tahssumaptiton that the exerciseof taxing powers would remain unchanged and
the States and their authorities would continue to pay Commonwealth
pay-roll tax. An agreement on that basis was, 1 understand, explicitly
stated at the time. I believe that the States then knew that the Commonwealth
of was not undertaking to pay the agreed grants to the States unless the States
refrained from levying income taxes themselves. That was the position, and
as far as we are concerned that remains the position. We have em phasised
that the introduction of State income taxation would in our view be a serious
breach of the present arrazzgernents.
Over the whole period since World War 11, the Commonwealth
has adhered firmly to the principle of uniform, income taxation and opposed
any suggestion of double income taxation. M\ y own Government is convinced
Sthat this principle is sound and beneficial to the nation and that any multiplica-
Wtion of income taxes would be undesirable both economically and socially*
Because th~ e imposition of income tax and the rates of income tax imposed have
' nmaajor timipolicatnions, f or economic and social policies throughout the whole.
the Commonwealth will not stand by and permit its use of income
taxation for policy purposes to be impaired by the itroduction of State income
taxes. At last year's Conference, there was some discussion as to
what scope there might be within the terms of the present financial assistance
arrange ments for the States to extend their fields of taxation should they
desire to do so. In that context the question of State purchase taxes or turnover
taxes on business receipts was raised. The Commonwealth's attitude was that
it would not be opposed in principle to State taxation of this kind providedit was
not carried to the point where it would significantly affect Commonwealth
revenue collections or the carrying out of national policies.
Shortly afterwards, Victoria introduced its new receipts duty
which extended beyond taxation on turnover with which we have no quarrel
to taxation on wages and salaries and other personal incomes. The Commonwealth
stated its objection to this duty insofar as it applied to wages and salaries and
other comparable payments such as superannuation. I know that a tax similuir 
-2
in many respects to the Victorian one was already in operation in Western
Australia, and I icnow, too, that the stamp duty legislation of other States
has at one time or another involved minor imposts on wages and salaries,
but we regard any impost on wages and salaries as in fact, substance 4nd
principle, a form of income tax. The Commonwealth is firmly opposed to
such a levy on wages and salaries and will continue to be so opposed.
In our view, such a levy is in breach of the preseat financial
assistance arrangements agree-d to by all States. W-e believe it is wrong
to impose more than one direct tax on Wages, salaries and related . forms
of income, and if such a practice were to become established and to spread,
it would not only add to the tax burdens on wage and salary earnlers which
already are by no means inconsiderable, but also it could give rise to all
of the evils of differential rates of income tax on citizens living in different
States, from which the system of uniform taxation has rid this country.
We want the States to refrain from imposing receipts duty
on wages and salaries and comparable payments. if these imposts are
still in existence when we come to review the present arrangements in
1970, that will be a decisive factor in determining our attitude on the
allocation to a State imposing that form of taxation. In the meantkme,
should a State that continues this impost on wages and salaries impose it
a higher rate than at present, we would mnove forthwith to amend our
legislation and seec to reduce that State's grant.
1 have already said that we do not object in principle to
modest extensions of State taxation into the general field of business
receipts or business turnover, provided it is not carried to a point where
it could significantly affect the Commonwealth's ability to carry out
national policies or to raise Commonwealth revenue. Subject to that
proviso, there would be -no conflict with the present grants arrangement
if any State decided to move into this field. But we do not suggest or urge
this. We are ready to accept it within the limits I have stated.
In recent times there have been suggestions that some States
might impose a tax on pay-rolls, presumably on the lines of the Commonwealth
pay-roll tax. We have studied that possibility and the various
implications it could have. It is right that i should tell you that the Commonwealth
does not look with favour on such action by any State. " We would
regard it as cutting across major Australian interests and purposes.
Pay-roll taxation is an important source of national rexenue and it is also
an instrument that can be used to promoite activities and developments of
benefit to our economy. For example, the rebate of pay-roll tax is
basically involved in the Commonwealth's scheme of export incentives,
which has been of marked success in promoting the growth of exports,
especially of manufactures, and this in turn has helped all of us. W-e
regard that as a kXind of tax that ought to be reserved to the Australian
Government and administered on a nation-wide basis. 
0? 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
million
N. S. W.
Victoria
Qld. S. A.
W. A.
Tasmania Six States 1966-67
275.1 207.5 124.8 93.8 85.9 34.5
821. 6( b) 1967-68
302. 8
228.3 139.6
102. 7
96. 1
38.0
907. 5( b) 1968-69( a)
Amount 328.9 247.7 153.9 111. 1
106. 2
41.2
989.0 Increase 26. 1
19.4 14.3 8.4
10. 1
3; 2
81.5
Assumes an increase of 5. 5 per cent in average
wages for the twelve months ended March 1969
and the same increase in each State's population
during 1968 as during 1967
In addition, the following amounts of special revenue
assistance were provided in 1966-67 and 1967-68 to help
offset effects of drought on State revenue
N. S. W.
Victoria
QId. S. A. 1966-67
$ million 8.0
2.75
10.75 1967-68
$ million 5.1 4.8 2.3 1.7
14.0
The following reimbursements have also been made
to the States by the Commonwealth to meet the cost of drought relief
measures: 1965-66
million 14.2 7.5 1966-67
million 13.0 4.9
21.7 17.9
N. S. W.
Victoria
QId. S. A. 1967-68
million 7.6 8.0 3.0 1.0
19. 6 Total million 34.8 15.4
59.2 



VISIT TO THEUS96
L I Bl SYPNEY
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR JOHN GORTON ON ARRIVAL HOME AT MASCOT
AIRPORT 2ND JUNE 1968
PRIME MINISTER : Good morning to you all. Well, we have just done 24
hours of flying, so I don't feel particularly in the mood for a very lengthy
session, but in this room before I left, I said I hoped on the journey I would
have the opportunity to form better impressions of American attitudes towards
Asia and of the attitudes of the various candidates for the Presidency.
I think I have been given the opportunity to do that, and I think it has been
valuable. I haxe had, of course, many meetings with President Johnson, who
is going to be in control of matters until January next year. I had quite -a
long talk with Vice President Humphrey, the Democratic candidate whom
people in the United States appear to give an edge to for nomination at the
moment I wouldn't know. I had about an hour with Governor Rockefeller,
one of the Republican candidates. I was unable to see Mr Nixon, but I did
have quite a long telephone conversation with him. I saw the Secretary for
Defence, and the Acting Secretary of the State Department ( because Mr Rusk
was ill), and the Secretary of the Treasury, I had good opportunities to
talk to leading members of the business community in New York. For these
reasons, I believe that the trip was valuable, and in discussing it with my
own colleagues, I will be happier in my own mind about any decis , ions we
may come to regarding our own actions. I think that is all I wanted to say.
If you have one or two questions you would like to ask, fire ahead.
Q. Prime Minister, can you say whether your discussions with
the candidates and President Johnson in any way indicate a firm attitude
on America's part to remain in Asia after 1971?
PM: Well, when I arrived and was received by President Johnson
in the morning, I made a speech at the White House, indicating our wish that
the United States should maintain an interest in Asia. That night at the
W,-hite House Dinner, he gave unequivocal assurances as far as he was
concerned that that interest would be maintained unequivocal assurance
in language whicha is open for you to read. This, of course, as he pointed
out, has validity, specific validity as far as he is concerned only until
January next year, but he is going to be significant in the Democratic
Party even after that.
Q. And the candidates?
PM: The candidates appeared to m-e to support the attitude expressed
by the President.
Q. When you say " appeared" to you to support this attitude, they
w'CI~ i11 t anyv iore defi ni te rhan j Lst appearing to. support it? ./ 2 
-2
PM: Well, they were private conversations with each candidate,
and I don't think I ought to go into details of it but just say 1 came
away with the firm impression that they did go along with maintaining
an interest in Asia.
Q. You don't feel uneasy then
PM: No.
Q. of the likely policy under a new President?
PM: Of those candidates to whom I spoke, I don't feel uneasy.
Q. What sort of bearing do you think your discussions will have
on the Five Power talks beginning this week?
PM: Well, the Five Power talks are talks between Great Britain
Australia, New Zealand, Malaya and Singapore concerning the Malaya/
Singapore area, and I don't know that my conversations would necessarily
have a direct bearing on the outcome of those talks.
Q. Nor on what contribution we might make
PM: Well, you are getting a bit close to the conversations.
Q. Prime Minister, were you able to gauge how the Viet Nam
peace talks were going?
PM: Yes; I had the opportunity during a breakfast session with
President Johnson and a number of members of his Cabinet to receive a
briefing from Mr Vance who had come back from Paris from the peace
talks. I can only say that the briefing indicated that very little progress,
if any, had so far been made, but the talks were continuing.
Q. Did he indicate any optimism, or of
PM: He indicated hope.
Q: In what way, Sir?
PM: Well, the talks were still going on. That is about it.
Q. Could you say, Sir, how your talks on trade went?
PM: Only that we re-expressed our hopes that quota systems
wouldn't be imposed on products that we particularly wished to sell
there such as meat and other products of that kind. If people want to
put tariffs on, that is one thing. We put tariffs on ourselves.
After all, this is a matter for their legislature, not for their executive.
Q. Anything on the wool tariff, Sir?
PM: Only a discussion expressing hope that something might
be done about it. / 3 
-3
Q. Mr Prime Minister, in your absence, there has been speculation
about the defence relationship between the two countries. Did you
get the impression in the United States that they wanted us to indicate
our intention of firmness in staying in South-East Asia before they
committed themselver,; and were they willing to commit themselves
regardless?
PM: I think they would be prepared as a world power to
maintain their interest in Asia but they would be happy for assistance
provided to them as they are happy for assistance provided in Viet
Nam.
Q. They didn't lay it on the line
PM: Nobody was twisting anybody's arm.
Q. You weren't twisting their arm by any chance?
PM: I'm not in a position to. I'm not big enough.'
Q. Will you be making a statement to Parliament, Sir?
PM: Well, I will consider it and discuss it with my colleagues
whether a statement should be made to Parliament or not. These
were very largely private conversations, other than the ones that were
on public record speeches by myself or by the President. It is a
little difficult for me at this stage to work out what value a statement
might be to Parliament, but if there appears to be value in information
which Parliament should have, then I would seek to give that to
Parliament.
Q. Mr Gorton, regarding your statement about the Israeli-type
army for Australia. Mr Eggleton made a remark about it being the
" last resort". Would you care to amplify that at all?
PM: I have no idea concerning Mr Eggleton, but on the matter
you raise, they asked me a question concerning Australian defence,
and they brought in this matter of an Israeli-type army. I sought
to def ine what an Israeli-type army in the Austraian context could be
considered to be which is a regular army allied to a citizen military
force. One hopes, as Australia grows that a citizen military force
would'build up and be better equipped and so on. This, of course, is
existing policy; there is nothing whatsoever new in that at all. This is
what we have been seekling to do for some time. As to the programme
of achieving this, nothing at all was said, nor will anything be said
until such timie as we k-now what resources are available for defence
as a whole, for the Arnig.,+, 1, whole, and for allocation between the
various kinds of regular/ citizen military forces and so on. At that
stage, of course, the first statement will be made to the Parliament.
Q. Did you take the opportunity, Sir, of informing yourself
per sonally on the F IllI?
PM: No. The Air Force have a team of experts over there,
and I think they would probably be better able to do this than I could. ./ 4 
a I. -4
Q. Sir, during your absence there have been certain allegations
made about tapping of Parliamentarians' telephones. I bring this up
because in August last year, the late Mr H-olt said he had received an
assurance from the Attorney that before any Parliamentarian' s telephone
was tapped, the Prime Minister would be informed. Gould you say, Sir,
whether any Parliamentarians' telephones have been tapped?
PM: Not as far as I know.
Q. This is in relation, in the case of one of them, to
conscientious objectors and Viet Nam.
PM: No matter what it is in relation to, not as far as I know.
Q. In your absence, on this matter there has been a rumpus,
as you no doubt know, about....
PML: Well, I have been moving pretty fast. I haven't this in any
depth. It has just sort of washed across me as I have been going, but
go on,
Q. Are you likely to enquire personally into the Simon Townsend
affair, to give it that tag or will you leave it to the Minister concerned
and the...
PM: I think I would like to k1-now a bit more about whatever it is
that went on while I was away, before I could answer that sort of question.
I have really been on a split-second schedule for almost as long as
I can remember, a split-second schedule dealing with the matters over
there. Thank you. 



TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, AT THE LODGE,
SCAINBERRA, FOR GTV9 MELBOURNE,.
po 3RD JUNE, 1968
13 JPAInterviewer: Mr Alan Reid-
Mr Michael Schildberger This is the first time on Australian television
that we have been able to bring you a direct telecast from the Prime
Minister's Lodge in Canberra. The Prime Minister, Mr Gorton, has
agreed to speak to us tonight about the significance of his recent,
just completed tour of America. Sydney " Daily Telegraph's" Alan
Reid travelled with the Prime Minister in America. He is here
tonight to interview the Prime Minister.
Q. Mr Gorton, President Johnson gave you more time, in my
experience, than any other Australian Prime Minister has received.
You also had contact with three out of the five Presidential candidates.
I know you have to allow for the unforeseeable, but is your impression
now that the U. S. will remain interested in Asia?
PM: Let's taike this in stages. We don't have to have an
impression up until January next year because the present President,
who will be in office up until January next year has unequivocally stated
in the speech he made to the White House Dinner that there would be no
diminution in the U. S. interest in Asia, and although he couldn't speak
for hs successors, he could speak completely for himself. And * this
carries us through for the next six or seven months. We don't have
to form an impression. That's a definite statement. For possible
successors, we do have to form impressions and the impressions that
I have formed are that the man who is most likely, so I am told, o be
the Democratic nominee for President at the next Presidential election,
Mr ' Humphrey, will be at least as strong, if not stronger than President
Johnson on the necessity for involvement in Asia by the United States.
On the Republican side, I believe from the soundings I have been able
to make from my direct talks with Governor Rockefeller, my telephone
talk with Mr Nixon and from talks with significant backers of the
Republican Party, that there will also be likely to be very likely
to be continuing interest in Asia by the U. S.
Q. Is this interest, in your view, based on their realisation
of their self-interest or is it altruistic or a mixture of both?
PM: I think it is a mi xture of both. I think it is a realisation
of their self-interest. I think it is a desire which has been quite
evident in what the U. S. has done in many fields over the last dec ' ade
or two that their self-interest is served by the advancement of the
interests of other countries, just aq in a sense, ours is. It's a
mixture of self-interest and altruism, because altruism, if it is to
be regarded as trying to build up other countries, will have the effect
of having the self-interest also served.
Q. President Johnson at his White House Dinner went to great
lengths to answer your speech on the Lawn. He committed himself
very deeply to it. He took a line that could possibly influence his
successor. What influence do you think President Johnson will have
upon a future Democrat Administration and a Republican
AdIrtinistration? 2 
-2
PM: I think he will have considerable influence on any future
Democrat Administration, although I don't know that that influence
would be needed if in fact Mr Humphrey were to be the Democrat
nominee and were to be elected as President. But even if that weren't so,
he would be a past President, a past President who had relinquished the
chance of office for an endeavour to bring peace and prosperit y to
Asia. He would have reliquinshed an almost certain I think this is
true an almost certain chance of being re-elected as President, for
this purpose. This, together with his long experience as majority
leader in the Senate would, I think, lead him to have a great effect on
any future Administration, a Democrat Administration. Now, his
effect on a future Republican Administration would not, of course, be
so great, but I would think that even a future Republican Administration,
if it were in fact needed, would be affected by the influence which
President Johnson could bring to bear in the country generally. But
I don't know that a future Republican Administration would need to
have any of this kind
Q. Senior Administration officials in Washington, as I
understand it, expressed the desirability of Australia maintaining its
defence associations with both Malaysia and Singapore and the
desirability of us maintaining a presence there. Did you in fact put
what seems to be the realistic viewpoint that we could maintain a
presence there only in the light of them taking a certain line of action?
PM Well, I'm fascinated to hear this question.... The Senior
Administration, as you understand it, expressed a particular point of
view. Well, I've no doubt that you have methods of assessing these
things, but all I can say is that your understanding must be based on
something other than any public statement that I have made or am going
to make on this matter. You asked me did they have this view. That
is for them to make public or not make public, and I'm not going to
comment on whatever impression it may be that you have received from
whoever it may be that you have talked to. What was the second part of
that question?
Q. Did you emphasise to them that our attitude in Singapore and
Malaysia, our presence there, would be governed by attitudes that they
might possibly take?
PM: Well, I think in answer to that, all I would say would be to
refer you to what I said when I arrived, and we were going to make, the
speech on the Lawn, but made it inside instead, and that speech*
indicated Australia's abiding interest in South-East Asia, abiding desire
to see that its standards of living were raised and said that we had a
present and a future in that area and we had a part to play in that qrea
in trying to achieve the results that we wanted to achieve but that we
could not effectively play it alone.
Q. Your approach in this seems to me to have been somewhat
different from both Sir Robert Menzies and Mv-r Holt who, so far as I
understood their emphasis, it was that we should do everything possible
to encourage America to stay in Asia. Now, as I interpret your
approach, maybe incorrectly, it was that we would not be staying in
Asia unless they were there. Was this in fact your approach? ./ 3 
-3
PM: Well, this is a very wide question. I think we can't divorce
ourselves from Asia. I think we can't say we won't have an interest
in Asia no matter what other powers may do. We would because we
are contiguous to the area. B ecause we are interested in the area,: we
would do what we could to try and underpin the economies, to provide the
technological requirements of the area, even if we had to try and do it
alone. But I don't think that alone we could do it with sufficient
effectiveness, with sufficient force, to achieve the results that would
need to be achieved in the next few years in that area. There are others
who would need to come in, and of these ct hers, I think the U. S. is the
most significant.
Q. There seems to be some confusion about your Israeli-type
defence statement to the Washington Press Club. My interpretation of
the thing was that this was one of many options that you were keeping
open against future defence needs for Australia. Is that interpretat ion
correct?
PM: Yes, well, I think you were there at the time . the question
was answered, and I think your interpretation is relatively cotktect,
except that we were asked, you will remember, the question did we
believe iA an Israell-iype defence force. I said on this matter I wouldn't
comment the actual Israeli-type defence force but that I would seek
to define what we in Australia would regard as an Israeli-type. That is
a force which has a Regular Army component but which has a back-up
force, well equipped, proped. yequipped, properly trained, quickly
able to go into action and a growing capacity to do it and a growing
amount of numbers to do it of the citizen forces type of military capacity,
where in order to back up your regular forces you have a capacity to
quickly get into action military forces, although the people of whom those
back-up forces are composed are citizens for most of the time but who
are trained to be able to take their place quickly in an emergency.
Q. Basically you were not announcing any proposed policy. You
were dealing with a contingency which might arise in extreme circumstances?
PM: I wasn't announcing any new policy at all, or indeed a
contingency which might arise in extreme circumstances, but rather
seeking to define, to give a definition of what could be loosely described
as an Israeli type very loosely described as an Israeli-type polic~ y,
which is indeed the sort of policy we now have that is Regular Forces
backed up by Citizen Military Forces, but suggesting that one of thle
options and in this you would be quite correct one of the options for
the future could be not a diminution in any way of our Regular Forces
ready for action at a m en's notice but rather a strengthening of the
back-up Citizens Military Forces who would come in behind those
Regular Forces. This is one of the options, one of the objectives, and
one of the ones that we have always had.
Q. President Johnson had you there when General Westmoreland
gave his analysis of the present situation in South Viet Nam. Basically,
he said that this could be a desperate throw on the part of the Viet Cong
and the North Vietnamese which could run out. Did you accept that
analysis, or did you ' have any reservations about it in the light of events
there? / 4 
-4
PM: No, this was an assessment which was made on the ba~ iis of
the Intelligence information available to General Wiestmoreland that the
Tet offensive for a start, and the present attack on Saigon was in some
sense almost a suicidal operation in order to try and have a political
effect on the peace talks which were at present going on. Now, I have
no way of checking the basic infallibility of the Intelligence on which
General Westmoreland based his report, but it does seem tha the
original Tet offensive was, from a military point of view as concerns
the North Vietnamese, unsuccessful; from a political point of view
overseas, far more successful than it was in the country itself.
It is not therefore unreasonable to suppose that this assessment of
General Westmnoreland's is reasonably accurate.
Q. In the military but not in the political sense?
PM: In the military sense accurate in that it was unlikely to
lead to any decisive military result. In the p olitical sense accurate
in that it might overseas lead to some political advantage to the North
Vietnamese which the military results of their present operations
would not justify.
Q. just two more questions, if I may. Do the Americans
ascribe the same importance to ANZUS as we do, and is the general
interpretation that it extends to our forces in the Malayan, Singapore
area?
PM: They, I am convinced, do ascribe the same importance to
ANZUS as we do, and particularly to the defence of Australia and of
New Zealand. As to the particular areas in which ANZUS might apply,
this is something which I think I couldn't properly accurately comment
upon in answer to your question.
Q. You leave on Wednesday lookidng very fresh, if I may say so,
after the exhausting tour you have had for another tour, this time of
South-East Asia. What are your intenrbnsthere? Are you planning
any substantive talks or what are you after there?
PM: No. Mostly as far as Viet Nam is concerned, I want to see
our own troops up there. I want to taka-e what opportunities I can to
visit them, and I suppose I'd be too much of a nuisance if I went too
far forward, so they may not allow me to do that, and I understand.
But I want to see them wherever they are so far as I can do it without
upsetting them or causing too much trouble to them. As far as Singapore,
Malaya and Indonesia are concerned, the main objective of this visit
is to show that there is from a new Prime Minister of Australia the
same interest in the area, the same desire to meet the leading figures
in the area as was evinced by my predecessor, Mr Holt, that there has
been no changre in Australia's continuing and abiding interest, up
change in Australia's desire that the leaders of each of the countries
in our region should know each other, and I would hope that this visit
would show that, and would help to show the peoples of the region
concerned that there is this continuing, neighbourly, friendly interest,
this desire to help and to be a part of the area in which we all live.
Q. Are you considering laying the groundwork for any say,
formal non-aggression pact or something like that with Indonesia?
PM: If Indonesia were happy to have a non-aggression pact with
ourselves, with Malaya and Singapore, we would be happy to do all we
could to see that such a non-aggression pact did becon-e a reality
Q. Thank you, Mr Prime Minister. 



Not for release until 6. 00 p. m. 4/ 6/ 68
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 64/ 1968
GREAT HALL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments have
agreed to a grant of $ 5003, 09 to be shared equally by them towards the cost
of a Great Hall at the University of Newcastle.
It is understood that it is the University's intention to
proceed immediately with the preparation of plans so that the construction
of the Great Hall will be able to commence at the beginning of 1970.
1 am pleased that the Commonwealth and New South Wales
Governments have been able to support this project, which has received
very generous support of over $ 500, 000 from a public appeal.
The University proposes to incorporate in the Great Hall,
facilities for general university use as well as for ceremonial and musical
occasions which can be shared with the citizens of Newcastle who have so
generously supported the appeal for funds.
CANBERRA 4 June 1968 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE J. G. GORTCN, M. P.,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 4 JUNE 1968
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS
I wish to inform the House that I have invited the following
per ans, who have accepted my invitation, to become members of the
Australian Council for the Arts.,-
Miss Elizabeth ARCHDALE, Mi B, E, and
Mr. W. P, COLEMAN, M. L. of New South
W~ ales;
Mrs. Dudley ERWIN and Mr. Barry JONES, of
Victoria;
Dr. Karl LANGER of Queensland;
Mr. Geoffrey DU'ITCN, of South Australia;
Mrs. Jeana BRADLEY, of Western Australia;
Mrs. H. W. HOUGHTCN, of Tasmania; and
Professor C. MASTERMAN, of the Australian
Capital Territory.
Ilam confident that each will make an important and valuable
contribution to the establishment and operation of the Australian Council for
the Arts. The decision to establish a Council to be the Government's
financial agent and adviser on the performing arts was announced by my
predecessor, in Parliament, on 1 November 1967. Subsequently, Dr. H. C.
Coombs was appointed to be its Chairman.
The Council will be associated with the Prime Minister?' s
Department. BACK( GRCUND NOTES: New South Wales
Mr. W. P. COLEMAN, M. L. A.
Barrister. Editor of QUADRANT; a former editor of THE BULLETIN.
Sometime Lecturer in Government and Public Administration in the
University of Sydney. / 2 
Miss Elizabeth ARCHDALE, M. B. E.
A graduate of McGill and London ( LL. M. Universities.
Headmistress, ABBOTSLEIGH C. of E. Girls' School, WAHROONGA,
since 1958. Sometime Principal, The Women's College, in the University
of Sydney. Fellow of the Senate of the University of Sydney since 1959.;
Victoria
Mrs. Dudley ERWIN
A graduate in Science and Arts of New York University. Has organised
and produced for stage and television. Has a vocational interest in Modern
Dance and is a Council Member of the Ballarat Fine Arts Gallery.
Mr. Barry JONES
A graduate in Arts, Education and Law of Melbourne University.
Barrister and Solicitor. Lecturer in History at La Trobe University.
Extensive experience with radio, TV, and major art forms.
Queensland
O Dr. Karl LANGER
Doctorate in Philosophy of the University of Vienna. Lecturer in
Architecture and Town Planning in the University of Queensland.
President of the Gallery Society of Queensland. Active interest in
the arts. South Australia
Mr. Geoffrey DUTTON
Poet, critic, commentator, biographer. Sometime Senior Lecturer
in English in the University of Adelaide.
Western Australia
Mrs. Jeana BRADLEY
A graduate in Arts and Senior Lecturer in English in the University of
Western Australia-Has had a long and close association with the theatre
in 7lestern Australia, as a dramatic critic and producer.
Ta smania
Mrs. H. W. HOUGH-TON
A graduate of the University of Melbourne. Associated with the Arts in
Tasmania, with a particular interest in cultural activities in country
districts. Has produced a number of amateur plays.
Australian Capital Territory
Professor K. C. MASTERMAN
Sometime Professor of Classics in the Australian National University.
Act Wye interest in the arts. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT ABROAD
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 4 June 1968]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-Mr Speaker, the House will be
aware of the circumstances which preceded
my recent vis? t to the United States of
America. Briefly restated, they were that the
visit had been envisaged before President
Johnson made his speech of 31st March.
In that speech he announced that he would
cease bombing over a significant area of
North Vietnam-the most populous areain
the -hope that this restraint might lead to
similar restraints by North Vietnam, and to
the opening of talks with North Vietnam
which might lead to the achievement of an
honourable peace. At that time the President
also announced that as an earnest of his
sincere desire to achieve a just and honourable
peace bhe had decided to devote his
energies to that end and would relinquish
his chances of re-election by withdrawing
his name from nomination as the Democratic
Presidential candidate at the next
elections. I was -in doubt, in these circumstances, as
to whether that projected visit by me should
take place. But President Johnson urged me
to come and because the visit would give me
a chance to get to ' know the -man who will be
President until 20th January 1969, and to
get to know same of the men who may
17655/ 68 succeed him in that office after that date, I
thought that it would be of value to myself
and to the Government and to Australia to
make the visit. I believe that the visit justified
that judgment. I have had the opportunity
to speak to, and to get to ' know, the
President and members of the present
administration-the Secretary of Defence,
the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the
Treasury and many others. Indeed I had, in
all, six separate meeting periods with the
President, either alone or with members of
his Cabinet. These, I think, covered an
amount of time which had not previously
been set aside by any President for a visit
of an Australian Prime Minister.
I did not believe that the visit would
result in any new, dramatic, developments
but I1 did think that it would give me an
opportunity ' to assess the fears, sometimes
experienced and expressed in this and other
countries, that the United States might lose
interest in -the. area of South ' East Asia,
might return to a form of isolationism. I
have had the opportunity to assess the
validity of those fears, Mr Speaker, I believe
they are groundless. In developing my
reasons for that judgment, I should like to
quote first from the remarks which I made
on arrival at the White; House, and secondly 
2
from the speech in reply which the President,
later that day, gave. On behalf of
the Australian Government I1sa id:
As Australians see it, the problems of the future,
although worldwide, are likely to be most acute
in Asia. We see there an area which needs an
economic and technical base such as Europe
already has. We see there an area where development
and progress are essential if the peoples of
these divergent nations are to support and defend
something dynamic and developing-not something
stagnant. ' We see there an area crying for technical
skills, a more experienced administration, a more
equitable sharing of an increasing -income-and
we see there an area subject, above all, to the
threat of subversion, terrorism and aggression.
Perhaps, Mr President, though I don't think so,
we Australians see this out of perspective-because
it is here that we, contiguous to Asia-part of
the South ' East Asia region-live and breathe and
have our present and our future. It is here that
we feel that we can best contribute to stability and
progress and to preserving political freedom which
has economic freedom as its goal. it is here that
we can play our part-but we cannot effectively
play it alone.
I hope the House would agree that this is
Australia's approach to the region of Asia
in which we live; it is certainly the Government's
approach, and I believe it to be the
proper approach-that we should want to
see stability in the region to our north,
that we should want to see economic progress
in the north, that we should do what
we can to achieve those objectives, but what
we cannot alone see them effectively
achieved in the time in which they ought
to be achieved. That was an expression of
the Australian Government's interest in the
area and of what we believe should be done
there, and indeed an indication that we feel
the United States has a duty to help in that
approach and that attitude in that area.
That night the President replied to these
remarks and I quote two passages from his
speech: I know there are some in Asia and elsewhere
who are wondering tonight whether the United
States will maintain its commitments in Asia;
who are wondering tonight whether the strain of
the struggle in Vietnam will lead the United
States to withdraw and leave two thirds of
humanity to its fate without American assistance
or American support. I cannot speak for
my successor but I can speak for myself and the
answer is no.
America will not withdraw. The second
passage I quote from the President's speech
is this:
In the years ahead we in the United States
hope that the new Asia that is being born will
be increasingly organised to shape its own destiny. It should be able to do more for itself and rely
less on the U. S. But I have no doubts that there
will be no return here to isolationism.
The President went on to point out how in
Administration after Administration since
1941, whether the Administration had been
Democratic or Republican, the same thread
had run through the approach of all the
United States Presidents, that there was a
duty and an obligation, to maintain an
interest in this part of the world, to give,
where it was required, military assistance
against attack, but above all to seek to
raise the economic living standards of the
peoples in the area so that they would be
the more able themselves to resist any
threatened attack, so that they would be
the more able themselves to help themselves
to provide a better standard of living for
their people.
Mr Speaker, -these public statements, and
the private conversations with the President
and his Cabinet which occurred, have left
me in no doubt-and this is a judgment
which is only to be taken as a judgmentthat
the present Administration will continue
the struggle in Vietnam until a peace
which assures the South Vietnamese a
chance to choose to elect -their own Government,
free from threat, is secured. And
they have left me in no doubt that the
present Administration will continue its
interest in, and its help for, the South East
Asian region. But this is an Administration
which is in office only until January next
yeiar-although this is some 7 months -a-way
-and it is a reasonable and proper question
to ask: What will the attitude of the United
States be after that date? I can only say
that I have had the opportunity to hold face
to face discussions with Vice President
Humphrey, who is a candidate for the
Democratic nomination for President, with
Governor Rockefeller, who is a Republican
candidate for nomination for President, and
to hold a conversation-unfortunately by
telephone, not face -to face-with Mr
Nixon who is the other Republican candidate
for President.
After these contacts, my own assessment
-and that is all it can be-is that I do
not believe, should any of these candidates
be successful, that there would be any basic
change in the interest of the United States
in this region. I do not believe that there
would be any retreat to isolationism, and 
if this assessment is true it is an important
factor on which Australia's future decisions
should be based.
The visit helped us in getting background
to assist in the formulation of our own
decisions as to what we can and should
do in this area in the future, for our security
in the future is bound up with, and cannot
be disentangled from, the security and
stability of the whole of the region in which
we live. It is necessary for us in those circumstances
to make our own decisions as
to what we can do to bring about security
and stability in the region; but in making
those decisions we cannot but be affected
by judgment as to what others will do for
the same purposes in the same area.
The assessments which I have made have
helped us, I think, towards formulating
those future decisions so important for the
area and so important for ourselves. There
are other matters still to be judged and still
to be assessed; other discussions still to be
held-such as the five power talks in which
we will participate-but at least I feel that
some of the imponderables, some of the
unknown factors of which the Minister for
Defence ( Mr Fairhiall) recently spoke, have,
as a result of this visit, been able to be
better assessed by the Government.
The talks held in Washington ranged over
a wide compass. They covered the present
situation in Vietnam, they covered the progress
or lack of progress at the preliminary
talks at present proceeding in Paris, they
covered the broader aspects of regional
security-not only military but economic
security-and they covered the problems
caused by the announced British withdrawal
from South East Asia. They were essentially
private talks in many aspects. But I
would say to the House that I formed a
judgment firstly, that the United States, as
I have said, would continue to have a presence
and an interest in the area of South
East Asia; secondly, that the Paris talks
were making little or no progress but at
least were continuing and that the United
States was not prepared to accede to what
President Johnson has called a fake peace
in Vietnam; thirdly, that the United States was as interested as we are not only in
providing military assistance to threatened
countries but also in helping them to help
themselves economically; fourthly, that the
British withdrawal from the Malaysia-
Singapore area caused them some considerable
disquiet in that they felt that the
stability in that area might by that withdrawal
be impaired; and fifthly, that the
ANZUS pact has a real and genuine meaning
and is the greatest guarantee that Australia
itself has against aggression. Its
application to areas outside the Pacific area
is not so definite as is its application to
ourselves; but neither should its application
to areas outside the Pacific area be discounted.
Mr Speaker, these may be modest conclusions
from a visit of not long duration
but the purposes of the visit were themselves
modest. Those purposes were to seek
assessments of the matters of which I have
spoken which were amongst, but were not
all of, the imponderables and unknown
factors of which the Minister for Defence
spoke in his speech on defence. But the conclusions
reached, together with those which
we shall draw in the future from the progress
of the five power talks shortly to be
held, will be those conclusions on which
our future defence and economic assistance
plans will be predicated. Those plans cannot
be projected into the future yet for the
future is as yet too unknown.
But I think-and on this note I conclude
the report of the visit, Mr Speaker-that
some progress has been made in helping
us to assess and to judge data on which we
shall in the future make our decisions.
Those decisions, based on this and the other
conclusions which we draw from other discussions,
will lead us at the appropriate
time, when we have what we regard as
sufficient on which to make judgments, to
come to the Parliament and to present to
the Parliament what the future plans of the
Australian Government will be for the protection
and the advancement of the region
in which we live. And this is of the essence
of the protection and the progress of the
country which we represent.
BY AU. THORITY: A. 3. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS: J ll 1968 P. M. No. 65/ 1968
DEATH OF SIR WALTER NASH
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister today paid the following tribute to the
former New Zealand Prime Minister, Sir Walter Nash, who died yesterday
( Tuesday):-" On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia
I convey deep regret at the passing of so prominent a
figure as Sir Walter Nash. Sir Walter was a notable New
Zealand Statesman, well known and greatly respected in
many countries. Successive Australian Prime Ministers
and Ministers found Sir Walter a friendly man in discussion
and a man of high principle and dedication to his country and
the cause which he sponsored. I and my colleagues send
deepest sympathy to the family."
CANBERRA June 1968 



VLS. T TO SOUTH-EAST ASIA 1968
CANBERRA
REMARKS TO PRESS ON DEPARTURE FROM
FAIRBAIRN AIRPORT JUNE 1968U
Q. Prime Minister, have you any comment on the
shooting of Senator Robert Kennedy?
PM: Well, it's awfully hard to think of what to say in
circumstances where a man who has had his brother assassinated
has been attacked in this brutal way. All I can say is that it
makes me feel sick in the stomach that this can go on. It really
is horrifying.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, on this present trip, is there one
thing you hope above all else you will be able to achieve?
PM: No, I wouldn't say that. I think the main object of
this trip is to meet the rulers of the countries to which I will be
going, and to demonstrate that just as my predecessor had a
continuing interest in Asia and the people who are ruling it, so do
1, his successor, as representative of Australia, have the same
interest. I think it will be helpful to know the individuals and I
think it will be helpful to demonstrate that there has been not the
slightest variation of our interest in the region.
Q. Have you had any reaction so far of your forthcoming
visit'? H-ave you heard of any reaction in South-East Asia?
PMV: Do you mean for it or against it?
Q. For it.
PM: N' o I haven't heard any reaction, except very pleasant
messages from the people I am going to visit, saying how glad
they are and how much they are looking forward to the visit.
Q. Sir, are you likely to indicate to Tunku Abdul Rahman
that you might continue to keep Australian troops in Malaysia
after 1971?
PM: I wouldn't dream of commenting on what I am going to
talk about to the various people I am going to talk to, particularly
on matters of policy. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
SINGAPORE
ARRIVAL PRESS CCNFERENCE GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR. JCHN GCRTCN, AT AIRPCPT 6 JUNE 1968
Q. ( Question on reaction of Senator Kennedy's death.
PM. I can only say what I said at home, that I was absolutely
sickened when I heard that this attack had been made upon him. I do not
see how a democratic country can run, if people who put a point of view
with which you disagree are subject to assassination. I do not see how a
democratic country can run if a minority resorts to force And violence to
try and overthrow a point of view with which they disagree. I find this
quite shocking, not only personally from the point of view of Robert
Kennedy and his family but from the point of view of the proper conduct
of public affairs. Although I have never met him, I find it completely
devastating that this could have happened, particularly to two brothers,
S two brothers of the one family in so short a time. Both really because
they had points of view with which others did not agree.
Q. Tell us something of the purpose of your visit. Is it a visit
of friendship to see other Prime Ministers?
PM. Well, the major purpose is to meet the people who are in
charge of the countries in our region and to demonstrate that that -policy
which my predecessor, Mr. Holt, furthered, of interest in and close
co-operation with our neighbours, was a continuing policy as far as I am!
concerned.
Q. Prime Minister, how do you feel about going in to Vietnam
e tomorrow morning?
FM. W'hat do you mean how do I feel about it?
0Q. Are you scared?
PM. No. Look there is an old Italian proverb " Che Sera, Sera"-
and I have no doubt it is in other languages also. So that's your answer.
Q. Sir, when Mrs. Gandhi was in your country she said she was
interested in international guarantees for the security of South East Asia.
How do you feel about it?
PM. We had a most delightful visit from Mrs. Gandhi. I think
that she enjoyed her stay and we certainly enjoyed having her with us. A
guarantee is a word and I don't think anything was spelt out during Mrs.
Gandhi's visit, nor were any particular proposals put forward. But I do
believe if all of us together in this region can do what we can to see that
military force is not used, that aggression does not take place, that there
is co-operation and -development, then that can do nothing but good to all
of us in this region.
Q. Do you think that Peking will react to any such proposal?
PM. I wouldn't attempt to try and think of reactions in Peking to
any proposal, whatever.
Q. Would you like Australia to have a dialogue with communist
China? 
What precisely do you mean by a dialogue?
Would you have diplomatic relations with communist China?
The Government's policy is not to have diplomatic relations
with communist China.
PM. Q. PM. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
Li B SAIGON
WELCOME BY VIETNAMESE PRIME MINISTER,
TRAN VAN HUONG, AT AIRPORT 7 JUNE 1968
Mr. Prime Minister, it is a very great pleasure and a very
great honour for the Vietnamese people, for the Government of the Republic
of Vietnam, and for myself to welcome on our soil today the representative
of a people to whom we are bound by so many ties.
Since Vietnam regained its independence and liberty, it has
had to defend that independence and that liberty against an enemy who is
set on destroying them in order to impose on the Vietnamese people a
system of government ard a way of life that they rejected as -not corresponding
with their interests or their best traditions, In this struggle, the Vietnamese
people have benefited from the sympathy and support without reservation
from the Australian Government and people in all fields political, military,
economic and humanitarian. We are therefore happy to have the opportunity
to express through you our gratitude to the Government and people of Australia.
Mr. Prime Minister, you arrive in Vietnam at a time when
our common enemy, international communism, is intensifying its efforts
with a view to obtaining a seeming military success in order to support
his political demands in Paris as elsewhere.
We have decided not to fall into the communist trap. We love
and hope for peace, but we will not accept a peace dictated by an enemy who
himself knows that hie cannot gain victory. We are convinced that the
Australian Government and people will continue to work closely with the
Vietnamese Government and people, as with the other nations which are
friends and allies of Vietnam, in order to prevent communism spreading
south of the 17th parallel.
Mr. Prime Minister, in the name of the Vietnamese people
and Government, I bid you welcome and a pleasant and fruitful time in
Vietnam. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
SAIGON_
STATEMENT MADE BY THE
MR. JOHN GCRTON 7 JUNE 1968
Thank you for the warmth of your welcome and for your
generous remarks about my country. I received with great pleasure the
invitation which the Government of Vietnam kindly extended to me soon
after I became Prime Minister of Australia.
I was anxious to make an early visit to Vietnam because
Australia's continuing commitment of men and material to support the
freedom and development of the Republic of Vietndm occupies so large a
part of our thoughts and affects at so many points our Governmental
policies. I believe that my discussions wikH the leaders. of your nation,
and the personal contacts shall make with them, will contribute to
strengthening the friendship between our two countries,
I see this visit as reaff irming Australia's support for
Vietnam. It is also part of the process of consultation Which takes place
frequently, and at all levels, between representatives of our two countries,
and our allies, and which does much to consolidate and improve our common
efforts. Such consultations are of particular importance when, at the same
time as conversations are taking place in Paris, North Vietnamese aggression
is continuing here. I look forward to meeting my countrymen who are now fighting
and working by your side the soldiers, sailors and airmen of the Australian
Force Vietnam, our aid experts, and the members of our medical teams
whose humanitarian work exemplifies the co-operation between our two
countries in many fields of endeavour.
I welcome this opportunity to pay personal tribute to the
valour of the Vietnamese people and to the achievements of the Vietnamese
Government in these tragic and difficult times. Australians have admired
what your people have achieved in adopting a constitution, electing a
representative Government and laying the foundations of national reconciliation
and reconstruction regardless of the dangers and complex stresses of war.
We have admired your courage and determination in doing this despite the
campaign of terror designed to deter you. We salute your soldiers for their
sustained defence of their homeland, and their courage in face of the present
offensives. Our deep sympathies go to all those civilians-and soldiers
alike who have suffered because an unwanted and bitter war has been
brought deliberately and callously into their midst. In the face of the
enemy's aim to destroy you it has been your constant purpose to defencd
and, at the same time to build a nation.
Few countries have been faced with such a formidable task.
No country has been more determined to achieve its goals. Our purpose
is to help you to achieve them. / 2 
2.
At Manila in 1966, the allied nations clearly expressed
their hopes and objectives for a peaceful settlement of the war in Vietnam,
Our aims have not changed, and no military, political and
diplomatic efforts by Hanoi will undermine our resolve to achieve a lasting
peace under which the people of Vietnam will live in freedom and justice. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
NUL DAT
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
TO AUSTRALIAN TROOPS 8 JUNE 1968
There are perhaps one or two things I would like to say to you
and say to you as representatives of all the people in this camp and of all the
Australians in Vietnam who aren't here to say to you what I would like to say
to all of them. I have only been able to meet a few this morning and they are
individuals and a few from each unit. But what can be said to one can be said
to all and that is that I regard it as an honour to have the opportunity to be here
to see you, to have had the chance vicariously through you to talk to all my
countrymen here. I think you are doing a magnificent job for our own country,
and though you may be far away from it, I feel the results will be felt in our
own country for decades to come.
I suppose sometimes, because of some of the activity that goes
on home, you may feel that the vast majority of Australians are not thoroughly
behind you because the newspapers tend to give publicity to any nut who carries
a placard or sits in the middle of a road rather than to the hundred citizens,
for each one who does that, who are thoroughly behind you4 Please believe
that your Government is behind you and ninety per cent of the Australian people
are behind you in what you are trying to do. I would like to congratulate you
once more on the way that you are doing it.
That is really all that I have got to say to you. I don't think
that there is anything to add, except to repeat and to put it in a capsule, it is
an honour to meet men doing the job they have to do as well as you are doing
it. And it's an encouragempent to meet men doing a job which is of such
importance to their nation now and in the future.
You will have heard talk of things that are called peace talks
in Paris. They aren't peace talks. They are preliminary talks to see whether
there is any basis for a chance to have talks later. And you will be interested
to know, those of you who are here and have been here for some time, that,
so far it has been quite impossible to persuade the North Vietnamese negotiators
to admit that there are any North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam at all.
I daresay that you would be able to correct them on that if you could get over
there, but that is the stage it has reached so far. Now I wouldn't build too
many hopes too quickly on that. The hopes are to complete the job, to finish
the job and to give the South Vietnamese people a chance to elect their own
Government, and to demonstrate that aggression by force does not pay. This
you are doing. Thank you for it. I wish I could have met you all. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
SINGAPORE
ARRIVAL STATEMENT MADE BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON 9 JU NE 1968
When I passed through Singapore last week in transit to
Vietnam I explained that my official visit here would be part of a tour
which included several South-East Asian countries. This tour is not
merely one of goodwill on my part as the new Prime Minister of Australia.
It reflects the need for an Australian Prime Minister today to widen his
knowledge of Australia's neighbours in South-East Asia and to gain, at
first hand, experience of the problems which they face and the policies
they are pursuing. I shall be having talks over the next two days with your
Prime Minister, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, and his colleagues, and renewing
my personal acquaintance with a number of them. I expect to give them
an account of my visit to Vietnam and there will be exchanges of views on
various regional questions of concern to both Governments.
My visit is not connected with the Five-Power defence talks
now commencing in Kuala Lumpur, although my discuss-ions here will
naturally include defence and security matters of common interest. The
kind of South-East Asian region that develops in the years ahead, and the
pace of its development, is of vital interest to our two countries. We
have the same basic concern to see in the South-East Asian region a
community of co-operating nations and a climate of order and stability
for national development. I look forward to seeing something of the social and
industrial achievements which are so dramatically changing the appearance
of your island. 1, also hope to learn more about your expansion programmes
for your harbours, shipping, communications and commerical facilities
and for your development and regional economic progress. Relations between
Australia and Singapore are firmly based on useful and practical co-ope ration.
We are both developing peoples, determined to use the
benefits of knowledge and modern technology for our progress and a better
life for our peoples. This is shown by the extensive range of contacts and
exchanges between our two communities, embracing commerce and
education, the professions, tourism and the arts. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
SAIGON
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON 9 JUNE 1968
Q. Mr. Gorton you haven't been here very long, Sir, but what is your
7 assessment of the military situation in Vietnam?
PM. I don't believe I'm competent to make a military assessment, I'm not
a military man. We get assessments given to us by our military advisers and
I'm certainly no trained strategist nor a trained tactician, but there is one thing
I do believe is quite certain, and that is the spirit and morale of our Australian
troops here is as high as I have ever seen in any body of troops anywhere.
Q. Sir, you were quoted as saying that you felt that news reports of the
situation in Saigon had been exaggerated; can you tell me what areas of
Saigon and Cholon you have seen?
0M. All I can tell you is that flying in, both myself and I think those who
were with me, had expected to see from the air much greater areas of
devastation than were, in fact, apparent.
Have you offered, or been asked, for any more Australian troops for
Vietnam?
PM. The answer to both those questions is no.
Q. Excelleilcy, as yotJ have notilced aboiut the general situation in Vietnaffi
do yoU ihihk thai the trend of ihis situation Will turn towards peace or towards
an escalation of the war?
Pm. What we all hope for is a peace which will bring to the people of South
Vietnam a just, enduring and lasting peace under which they can elect their own
Government free from fear and live under that Government free from fear.
This is the peace, the objective sought as I understand all the allies agreed
at the Manila Conference.
Excellency, do you think that the Americans will withdraw from Vietnam?
In other words, will give up in Vietnam?
FM. I' m not qualified to speak for the Americans but the American President
I understand has made this situation perfectly clear.
Q. Mr. Gorton, the Australian 1st Battalion in 1965 took far less casualties
than the Australian 1st Battalion is now taking in the same areas. It's the
Australian 1st Battalion in War Zone now fighting N. V. A. units which
are better equipped and are deeper entrenched in War Zone How can
you then refer to military progress by the Australian Task Force as you have
done elsewhere in the tour?
PM. I' d like you to point out where I've referred to military progress by the
Australian Task Force. What I have said and what I repeat is that the spirit and
morale of the Australian troops are as good as I have seen in any body of troops
anywhere. But since you have raised the question, I understand from our
Australian military advisers, that the Battalion has played a significant part in
setting itself across one of the main supply routes of Vietcong units down here
and has caused so much discomfort to the enemy that it has led to attacks upon
that Battalion in considerable force; and attacks which were repulsed with, and
I speak from memory, losses to the enemy of some 45 to 55 men and a
considerable number of arms. I think that is an indication of capacity and
progress of the Australian Force as far as the Australian Forces are concerned.
I just want to make it perfectly clear that the progress and capacity of the
Australian military forces are not to be impugnedwhile in my presence. At
least I won't accept it. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
SA IGON
JOINT COMMUNIQUE. 9 JUNE 1968
At the invitation of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam,
the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, M. Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of
Australia, accompanied by Mrs. Gorton visited the Republic from 7 to 9 June,
1968. In Saigon, the Prime Minister was received by His Excellency, the
President, and had conversations with the Prime Minister of the Republic, the
Cabinet and the Presiding Officers of both Houses of the National Assembly.
Mrs. Gorton visited a refugee centre and saw something of the work being done
to rehabilitate the victims of communist attacks.
The Prime Minister of Australia and the leaders of the Republic
thoroughly reviewed the present situation. They agreed that regular consultation,
S as to which the Prime Minister' s visit formed a part, was particularly important
W now since, at the same time as preliminary talks were taking place in Paris,
North Vietnamese attacks on civilian centres were continuing and the infiltration
of North Vietnamese troops into South Vietnam was being increased. They
reaffirmed their determination, expressed by all the allies at the Manila
Conference, that the South Vietnamese should not be conquered by subversion,
terrorism, murder, and the use of organized aggressive force, but should
retain the right to choose their own form of Government and their own way of
life. Mr. Gorton paid tribute to the steadfaistness of the Vietnamese
Government, armed forces and people in the face of recent enemy offensives
and attacks on civilians in population centres. He said that Australia and the
Republic's other allies had noted with admiration the achievements of the
__ Vietnamese people who, in spite of a campaign of systematic terror and
Wdestruction had adopted a constitution, elected a representative Government
and were laying the foundations of national reconciliation and reconstruction.
The Vietnamese leaders expressed their appreciation and
gratitude for the continuous support and assistance extended by Australia to
their fight against communist aggression. They reasserted their position that
the Republic of Vietnam should be a full participant and play a major role in
any negotiations to settle the conflict. The Prime Minister and the leaders of
the Republic agreed that the allied nations which have helped to defend the
Republic of Vietnam should participate in any final settlement of the conflict.
The Prime Minister and his party visited Nui Dat, Vung Tau,
Phan Rang and Bien Hoa. These visits enabled the Prime Minister to meet
Australians fighting and working in the Republic the soldiers, sailors and
airmen of the Australian Force Vietnam, aid experts, and members of the
medical teams whose humanitarian work exemplifies the breadth of the
co-operation established between the two countries.
The Prime Minister expressed his warm appreciation for the
Vietnamese Government's invitation and for the arrangements that had been
made to enable him to deepen his understanding of the problems and aspirations
of the country. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
S[ NGAPORE
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton,
at Banquet given by Mr. Lee Kuan Yew JUNE 1968
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Lee, Distinguished Guests Ladies and
Gentlemen: May I start, Sir, by thanking you for the honour which you;
do my country today, through me, by extending this State banquet to us.'
It is an honour the more appreciated because we feel, as later I shall take
more time to explain, that you are an example to the area of the world in
which you live and that you, and we together, may perhaps with the other
countries in the region, if they follow this example, bring not only to you,
not only to us, but to all of us in this region a stability you want, an
opportunity for. progress you want and we want, and by doing so contribute
more than we can contribute in any other way to the peaceful progress of
all of the nations so close and so neighbourly around here.
This is not the first time that I have been in Singapore. Indeed,
it is not the second, third or fourth time. But on the first timeJ. was here,
things were not so peaceful here as they are now. Because on that occasion Si
Singapore was under attack, was under threat of conquest, and indeed, was
subjected to aggression. And those of you in this room who lived through
that period of time, will know what this meant to individuals in Singapore.
And will know what it meant to the opportunity given to individuals or rather
denied to individuals in Singapore to be the arbiters of their own destiny,
to be the deciders of their own fate.
One of the objectives which we must seek in the whole of this
region and by this region I mean not only Malays, Sin gapore, Indonesia,
Australia or New Zealand but other countries including Vietnam.. one
of the objectives we must seek is to see that that kind of aggression does
not succeed in denying to the citizens of any particular area the right to be
arbiters of their own destiny. And that this is of as much importance to us
in Australia as it is to you, let me illustrate, by saying this.. a little less
than a week ago I was in Darwin, one of our northernmost Australian cities,
and as I stood there, I was closer to Saigon, and was closer to Singapore,
than I was to the southern regions of Australia in Hobart, in Tasmania. There
are no longer these great geographical divisions there used to be. There are
no longer these great differences in time and in travel that there used to be.
We are getting closer and closer together in point of time; we are getting, I
hope, closer and closer together in point of understanding. / 2 
You spoke, Sir, of expecting from Australians a hard-headed
appreciation of where Australian interests lie. I think it is natural and right
that this should be so, for the first duty of any government of any nation is to
look after and to advance the interests of those people whom that government
governs. You, I think, have the same approach. But this doesn't mean that
either country, ours, or yours, or any other country in the region can be
unconcerned with the interests of the neighbouring countries, because that
very hard-headed appreciation of which you spoke must lead one to the
conclusion that the ultimate interests of any country in a region can only
properly and fully be served if the progress, the stability, the economic
viability of the neighbouring countries are also served. For otherwise, there
is always a potential threat.
The future of this region, as you said, Mr. Prime Minister, is
likely to be shaped by the answers, as yet unknown, to the questions which you
posed. Some of them will be answered relatively soon; some of them will
take a longer time to answer. But some of them are at this very moment being
hammered out, or at least the initial steps to hammer them out are being taken,
at the Five-Power talks occurring in Kuala Lumpur; Five-Power talks which
are, as I suspect, only the precursors of discussions between the Five Powers,
but which are at least starting now and which regarding what you have said from
a purely military standpoint, are the beginning of trying to get the answers to
some of the imponderables which you have posed to us. And I think I should
say no more on that, than that these talks are progressing and that as the
answers come from them so the future course of events is the more likely to
be properly assessed. But stability won't depend merely on these kind of talks. In the
long-range, stability will rather depend on the economic progress which the
various governments of this region can secure for their peoples, and this, in
turn, will depend on the dedication of such governments to the interests of all
their peoples, not just that section which forms the governing class. It will
depend also on the administrative capacity of these governments to translate
their intentions into accomplishments, for only in that way will the peoples of
the nations in this region feel an identification with the governments who rule
their nations and swing * in behind those governments to help themselves and
sacrifice and work to see that a government in which they bd ieve will bring
to them the benefits that sacrifice and work will ultimately bring. That, I
think, will * be the abiding basis for security and stability in this region; which
is not to say, Sir, that it will be the only basis.
And I say, with genuine belief as far as I am concerned, that
here in this city state, perhaps the inheritor of the tradition of Venice, and
perhaps a city state destined to hold longer than did Venice that leadership
in this part of the world, you have provided a shining example of what a
government concerned with advancement of its peoples can do. You have
shown what a government which has skilled and devoted public administrators
can achieve, and the loyalty and support which such a government can generate
in the people it rules. / 3 
It fills me, Sir, with respect and envy to think that a
government is able, at an election, to win every seat.. to win every seat
on its record, and I have no doubt that every seat was won on your record.
I think that the drive, the energy, the hard work, the initiative which you
have shown, the realization you have shown of the possibilities inherent in a
private enterprise system damped down by government to see it doesn't
become an exploited system, guided by government to see that its energies
are pulled into channels which are designed for the public good, but not
overseen in every detail of its work by government and by bureaucrats
have achieved what this city state has, in fact, achieved.
I hope that this example which I have called a shining example
will be able to be emulated by all the countries in this region, because I am
sure that ifit is, then the worries one has of subversion, of terrorism, Qf
infiltration will be so minimal that they will not any longer pose a significant
threat. And because if it is, then I feel that the other major threat that might
hang over the region, that of an organized invasion, would run so counter to
world opinion that it would have no chance of achieving what it set out to do.
So these are the abiding things on which the stability and security and progress
and prosperity of this region must be built.
Of course going along with them, especially in the initial stages,
must be some significant capacity to reinforce * what one is doing with the
military arm. But, Prime Minister, I know that you and I have the same
ultimate goal, the same ideal of what might be achieved, and I know that you
and I both realize the inherent difficulties which w ill need to be overcome and
the slow progress which will necessarily be made, because these new worlds
cannot, be built and varnished and brought. new into being in a day..
But knowing this, I assure you, Sir, of this: we stand ready,
in my own country, to endeavour to play our part in a co-operative enterprise
with you to bring about what I believe we want, and we expect, and I have no
doubt that we will get. And just as you have pointed out that we have reached
the stage now in history as a result of hard work and endeavour over 200 years,
and have in front of us the future because we must look to that and not to the
past so I believe if you and we and the other nations of this region can achieve
this administrative capacity, can use aid from whatever source it comes and
see that it is used to the utmost benefit of all the people and is not wasted, then
those 200 years of which you spoke are but a prelude.
Mr. Prime Minister, I am reminded of this saying: " All of
the pas * t is prelude", which has been irreverently translated as meaning, " You
ain't seen nothing yet". Really, I think this is true, be cause casting one's
mind forward, and we can only do it for ten years, for a decade, but tryirg to
cast it forward further still it is possible to envisage here, not in Singapore,
here in this region, in Australia, in New Zealand, in Singapore, in Indonesia,
in Malaysia and in bordering countries, a technological base, and education
and administrative capacity, which will enable each to develop and advance in
peace and in progress. / 4 
That, Sir, I think, you and I would seek to see achieved and
that, Sir, while * we each hold our respective positions, we will work to see
achieved. I hope that not only will my wife and I return here to see you, but
that you will come to see us, for the invitation for you and your wife, Sir,
stands open for as long as you are the Prime Minister of Singapore, and a
private invitation stands open if you ever cease to be Prime Minister.
Thank you.
I, 



' 09 1~ a, VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
MALAYSIA
ARRIVAL STATEMENT MADE BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON 11 JUNE 1968
I am glad to have this opportunity to visit Malaysia soon after
taking office as Prime Minister of Australia. Our two countries have long
been in warm and friendly association. I look forward with pleasure to once
again meeting'and talking with your revered Prime Minister and his colleagues,
so many of whom are well known to us in Australia.
It is a pleasant experience to fly into K,, uala Lumpur and see
this beautiful and well laid out city and the attractive, prosperous countryside
which surrounds it. Over the years, peaceful suburbs and rural development
have transformed areas which were once the scenes of bitter conflict. The
peace and harmony in Malaysia is the more noticeable because I have recently
been in South Vietnam. a country and people still suffering the ravages of
war. Yet one can take heart from what Malaysia has succeeded in
doing. For Malaysia too has had its trial by fire. You were ableto overcome
the challenge of insurrection, long continued, and having overcome go on to
develop a progressive nation. This must encourage all small countries subject
to aggression or externally-inspired subversion.
Malaysia is a living example of what can be achieved in the
Asian region by a Government dedicated to national development and to
expanding opportunities for its peoples. We in Australia admire the increasing
part that Malaysia is playing in regional affairs, both in its direct contacts
with neighbouring countries and through its membership of the regional
organisations and groupings that are being established to promote the sense
of community and the common purpose of the region. And we look to close
co-operation with Malaysia in these endeavours.
These are among the matters I shall be discussing during my
stay in Kuala Lumpur. I hope, too, to give your Government an account of my
visit to Vietnam. Although my visit is not directly connected with the Five-
Power talks, I shall hope to hear Malaysian views on the progress of the talks.
While in Malaysia, I will visit Australian forces at Terendak and at Butterworth. 



i
KLC 1567
KLS 144
IKZXE COUMW
IKZXE OTUAP
13/ 6/ 68
UNCLASS IFIlED
ADDRESSED CANBERRA 1385, REPEATED SINGAPORE 130.
( ATTENTION MISS NEWPORT, ASSISTANT PRESS SECRETARY TO P. M.)
* FOLLOWING IS TRANSCRIPT OF PRIM E MINISTER'S PRESS CONFERENCE
IN SINGAPORE ON 11 JUNE.
FOR MASTER FILE AND INSTANT SERVICE LIST ONLY.
BEGINS: I DON'T THINK YOU EXPECT ME TO MAKE ANY STATEMENT, BECAUSE
THE VISIT HAS BEEN CARRIED OUT IN A CIOMPLETELY OPEN WAY, KNOW,-ING
WHAT HAS HAPPENED AND WHERE I HAVE BEEN. AND THE GENERAL
TOPICS OF CONVERSATION ARE ALSO PROBABLY KNOWN TO YOU. r
PERHAPS I COULD SAY THIS THOUGH, AS I HAVE JUST SAID TO YOUR
PRIME MINISTER. THAT MY WIFE AND I AIRE EXTREMELY GRATEFUL FOR THE
I1NVITATION WHICH WAS GIVEN US TO VISIT THIS CITY STATE., THAT
WE BELIEVE THAT THIS VISIT WILL BE THE BEGINNING OF A NUMBER
OF RECIPROCAL VISITS FROM, I HOPE, MYSELF AS PRIME MINISTER OF
AUSTRALIA AND MR LEE AS PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE., AND THATL
IN4 THE MEANTIME THE BA. SIS HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED FOR COMMUNICATION
ON A PERSONAL LEVEL WHICH I THINK CAN DO NOTHING BUT GOOD TO
BOTH OUR NATIONS.
I HAVE ENJOYED THE VISIT., I HAVE FOUND IT VALUABLE, AND I
HOPE, AND BELIEVE, THAT THE RESULTS WHICH THE FUTURE MIGHT BRING
WILL SHOW THAT, IN FACT, IT WAS VALUABLE.
. BUT HAVING SAID THAT, PERHAPS YOU MIGHT WISH TO ASK ME SOME
QUESTIONS, I LEAVE IT OVER TO YOU NOW. 
C0.-
Q. PRIME MINISTER, DURING YOUR VISIT HERE AND PARTICULARLY HERE
YOU HAVE EMPHASIZED THE NEED FOR REGIONAL CO-OPERATION,? AND YOU HAVE
ALSO MENIIONED ON OCCASIONS PACTS BETWEEN VARIOUS COUNTRIES OF
THE-REGION.
SOME KIND OF ARRANGEMENT, PACTS BETWEEN VARIOUS COUNTRIES,
ANYWAY A. WAIT A MOMENT.
HAVE YOU EVER HEARD ME USE THE WORD '' PACTS'' OR AGREEMENTS
O Q. COULD I SAY SOME KIND OF ARRANGEMENT THEN
COULD YOU EXPLAIN TO ME IN A LITTLE BIT MORE DETAIL WHAT
O KIND OF THIN'G YOU HAVE IN MIND FOR THIS REGION.
I THINK VIE BELIEVE THAT IT IS MORE ON THE LINIES OF ECONOMIC
CO-OPERATION.
A. MORE ALONG THE LINES OF ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION IS WHAT YOU SAID.
WHAT ONE WOULD HOPE TO SEE ACHIEVED IS AN IMPROVEMENT IN THE
ECONOMIC LIVING STANDARDS OF ALL THE PEOPLE IN THE REGION.,, AND
THE VARIOUS NATIONS IN THE REGION INCLUDING OURSELVES, HELPING
EACH OTH~ tR FOR THIS GEN'ERAL ADVANCEMENT.
THIS IS NOT A BI-LATERAL THING, IT IS A MULTI-LATERAL THING
OF THE NATIONS IN THE AREA: IT DEPENDS NOT ON AID ALONE FROM ONE
COUNTRY TO ANOTHER BUT ON MULTI-LATERAL AID AND, INDEED, ON FREEING
THE CHANNELS OF TRADE AS FAR AS THE INTERESTS OF A PARTICULAR
COUNTRY MAKE THAT POSSIBLE.
THIS, TOGETHER WITH A BANISHMENT OF FEAR, A BANISHMENT OF ANY
DANGER OF AGGRESSION FROM INSIDE THE AREA IS THE SORT OF THING
ONE WOULD LIKE TO SEE ACHIEVED.
THE DIRECT METHODS BY WHICH THAT HAPPENS ARE OF COURSE ABLE
TO BE THE SUBJECT OF DEBATE, BUT THE END RESULT IS THE ONE WHICH
I HAVE ATTEMPTED 1* O PUT TO YOU IN THOSE FEW WORDS. 
Q. MR PRIME MINISTERS PURELY ON THE BASIS OF THE REPORTS RECEIVED
FROM KUALA LUMPUR, DID THE RATHER RIGID ATTITUDE OF THE BRITISH
TOWARD THE DEFENCE. SITUATION SURPRISE YOU
A. WELL, I'D LIKE TO SEE THE TRANSCRIPTS OF WHATEVER WAS SAID
BY THE BRITISH SPOKESMEN THERE BEFORE I MAKE ANY REAL COMMENTS
ABOUT THAT.
BUT THERE HAVE BEEN A LOT. OF VARIATIONS OVER THE YEARS ON
BRITISH PROGRAMMES AND BRITISH INVOLVEMENT IN THIS REGION, SO
I'D LIKEI TO SEE THE TRANSCRIPT TO SEE WHETHER THERE IS OR IS NOT
ANY FURTHER VARIATION.
AND I DON'T THINK I'D COMM~ ENJT ON IT UNTIL I'D SEEN THE
TRANSCR IPT.
Q. SI'R) YOU HAD DISCUSSIONS ON TRADE WERE THERE ANY SPECIFIC
I,
COMMODITIES MENTIONED
A. NO, THERE WEREN'T.
I WAS TALKING OF A GENERAL AREA,
BUT ,' IT MAY BE OF INTEREST TO YOU TO KNOW THAT WE DID IN THE
COURSE OF OUR DISCUSSIONS CONSIDER THE DESIRABILITY OF A TAXATION
AGREEMENT BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND SINGAPORE.
AND WE HAVE AGREED AND ARRANGED THAT DISCUSSION4S AT THE
SOFFICIAL LEVEL ON THE NEGOTIATION OF RECIPROCAL TAXATION SHOULD
IMMEDIATELY TAKE PLACE.
Q. ALONG THE LINES OF THE JAPAN/ AUSTRALIA
A. OF THE JAPANESE/ AUSTRALIA ( AGREEMENT). 
Q. MR GORTON, DURING YOUR TALKS WITH MR LEE AND OTHER LEADERS HERE,
ARE YOU ABLE TO INDICATE JUST WHAT AUSTRALIA'S MILITARY ROLE IN
THIS AREA MIGHT BE AFTER 1971 OR IS IT TOO EARLY TO DO THAT
A. I THINK WE'LL WAIT AND SEE WHAT HAPPENS IN THE FIVE-POWER
TALKS AND ANY SUBSEQUENT TALKS WHICH MAY FLOW FROM THE FIVE-POWER
TALKS. IN OTHER WORDS AS MR LEE HIMSELF SAID LAST NIGHT, IT IS
NOT UNREASONABLE AT THIS STAGE TO KEEP ALL ONE'S OPTIONS OPEN.
Q. SIR, YOU HAVE BEEN IN VIETNAM, WHAT ARE YOUR VIEWS ON THE
VIETNAM $ ITUATION
A THIS IS A TERRIBLY BROAD QUESTION, WHAT'S MY VIEW ON THE
VIETNAM SITUATION
1 DON'T KNOW WHETHER YOU MEAN MILITARILY OR PRECISELY
WHAT IT IS WHAT YOU WOULD LIKE ME TO ANSWER.
Q. I'D LIKE TO ASK YOU WHETHER A MILITARY VICTORY IS POSSIBLE
A. I MYSELF BELIEVE, ALTHOUGH I DON'T POSE TO BE A MILITARY
STRATEGI$ T OR A TECHNICIAN I AM A POLITICIAN WHO RECEIVES
MILITARY ADVICE AND ATTEMPTS TO EVALUATE IT I THINK THAT
THE OUTCOME, FROM A MILITARY POINT OF VIEW, WILL DEPEND ON WILL,
YOU KNOW WILL AND RESOLVE BUT I WOULD HOPE THAT THE
OUTCOME WOULD BE THAT THERE WAS GIVEN TO THE PEOPLE OF SOUTH
VIETNAM AN OPPORTUNITY TO CHOOSE THEIR OWN GOVERNMENT AND THAT IN
THE CHOOSING OF IT TO BE FREE FROM TERROR OR SUBVERSION, OR
PRESSURE FROM ANY QUARTER.
AND IF THIS IS ACQUIRED FOR THE SOUTH VIETNAMESE PEOPLE, THENTHEY
WILL BE THE ONES WHO WILL BE ABLE TO MAKE THE CHOICE OF
WHICH PARTICULAR GOVERNMENT THEY WANT.
AND IF THEY CAN DO IT WITHOUT FEAR OR FAVOUR OR PRESSURE
THEN I BELIEVE THAT WE WILL HAVE GAINED WHAT WE HAVE SET OUT
TO GAIN, AND WHAT YOU IN SINGAPORE HAVE AND WHAT WE IN AUSTRAL IA
HAVE AN D WHAT I THIN4K IS NECESSARY FOR PEOPLE TO HAVE. 
Q. WOULD YOU SAY THAT THE POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION IS MORE IMPORTANT
THAN THE MILITARY, SIR
A. THE ONLY PURPOSE OF MILITARY ACTION IS TO ACHIEVE A POLITICAL
SETTLEMENT IN ANY CIRCUMSTANCE, NOT JUST THE VIETNAM SITUATION.
IN ANY TIME WHEN A CONFLICT TAKES PLACE, THAT CONFLICT TAKES
PLACE BECAUSE A POLITICAL SETTLEMENT HAS NO0T BEEN POSSIBLE, AND
ONE SIDE OR-* THE OTHER DECIDES THEY WILL RESORT TO FORCE INSTEAD
OF CONTINJUING TO TRY AND REACH AN AGREED POLITICAL SETTLE MENT.
NOW WHAT ONE HOPES WOULD TAKE PLACE WOULD BE A POLITICAL
SETTLE ME NT.
IT WOULD BE MUCH BETTER IF THAT POLITICAL SETTLEMENT TOOK
PLACE, AS LONG AS IT TOOK PLACE ALONG THE LINES THAT I HAVE
SUGGESTED, WITHOUT FURTHER MILITARY ACTION.
BUT IF IT WAS IMPOSSIBLE TO GET THAT KIND OF POLITICAL
SETTLEME NT, THEN I EXPECT THAT MILITARY ACTION WILL'CONTINUE.
Q. MR PRIME MINISTER, AUSTRALIA IS GETTING MORE AND MORE INTERESTED
IANSIA. DO YOU THINK YOUR IMMIGRATION POLICY WILL HAVE TO BE REVISED
TO G I\ JE AS IANS AN EQUAL CHANCE TO COME TO AUSTRAL IA WITH EUROPEANS
A. YOU KNOW, YOU USED A WORD WHICH INTERESTS ME AND RATHER
. BEMUSES ME.
YOU SAID AUSTR~ ALIA IS GETTING MORE AND MORE INTERESTED IN ASIA.
JUST WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY ASIA
ASIA IS A CONTINENT AND IN THE AREA THERE ARE A LOT OF
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES, A LOT OF DIFFERENT CULTURES, A LOT OF
DIFFERENT APPROACHES, IT IS NOT AN ENTITY IS IT
IT'S NO0 MORE AN ENTITY THAN EUROPE WAS AN ENTITY BEFORE THE
FIRST WORLD WAR.
GERMANS WERE SO DIFFERENT FROM THE FRENCH, AND THE FRENCH
WERE SO DIFFERENT FROM THE ITALIANS, A ND THE RUSSIANS WERE
SO DIFFERENT FROM EVERYBODY ELSE, AND SO ON
WE ARE INTERESTED IN PEOPLE, AND WE HAPPEN TO BE INTERESTED
IN THE PEOPLE WHO ARE CLOSEST TO US.
O. K.
THE NUMBER OF THE NATIONS WHO ARE CLOSEST TO US ARE NATIONS
WHO ARE IN4 THE GEOGRAPHICAL AREA KNOWN AS ASIA, BUT IT'S. RATHER
A BLANKET THING WHICH I WANTED TO TIE DOWN A BIT MORE, TO DEFINE
A LITTLE BIT MORE THAN YOU HAD DEFINED IT. 
WE HAVE All IMMIGRATION POLICY WHICH IS SUBJECT TO CONSTANT
REVILEW, AND INDEED HAS RECENTLY BEEN REV IEWED.
IF-AN ASIAN WISHED TO BE NATURALIZED AS AN AUSTRALIAN) THEY
HAD TO LIVE IN AUSTRALIA FOR 15 Y. EARS, WHEREAS EUROPEANS HAD TO
LIVE THERE FOR
THAT HAS BEEN CHANGED NOW: ASIAN ONLY HAS TO LIVE THERE
FOR 5 YEARS THE SAME AS THE EUROPEAN.
THIS IS ONE ALTERATION WHICH HAS BEEN MADE.
THERE' IS ALSO, OF COURSE, NO BAR SUBJECT TO IT BEING A
GENUINE MARRIAGE, AGAINST ANY ASIAN MARRYING AN AUSTRALIAN AND
AUTOMATICALLY BECOMING AN AUSTRALIAN CITIZEN I DON'T MEAN
BY THAT THAT YOU CAN HAVE AN ARRANGED MARRIAGE JUST FOR THAT
PURPOSE, BUT A GENUINE MARRIAGE LEADS TO THAT RESULT.
QUITE SOME THOUSANDS I DON'T K( NOW HOW MANY FROM THE
IMMIGRATION FIGURES FOR THE VARIOUS COUNTRIES OF ASIA DO BECOME
NATURALIZED IN AUSTRALIA.
I EXF! IECT THAT OVER THE DECADES AHEAD THIS KIND ' OF
LIBERALIZATION IS LIKELY TO BE KEPT UNDER REVIEW.
WE, I TH INK NEED TO BE SURE THAT WE DON'T RUN A R ISK OF
CREATING IN AUSTRALIA A PROBLEM WHICH WE HAVE SEEN CREATED IN
OTHER COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD WHERE A VERY LARGE MINORITY
ATTRACIVS, THE DISLIKE OF THE MAJORITY ( DISLIKE ISN'T THE PROPER
WORD.# II THINK YOU KNOW THE WORD I MEAN ANIMOSITY SOMETHING
OF THAT KIND., WE CAN AVOID THAT AND THIS WILL THEREFORE
BE A GRADUAL GROWTH.
BUT IT HAS BEEN, I HAVE LOOKED BACK ON THE RECORD, IT HAS BEEN
A GROWTH THAT HAS BEEN LIBERALISED., THE THING HAS BEEN MADE
EASIER. BUT AGAIN, FROM OUR OWN NATIONAL INTERESTS, WE WOULD NEED
TO TRY AND SEE THAT WHAT HAPPENS IN OTHER PLACES, INCLUDING
WTHE VARIOUS COUNTRIES OF ASIA, WAS AVOIDED AS FAR AS POSSIBLE IN
OUR OWN COUN'TRY.
I DON'T THINK THAT I OUGHT TO GO TOO DEEPLY INTO IT.
YOU WOULD KNOW OF COUNTRIES IN ASIA WHERE THERE ARE
DIFFICULTIES, BECAUSE OF MINORITIES OF A DIFFERENT RACIAL
CHARACTERISTIC THAN THE OTHERS.
WHAT ONE WOULD LIKE TO SEE IN AN IDEAL WORLD IS A SITUATION
WHERE THIS DIDN'T EXIST.
WHAT WE HAVE IN AUSTRALIA IS A SITUATION WHERE THERE IS NO
SUCH FEELING AT THE MOMENT AT ALL AGAINST ANYBODY.
WE'D LIKE TO KEEP IT THAT WAY, BUT I THINK THERE WILL NEED
TO BE A GRADUAL GROWTH TO MAKE SURE WE AVOID THE PITFALLS, NOT
ONLY OF EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, BUT OF ASIAN COUNTRIES THEMSELVES. 
Q. SIR YOU HAVE SAID'YOU HAVE HAD DISCUSSIONS CONCERNING VIEW ON
VIETNAM. COULD YOU SAY WHETHER YOUR VIEWS ON VIETNAM WERE IDENTICAL
WITH SINGAPORE VIEWS
A. I THINK THEY WERE VERY CLOSE TOGETHER INDEED, BUT I. PREFER
THAT ANY COMMENTS ON THE VIEWS OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE
SHOULD COME FROM THE PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE.
Q. SIR, DID YOUR DEFENCE DISCUSSIONS WITH MR LEE INCLUDE THE
POSSIBILITY OF AN AUSTRALIAN MILITARY PRESENCE HERE AFTER THE
BRITISH MILITARY WITHDRAWAL
A. INCLUDED IN COVERING THESE FI. ELDS, THIS WOULD BE ONE OF THE
SUBJECTS WHICH WAS DISCUSSED.
YES.
Q. DISCUSSED IN A PRACTIC. AL MANNER, OR JUST GENERAL TERMS
A. WOULDjYOU MIND ELABORATING ON THAT SO I KNOW PRECISELY
WHAT YOU MEAN
Q. I WAS TRYING TO SUGGEST SIR, THAT OBVIOUSLY THIS IS A BIG
TOPIC WHICH WOULD COME UP.
DID ANY GUARANTEE COME FROM AUSTRALIA
A. OH, 1 I SEE.
IT WAS DISCUSSED NO, NO GUARANTEES CAME FROM AUSTRALIA,
BUT CLEARLY VARIOUS CONTINGENCIES WERE DISCUSSED AN4D VARIOUS
PROPOSALS TO MEET THE CONTINGENCIES WERE, YOU KNOW THE SUBJECT
OF THE CONVERSATIONS, BUT NO '' YOU DO THIS... YES ALL RIGHT..
WE'LL DO THAT''.
NOT THAT KIND OF DISCUSSION, BUT MORE FOR SEEKING TO PIERCE
THE VEIL OF THE FUTURE A LITTLE IF THAT'S THE PROPER WORD
AND TRY AND SAY THAT IF THIS HAPPENS THEN THIS MIGHT BE
POSSIBLE, OR IF THAT HAPPENS, THE OTHER MIGHT BE POSSIBLE.
LET'S WAIT AND SEE WHAT HAPPENS, AND THEN WE'LL
HAVE ANOTHER TALK. 
Q PR-I 1iE-M: I N-i STER,-JUS T-ONE--QUES-ZPGMAJG-I-IQW-___
TGPWXEK-ZBZVS? R-----WITALKS WI
WI4-AU ST.-USA-L-I-A-C-GONsI-D E-R-E-P &amp; S-E-D-A-TFfRr-AT -TO-RTTIAL--SE-CU RtTY
A iD_ WAS_ MR-LE-E-A&amp; RE-E* BL E
Q. PRIM1E MINISTER, JUST ONE QUESTION.
9. IN YOUR TALKS WITH MR LEE, DID YOU OUTLINE THE MAJOR FACTORS
WHICH AUSTRALIA CONSIDERED POSED A THREAT TO REGIONAL SECURITY
AND WAS MR LEE AGREEABLE WITH YOUR ASSESSMENT OR WERE THERE
O POINTS OF DIFFERENCE OF EMPHASIS
A. I THINK THAT WE WERE IN COMPLETE AGREEMENT.
I THINK AS FAR AS OUR OWN COUNTRY OF AUSTRALIA IS CONCERNED
ONE OF THE COUNTRIES OF THE REGION WHICH YOU ARE TALKING ABOUT,
THE ONLY THREAT WHICH I THINK EITHER OF US COULD SEE
COMING TO AUSTRALIA WAS A FAR-OFF THREAT, AND A THREAT WHICH
WOULD ONLY BECOME A REALITY IF SOME POTENTIAL THREAT HAD REACHED
REALITY IN THE OTHER COUNTRIES OF THE REGION.
BUT BECAUSE THERE MIGHT BE SOME FAR-OFF THREAT WHICH COULD
S REACH REALITY IF SOMETHING HAPPENED TO OTHER COUNTRIES IN THE
REGION THEREFORE IT WAS OF INTEREST TO US TO DISCUSS HOW ONE
COULD TRY AND AVOID THAT KIND OF THREAT TO THE OTHER COUNTRIES
IN THE REGION HERE.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF WAYS OF DOING THAT ALL OF THEM NOT BY
ANY MEANS MILITARY BUT SOME OF THEM.
I THINK WE BOTH HAD THE SAME KIND OF APPROACH AS TO THE
POSSIBILITY. THESE CAN ONLY BE POSSIBILITIES OF WHAT MIGHT HAPPEN AND AS
TO WHAT MIGHT BE DONE IN VARIOUS CONTINGENCIES. 
Q. I WAS THINKING, SIR, WHAT PROMPTED THE QUESTION II. T SEEMS
TO ME THAT AUSTRALIAN FOREIGN POLICY IS CONCERNED WITH COMMUNIST
IMPERIALISM WITH CHINESE IMPERIALISM -, KHAUCK'S TERMS,
WHEREAS SINGAPORE SEEMS TO BE CONCERNED A BE A
REPRODUCTION, A FURTHER OUTBREAK OF INDONESIAN IRRIDENTIST POLICIES
WHICH THEY SEEM. SO CONCERNED ABOUT.
WERE THESE FACTORS TALKED ABOUT
A. OH WELL, THESE WERE PRIVATE CONVERSATIONS.
Q. MR PF! IME MINISTER, WHEN YOU GO UP TO KUALA LUMP'UR THIS
V AFTERNOON, WILL YOU BE HAVING A BRIEFING FROM MR FAIRHALL
AND MR HASLUCK BEFORE YOU MEET THE TUNKU TOM* ORROW
A. WE'RE GETTING THERE ABOUT 5.15 P. M. AND PEOPLE ACCOMPANYING
ME HAVE BEEN DOING A BIT OF RINGING UP TO SEE WHETHER
MR HAS ILUCK AND MR FAIRHALL HAVE TIME TO COME ALONG TO HAVE A TALK
IN BETWEEN THE CONCLUSION OF WHATEVER THEY'RE DOING, AND GOING TO
THE STATE BANQUET.
IT WILL NOT REALLY BE A BRIEFING, BUT IT WOULD BE A CHANCE
FOR THE THREE OF US TO GET TOGETHER AGAIN.
IT DOESN'T NEED TO BE A BRIEFING, BECAUSE THERE WILL BE NO
HARD AND FAST DECISIONS TAKEN BY AUSTRALIA AT THESE FIVE-P OWER
TALKS AND, THEREFORE, TODAY WHETHER IT'S IN 10 DAYS' TIME,
WON'T BE THOROUGHLY SIGNIFICANT.
BUT I DON'T KNOW WHETHER YOU'VE HEARD THE RESULTS OF THE
CONVERSATION MR HEWITT HEAD OF MY DEPARTMENT DO
YOU KNOW ANYTHING
( MR HEWITT). THEY'LL BE CALLING IN TON IGHT.
A. O. K. THAT'S THE ANSWER TO YOUR QUESTION.
Q. YOU ARE GOING TO INDONESIA FROM KUALA LUMPUR
A. I'll GOING TO INDONESIA YES. 
Q. HAVE YOU ANY PARTICULAR TOPICS TO BE DISCUSSED IN INDONESIA
WITH PRESIDENT SUHARTO
A. NO. 1
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THEY MIGHT BRING UP, BUT THE MAJOR PURPOSE
OF THIS VISIT IS FIRST TO ALLOW MYSELF TO GET ACQUAINTED WITH THE
RULERS OF THE VARIOUS COUNTRIES IN THE REGION IN A PERSONAL WAY,
AND ALSO TO SHOW THAT' WE IN AUSTRALIA REALISE WE ARE CONTIGUOUS
TO A PART OF THE REGION AND AFFECTED BY WHAT HAPPENS IN THE
REGION, AND TO SHOW THAT THE DEATH OF THE LATE PRIME MINISTER,
MR HOLT, DID NOT PUT A STOP TO THIS, THAT THIS IS A CONTINUING
INTEREST ON OUR PART.
NOW I HAVE NO DOUBT THERE WOULD BE A NUMBER OF MATTERS OF
ECONOMI C INTEREST WHICH GENERAL SUHARTO MIGHT WISH TO RAISE,
BUT I AM 14OT GOING THERE FOR THE PURPOSE OF GETTING OUT A BRIEF
AND SAYING TO HIM '' WELL,-WE'D LIKE YOU TO DO THAT OR WOULD YOU
LIKE US TO DO THIS'' OR THINGS OF THAT' KIND.
O. K. I
THANK YOU.
ENDS CFM: 1385 130 11 JUNE
ENDS: 13/ 121OLT GMCN 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
KUALA LUMPUR
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
at State Dinner given by Tunku Abdul Rahman 12 JUNE 1968
Prime Minister, Mr. Holyoake, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The first thing that I must do, Prime Minister, is to express to you my
thanks, very sincere thanks, for your having extended to my wife and I the
invitation to visit your country. And to say that, during the course of that visit,
you have extended to me many kindnesses which I shall remember as long as
I have breath, You did this morning an honour to my country, through me, by allowing
me to enter your House of Parliament, and by the things you said about my
country, remarks which were seconded by the Leader of the Opposition in that
House. The fact that I was the first Australian Prime Minister to enter your
House of Parliarent, and be so treated is perhaps an indication of how much
closer together wV-e have been getting, and perhaps an indication of how much
closer yet we may get in the future.
The ties betw., een Malaysia and Australia, and particularly that part of
Malaysia which I shall call Malaya, and Australia, go backIC a long while, but
they were in the beginning quite tenuous. The people of my country knew little
of the people of yours and I expect that the people of your country knew little of
mine. But a little more than a quarter of a century ago, those ties began to mean
something rather more real when together, you and we, and New Zealand, Great
Britain and other nations attempted to stem the tide of conquest then sweeping
down the Malayan Peninsular. That, I think, gave to thousands of Australians a
clearer knowledge of this country and of those who live in it. And, since that
time, the inter-flow of the thousands of visitors of -which you spoke, the great
enrichment of our own country by the students who have come in such large numbers
from Malaya, the closer economic co-operation between Malaya and ourselves,
the requirements to use force in order to resist at first an emergency and then a
confrontation, have all strengthened those ties of which you spok e.
Prime Minister, they are not now just ties between Prime Ministers;
now, are they ties between governments or the policies of governments. I
believe that they are now ties between the peoples of my country and of yours
and, I think, that they will grow still more in strength as the years go by. I
don't know, Sir, what the future holds, for none of us have a crystal ball. Vie
have for some time been engaged in joint attempts to safeguard the stability, the
security and the progress of this area but now a change has come and some of
those who are engaged in these attempts may or may not be engaged in them in
the future, or at least not in the same way. And this, of course, has been the
theme of the initial Five Power talks just concluded.
3ut I would hope, Sir, one m~ uld not put one's trust for security in such
things as the w, alls to which you referred which the Romans built ; when they
quitted Britain because, if I remember subsequent events correctly, they were
of no use whatever in preventing the Scots from completely subjugating Britain
and indeed I think New Zealand. But one doesn't of course put one's trust in
such things: rather does one put it in that common pur pose which you have
expressed a common purpose to seek by such means as each of us are able
to spare, the security of an area which is necessary if the peoples of that area
are to progress and get a better standard of living. Rather does one put one' s 
trust in a common outlook recognising that security, and progress, are best
secured by those kind of democratic processes, which you put into practice
here and we put into practice in Australia. These are the ties that bind, these
are the objectives in common.
And until that time comes when the motto of the United Nations is
translated into that motto being " They shall beat their swords into ploughshares"-
until that time comes, and it has not come yet, then there will need to be
co-operation for security, and, under that shield, co-operation for progress.
And because I think, as I said, that the people of my country are interested in
the people of yours, and of neighbouring countries, I have high hopes that both
our nations will be able to progress, behind the shield of security, to a future
of even greater security, because the future rests on the will of the peoples and
the standards of living which we will be able to achieve for them.
Ladies and gentlemen, would you join me in a toast to the Prime
Minister of Mal ay sia. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
DJAKARTA
ARRIVAL STATEMENT MADE BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JCHN GORTON 13 JUNE 1968
I am happy to have this opportunity to visit the Republic of
Indonesia on my first trip to South East Asia since becoming Prime Minister
of Australia. My wife and I have been greatly looking forward to this visit
and are grateful to the Government of Indonesia for its kind invitation.
Although the association between our two countries is short
when measured in terms of history, dating only from your independence
Iit has been an association which has laid a foundation of friendship
and co-operation. We in Australia, contiguous to Asia and part of the Asian
and Pacific region, look to the forging of an enduring relationship with our
closest South East Asian neighbour, We in Australia are deeply aware of
the new world of independent nations in this region. It is in this region we
feel that in friendly co-operation with our neighbours we can make our
contribution to stability and progress.
As a friend and neighbour, Australia has enjoyed fruitful
relationships with Indonesia in fields of practical co-operation. Your Stutsr
have attended our universities and technical institutions and Australians
have worked alongside Indonesians on projects ranging from road building
in East Nusa Tenggara to the installation of an aerial communicat ions network
spanning the vast area of the Archipelago of the Republic. Our firm support
of your present rehabilitation programme is assured.
I am looking forward to discussions with your President and
his Ministers on the many matters of mutual interest. It is my hope that
our two Governments will expand their areas of co-operation in the future
and that the range of personal and cultural contacts between our people will
widen over the coming years.
I hope also during this visit to see more of your country and
people. My wife, who stayed in your country for a period of six weeks in
1966, has insisted that I see something of the natural beauty of Indonesia
and experience the warmth and hospitality of the Indonesian people. This
we will do. After my period of official meetings and discussions here in
Djakarta, we are also going to visit Bandung and Bali. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
LB^ Ry DJAKARTA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINI3TER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
AT BANQUET GIVEN BY PRESIDENT SUHARTO 13 JUNE 1968
Mr. President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
Thank you, Sir, for your kind welcome and warm remarks about the
relations between our two countries. My visit to Indonesia in the course of my
first visit as Prime Minister to this area reflects the close concern and interest
which the Government and people of Australia have in your country. This
interest is not new found.
Australians are proud to have extended the hand of friendship to Indonesians
in the earlier days of the struggle for independence. Vie are even prouder, Sir,
that you accepted that friendship and paid us the honour of nominating us as
your representative at the United Nations negotiations at that time. It was in
those days that a firm basis evas laid for an enduring and neighbourly relationship.
Those early days of close co-operation were followed in due course by events
that were less happy. But through all these times of differences and confrontation
Australia's interest in Indonesia did not slacken.
For example, during all that time our aid programme continued and your
students remained at their studies at our universities, It was also possible at
that time to reach agreement on the marking of our common border in Irian, In
all our dealings during those, difficult times we sought to indicate that we were
fully conscious of the need to preserve as wide an area of co-operation as possible
and continue to work towards a confident and productive relationship. I believe
that you shared this aim and looked forward with us to the time when the full
warmth of our relations could be restored. And that time has come. It is a
matter of the highest satisfaction to me and to all Australians that relations have
now been fully restored and indeed, as I think, lifted to new levels.
The Australian Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Hasluck, has visited
Indonesia three times in the last sixteen months. Your Foreign Minister has just
concluded a visit to Australia. There have been numerous visits by other
Ministers between our two countries in the last two years. At the Parliamentary
level we had a Parliamentary Delegation here last year and your Parliamentary
Delegation has just returned from Australia. Large numbers of individual members
of the Australian Parliament from both sides of the House have come here on
visits both official and private. Our Air Force Commanders have exchanged
visits. We have Army officers training in each other's country. Units of the
Australian Navy have been most courteously received in recent visits in Indonesia.
This is quite a satisfying list. But in itself it does not fully convey the
; armth of the relations established, the growing frankness of the exchanges that
we have and the desire to seek out even more ways of helping each other overcome
our individual and our shared problems. It is this spirit and not just the fact that
there have been these meetings which is so important and which ensures that we
shall go forward along the course of mutual help and interest with trust and respect.
None of this that I have said is surprising to me, nor, Your Excellency, from
what you have said, is it surprising to you. Nothing is more natural than that
Australia and Indonesia, situated as they are and occupying the places they do
in the political and economic life in this part of the world, should be the best
of friends with a common interest in developing good neighbourly relations.
/ 2 
2.
For whatever happens in this part of the world affects us both, not always
equally, but surely nonetheless. d'e look out on the same vista of international
affairs from the samne geographical situation, and we give thought to the same
questions, and cope with similar problems. The conclusions we arrive at, the
actions we take, are not always going to be the same. VWe each have our
particular traditions, and linkcs, and interests which togrether with the facts of
geography, determine those individual conclusions and actions. But, in many
cases those conclusions will be the same, and when they are not it is important
that we both have a clear understanding of the reasons for any diversion of
approach. And I think there is already ample evidence that this is a realistic
aim and that this can, and will, be achieved.
So I believe, Your Excellency, that our two countries must go forward
tether. I believe also that each of our two countries recognises that. I believe
that not only our two countries but the other neighbouring countries in the region
must also go forward with us. And I believe finally that we shall accomplish
this goal, God w., illing, to our mutual benefit, prosperity and to the service of
the independence of each one of our countries and of those other neighbouring
countries in the region.
Ladies and gentlemen, would you join me in drinking a toast to the
President of the Republic of Indonesia. 



968VISIT ~ ju~ TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
DJAKARTA
SPEECH GIVEN BY PRESIDENT SUHARTO AT STATE
DINNER IN HONOUR OF THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME
MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON 13 JUNE 1968
Your Excellency Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton, Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen:-May 1, on behalf of the Government and the people of Indonesia,
once again express our pleasure and appreciation for Your Excellency's
acceptance of our invitation to visit Indonesia. This constitutes one of the
most important visits to us, for Australia is one of Indonesia's closest
neighbours. Our very close geographical propinquity makes it one of the most
significant aspects for the future development of our two nations.
Indeed, during the past few years the relations between our two
countries were not at their best and at certain periods it was even quite clouded.
However, right now we thank God Almighty those days have passed. We are
now entering a new period and a hopeful future. It has now become our mutual
responsibility to give substance to the future; something that is beneficial to
our common inter ests which we should realize jointly as far as possible and
on the basis of equality.
National independence and the peoples' sovereignty are basic
principles to which we fully adhere. We maintain and at the same time apply
these principles in our attitude towards other nations in the world. Therefore,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity from Sabang to Merauke
are for the Indonesian people matters of principle. In order to realize those
principles the Indonesian people have fought for hundreds of years sacrificing
all they could offer. The fight for freedom has culminated in the proclamation
of our independence, but our struggle had still to be continued years after. Up
to the present moment, the Indonesian people have still to endure the
consequences of their sacrifice in the effort to achieve their territorial integrity.
One of them is the people's plight in the economic field. We are therefore
determined to defend whatever we have achieved painfully. Despite the burning
spirit of our nationalism, the pantja sila, which is the basic Indonesian
philosophy, will guarantee that it remains a sound one. Nationalism based on
pantja sila will stem the greed for territorial expansion.
To the Indonesian people, independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity are very important principles; they do not only constitute
our rights and honour, but they also serve as one of the important instruments
for nation building in its broadest sense. I am confident that the Australian
people will understand what I have just said, as they did when the Indonesian
people fought to uphold and maintain their independence in 1945, which they
fully supported, and to which they rendered their concrete assistance. For
all this, on this occasion, the Indonesian people once again wish to express
their high est appreciation and profound gratitude.
Much has happened since the Indonesian people achieved
independence and many changes have occurred in the world and around our
territory. After going through various stages of developments and serious
ordeals, the Indonesian people have now regained their genuine ideals of
independence and we are doing our utmost to substantiate that independence
with the welfare of the people. In our effort to give substance to our
independence by way of reconstruction, we are aware of the necessity to
maintain stability in South East Asia. This stability is to be based upon the
/ 2 
principles of national independence and the people's sovereignty by which
genuine good-neighbour policy can be established.
In this wo rid, that still contains greed to influence other nations'
internal affairs which in some instances were conducted by force of arms we
also realize the necessity of a physical defence capable of protecting the Indonesian
nation and our country's integrity. However, the Indonesian people believe that
the means for defence, which are decisive and at the same time advantageous,
are the conviction in its own national identity and the standard of prosperity of
its people. In my opinion, such a good neighbour policy is sufficiently realistic
and will always serve as a basis for the Indonesian nation in conducting its
co-operation with friendly countriesi in particular with those in our immediate
neighbourhood. We highly esteem the fact that recently Australia has paid a great
deal of attention to problems encountered by the developing South East Asian
nations, and in particular Indonesia. The developments that have occurred in
Indonesia and the new outlook that has come about in the minds of the Australian
people, to my belief, reflect a very favourable situation for our two nations.
Let us maintain this very favourable atmosphere and transform it into a more
concrete and effective mould. This mutual friendship and co-operation beneficial
to our two nations, will certainly be significant not only for Australian and
Indonesia, but also for the sake of this region's stability and the more so it
will positively contribute to the peace in the world. I pray that my hopes will
become a reality in the not too distant future.
Finally, may I invite Your Excellency, Your Excellencies,
ladies and gentlemen to raise your glasses and to toast to the health of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, and also the health of Your Excellency, the Prime
Minister, Mrs. Gorton, and the distinguished members of the Prime Minister's
party. Thank you. 



VISLT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 196( r-
DJAKARTA
SY E72C H BY FR ZSL" DE11' FP SUHA RTC AT DINNER GIVEN 2 4 JUR 1968
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON 14 JUNE 1968
Your Excellency Prime Minister Gorton and Madame Gorton, Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Honourable Guests:-
After having been in the capital of Djakarta for a few days, Your
IExcellency Prime Minister Gorton and Madame Gorton are going to visit some
areas of Indonesia. I am convinced that this visit to the other areas will be
very useful: Your Excellency will then be able to kcnow better the Indonesian
people, and their culture: you will know each other better from heart to heart:
you will better understand their everyday problems and their efforts to overcome
them. Above everything else Your Excellency and your party will even more
enjoy the friendly atmosphere as is the wish of the Indonesian people. I am sure
that you will feel all these thingg even better, because among your party there
is somebody for whom it will be easier to understand them, namely Madame
Gorton who speaks indonesian fluently.
It is indeed an honour, it is even very moving for the Indonesian
people that this time outside the Malay race we have a State guest who is well
versed in our language and who has a thorough knowledge of the Indonesian culture.
I feel that Mrs. Gorton's fluency and her knowledge of the Indonesian language
are a manifestation of the friendly feelings and the understanding of the Australian
people about the Indonesian people.
In the last two years these bonds of friendship have become even
more visible: an exchange of visits among officials and leaders of our two nations
have taken place, also among private persons. Indonesia has also received
financial, and technical help and other forms of assistance which are very useful
for us and which we value very highly. But much more important than material
help are the deeper foundations as I see them, foundations which are manifestations
of an understanding from Australia about the problems which are being faced by
the Indonesian people at present. Indeed the Indonesian nation is at present
focussing her attention and her ability to bring about economic stability, and on
the basis of this economic stability we will soon begin with development in the
truest sense of the word. We fully realise that in developing Indonesia's economy
emphasis must be laid upon the mobilisation of our own forces. However, we
are also fully aware of all the limitations which are still binding us: so that
foreign assistance and co-operation have a considerable influence in accelerating
efforts by the Indonesian nation in developing their economic potentialities.
I sincerely appreciate the fact that Your Excellency during this
visit has been able better to understand the problems which we are facing. This
understanding can be seen very clearly during our discussions which I held with
Your Excellency this afternoon, especially with regard to relations between our
two nations and Indonesia's efforts to improve her economic facilities. The open
discussions and heart-to-heart talks held between us concerning international
problems in general and about Asia in particular are indeed very useful. Cur
exchange of thoughts have convinced me that the future of the friendship between
our two nations is extremely hopeful and that it contains many useful
possibilities for both parties. / 2 
2.
With regard to relations between nations in the world at present,
I get the impression that an exchange of visits between leaders of nations is
extremely useful for strengthening the bonds of friendship, because mutual visits
bring mutual understanding. It is mutual understanding and mutual esteem that
are absolute requisites for the realisation of everlasting peace in the world. With
this general picture in mind I believe that Your Excellency would agree with me
that your visit to Indonesia this time is truly of great significance for Australia
and Indonesia, The results of this visit will become a firm foundation for future
friendly relations and co-operation between our two nations and, let us hope
that it will be a positive contribution towards the stabilisation of our area.
Your Excellency Prime Minister Gorton and Madame Gorton,
tomorrow Your Excellency and Madame and your party will leave Djakarta to
continue your trip to various areas of Indonesia, after which you will be leaving
our country. My wife and I very much regret not to be able to accompany you on
your further trip in Indonesia. However, I believe that this will not in the least
reduce the value of your observation trip. Therefore, I shall avail myself of
this opportunity to wish you a happy journey.
During your visi t we feel that Your Excellency has succeeded in
creating a friendly atmosphere towards the Indonesian people: we also hope that
when leaving Indonesia Your Excellency will take home with you the friendly
feelings of the Indonesian people. On behalf of the people of Indonesia and on
my own behalf, through Your Excellency, I wish to send friendly greetings to
the Australian people. At the end, allow me to invite Your Excellency, Your Excellencies,
ladies and gentlemen, and all honourable guests to raise your glasses and to
drink to the prosperity of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth 11 and to the health of
Your Excellency and Madame Gorton and your party and to the prosperity and
progress of the Australian people.
Thank you. 



VISIT TC SCUTH EAST ASIA 1968
DJAKARTA
JOINT COMMUNIQUE 14 JUNE 1968
General Suharto, President of the Republic of Indonesia, and the
Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia,
completed their discussions today. The two leaders expressed their pleasure
at the basic goodwill, friendship and good neighbour spirit between the two
countries. They welcomed the continuing development of close and co-operative
relations between the Governments of Indonesia and Australia, and the growth of
contacts between their peoples in a wide variety of fields.
The two leaders discussed the problems facing their respective
countries and the objectives they each sought, and declared their interest in the
stability and progress in Asia and the Pacific were prerequisites to world peace,
and that developments in the region affected the vital interests of both countries.
They agreed that their two countries should co-operate closely with each other
for the attainment of these objectives. They also agreed that the leaders of the
two countries should have frequent consultations concerning the problems of the
area. Having reviewed at length the situation and prospects in South East
Asia, they noted that the strengthening and consolidation of national independence
and integrity was a foremost objective for the countries of the region. Along with
this went a growing senseC of community among the nations of the region and a
growing movement toward regional co-operation, embracing wide areas of
national life. Regional co-operation was both an expression of national
independence and a means of supporting that independence. They noted that an
environment of economic, social and political stability in the region was essential
for the carrying out of sound and constructive national programmes aimed at
raising living standards and meeting the desire of people everywhere for a fuller
life. In this connection the Prime Minister expressed his understanding and
support for the purposes which lay behind the creation of the association of South
East Asian nations. The President expressed his deep appreciation for Australia's
active participation in the inter -governmental conferences on Indonesia and for
Australia's greatly increased assistance in 1968/ 69. He hoped that, within the
framework of economic co-operation, endeavours would be made to increase
further trade between the two countries. The Prime Minister confirmed
Australia's strong interest in Indonesia's economic recovery. He stated that
Australia was prepared to continue its co-operation with Indonesia, to extend
what assistance it could, and to explore the possibilities of increasing tr~ ade
between the two countries.
The two leaders noted and welcomed the growing variety of
cultural contacts between their countries. With a view to stimulating the
further growth of these exchanges and to establishing a deeper understanding of
the history and culture of their respective peoples, a cultural agreement covering
a wide range of activities in this field has today been signed by Mr. Adam Malik,
Foreign Minister of the Republic of Indonesia, and Mr. Max Loveday, Australian
Ambassador to Indonesia. The President and the Prime Minister welcomed the
opportunity provided by the visit to establish personal contact which they agreed
to maintain and strengthen in the future. In this connection the Prime Minister
extended a cordial invitation to t he President and Mrs. Suharto to visit Australia
at a mutually convenient time. The President accepted the invitation with thanks.
The Prime Minister expressed his deep appreciation for the warm and cordial
reccption which he and Mrs. Gorton had received. 



V IS 1T TO SOUTH EA ST ASI1A 1968
DJAKARTA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
AT A DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRESIDENT SUHARTO 14 JUNE 1968
Mr. President, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
It would, for any Australian Prime Minister, at any time, be a
special privilege to be a host to the President of the Republic of Indonesia. But
on this occasion there is perhaps a doubly special pleasure because quite soon,
I think perhaps tomorrow, you begin a series of fairs and carnivals in Djakarta
to celebrate the 44 1st anniversary of the foundation of this city. It is therefore
doubly pleasant that I should have quite inadvertently so timed this visit that it
coincides with this celebration.
It is perhaps salutary to someone from Australia to consider this
Wand to consider that this city, in which we are tonight, was founded 250 years
0before the nation which I represent was founded in my country. This long stretch
of history behind you was reinforced to me last night by the cultural exhibition
Swhich you so kindly presented and which was from the various parts of this
Vgreat archipelago. You showed dances stretching back three, four, five hundred
years and which we for our part cannot match. Our own national existence has
been shorter than has been the existence of this city though we do draw from
centuries past, a culture from Great Britdin that we must turn and will turn to
our own ends as people from other nations come and make a new nation in
Australia'. But it is a double privilege to have you as the guest of honour,
for we in Australia have a keen awareness of the leadership which you are giving
Sto this nation in difficult times; a keen awareness of the problems which you
Wwith courage and imagination are seeking in these times to overcome. We wish
you all success in these endeavours, not only for your own sake but for our own
sake too and for those of other neighbouring countries. For if you achieve success
in the task which you have set yourself, then our future will be the easier, so
will the future of other neighbouring countries: so will the future of the region
as a whole. In this great and difficult task which you have before you we will,
as far as our nation is concerned, be helpful as far as we are able, considering
the commitments at home and abroad which we have.
Sir, what we can do will depend on many factors, but I do assure
you that we will try as a nation to play that part in helping to fulfil the dreams
you have for -the future of your nation and the dreams we have for the future of
the whole of the region to which we are contiguous, of which perhaps ultimately
we will be an important part. Sir, you will know that just recently we have
taken a decision in Australia to double next year the amount of aid which last
year we provided to Indonesia and it is a matter of special pride that this was
one of the first decisions made by the Australian Government since I became
Prime Minister of my country. But that is, in the context of the problems
facing you, a small contribution. We will, besides that, stand behind you in
the councils of the world to seek to see that other greater countries, not
contributing more per head perhaps, but contributing more in total, enjoin
with you and ourselves in the goal you have set.
We are glad to have large numbers of your students studying in
our country, and we hope that when they return, as they do return, to their
homeland, the result of their studies will be shown in technological progress,
in administrative progress, in the general assistance to you in your governmental
activities which through such training we hope to give. / 2 
.39
00 0 
And you will know that, regarding investment in this country, the
first main conference in Indonesia of private firms and private individuals took
place in August of last year and had, as its origin in Australia, a large number
of Australia's leading businessmen and industrialists who came to Djakarta at
that time to participate and who, as regards many of them, have pursued their
interests since then. In some cases, in turn, investment will follow. In other
cases, investment might not follow but technical assistance, technological
assistance, will be there for the asking and we feel that it is possible that in the
context of the Indonesian economy, the technical assistance which we can provide
may be, and I say only may be, more significant and more appropriate than the
technical assistance of some greater complexes of some greater countries,
because it may be that at our stage of development, and at your stage of.
development, this technical assistance will be better than it might be from some
mighty complex of a power country.
But this iimportant as it is, must go side by side with agricultural
Simprovements which I know is close to your hearts. Is it impossible to increase
Vfood production in Indonesia? If it is possible to double the production per hectare
of land, for example, of rice, then that must be a basic requirement for future
progress in any direction because the production of food in sufficient quantities,
to ensure that food is sold without an increase in price must be the basis on which
all other building takes place and we would be interested, Sir, in seeking to try
and play a part in that should you regard that as a large priority in the many other
activities in which you are engaged.
I do not wish to traverse the whole field of co-operation between
our two nations. I think we have made some advance in the cultural agreement
signed between our two countries: one which provides for exchange of scientific
knowledge for bringing closer together the academics in our country and in yours:
for bringing to our own nation those cultural heritages which you have: for
Sbringing for the Indonesian people that which we can do to entertain them. These
Vmust, in the long run, build up to a better understanding between our two peoples
and indeed, Sir, it is my belief that the signing of such an agreement will give
added impetus to an interest already evident but not as evident as it should be
in Australia to the studying of Indonesian language, of Indonesian history, of
Indonesian culture, and this I believe will take place in our country in the future.
That step has been a part of the past between Indonesia and
Australia that I think is a part of the vision of the future between Indonesia and
Australia but there are tensions in the whole of the area in which you find
yourselves geographically and we find ourselves geographically, and I would hope
that it would be possible in the course of the future, the near future, to see that
these intentions were as far as possible damped down and that you and we and all
the other nations in this area could at least say to each other that we respect and
honour the territorial boundaries of each nation and will not, under any
circumstances, seek to upset them. This is, Sir, just a matter of damping
down the tensions: if it happened it would be good, and if after it happened or
while it was happening we could, together, seek to improve, however slowly,
but constantly the living standards of the individuals in each country, then we
would be laying a real foundation for what is possible if the men and the women
of each nation in this area, under the leadership provided to them, are prepared
to make it possible, and because I think that you, Sir, are prepared to make it
possible and because I think you are aiming at making it possible. T1hat is the
third reason why tonight I have such a sense of privilege in having you beside
me in the Indonesian capital, and in asking all those gathered here to rise and
drink with me to the President of the Republic of Indonesia. 



FOR PRESS: i8JUN 1968 P. M. No. 66/ 1968
VISIT BY THE PRESIDENT OF NAURU
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen,
announced today that His Excellency Hammer DeRoburt, President of the
Republic of Nauru, would make an official visit to Australia commencing
on Tuesday, 18 June.
Nauru is the first country Australia has sponsored for
Independence. Mr. Mciwen said that the forthcoming visit by its first
President is warmly welcomed by the Australian Government and would
further strengthen the strong ties of friendship and goodwill that exist
between the two countries.
In the course of his official visit, the President will visit
Melbourne from 18 to 24 June and Canberra from 24 to 29 June.
The arrival and departure of the President at the National
Capital will be ceremonial occasions.
The President will be accompanied by Mrs. DeRoburt and
Mr. Buraro Detudamo, Minister Assistant to the President.
CANBERRA 14 June 1968 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
ARRIVAL STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, AT RAAF FAIRBAIRN ON RETURN
FROM SOUTH EAST ASIA 17 JUNE 1968
Since leaving Canberra twelve days ago, I have visited four
of Australia's nearest neighbours in South East Asia.
It has been, I hope, a valuable journey and has contributed to
closer relations with the countries visited, besides demonstrating Australia's
continuing interest in the security and advancement of South East Asia.
In Vietnam I was honoured to visit our servicemen at their
Woperational bases. I found them in great shape. Their morale is high and they
are doing their job with resolve and confidence in the finest Anzac tradition.
Talks held in Saigon with Vietnamese leaders and senior American officials
were also helpful. In Singapore and Malaysia, we discussed a variety of matters,
and in particular the future stability and development of the South East Asian
region in the wake of the British with~ drawal.
I was particularly pleased to be able to visit Indonesia, our
nearest nieighbour. There, I had Lengthy private discussions with President
Soeharto which I think will further friendship, co-operation and understanding
between our countries. An agreement to increase cultural exchanges were
* signed between our two countries while I was in Djakarta.
One benefit from the visit is that I now have personal relationships
with the leaders of the four count Aies whose futures are closely related to our
own and this should be in itself of benefit in meeting challenges which the future
Omay hold.
Note: The Prime Minister is now due at Fairbairn between 10. 30 and
11. 30 p. m. this evening. Because of the late hour, he will not be giving a press
conference. The above statement will cover his return. He will be speaking
in more detail, and answering questions, when he is Guest of Honour of the
National Press Club in Canberra on Thursday. A. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister 



N ATIO 0N AL P R ESS C LU B
LUNCHEON AT HOTEL CANBERRA REX, CANBERRA JUNThE 1968
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
Mr President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
This must necessarily be a truncated report on visits recently paid
to the United States, Viet Nam, Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia.. Being
brief, it can only touch on some of the matters discussed and that-without
going into the matters in any depth, Indeed, if it were to do anything else,
iwould deprive you of that which you have come along to do, and that is to
Wsuch searching questions as may have occurred to you before this Luncheon
took place. One of the main purposes of the visits to these countries nearest
0~ Mr President, was to demonstrate that although there had been a change of
mie Ministers in Australia, there had been no change in our interest in or
desire to co-operate with those Asian countries in our region. I wished to
demonstrate that that policy:-furthered so well by my predecessor, was a
continuing policy of the Australian Government and, as I believe,' of the
Australian people.. This, I think, the visit succeeded in doing,
A further purpose was to make personal contact with the leaders
of the countries visited and with other senior people in the Administration
of those countries., It is always a good thing if you are at some later stage
to speak to, or to write to an individual,. to have met that individual
feto face and for him to have met you.
6 A third purpose, and indeed not third in point of importance, was
a desire to see and meet with and bring greetings from Australia to those
Australian forces which are serving overseas in various areas and which are, in
pnt of-numbers, the greatest forces we have had serving overseas since the
clusion of the Second World War,
These visits. Mr President, took place against an international
background of change,.
Firstly, the President of the United States was trying to bring
North Viet Nam to the conference table to see whether a just and honourable
peace could be negotiated in that war-torn country, and to that end, he had
ordered at some considerable military sacrifice, a cessation of bombardment
over a large area of North Viet Nam, He had announced that he, himself,
would give up any hope of being re-elected ae President of his great nation,
so that he could devote his efforts to that end and so that he could not be
accused of devoting his efforts to that end for personal political purposes..
This had led to a flood of speculation that the United States might withdraw
altogether from Asia: might withdraw altogether from Viet Nam, might accept,
in the words of the President of the United States.. a " fake" peace which was
merely a prelude to a takeover by North Viet Nam of the South, and might lose
all interest in involvement in this area of the world,, 
An assessment of the answers to these questions was clearly of
importance to Australia's future planning, and I sought to make this
assessment in personal talks with the President and with such of his
likely successors as I was able to meet, and I have reported on this,~
Secondly, Mr President, there had been a fundamental change in
the basis on which Australia~ s strategic planning had for more than two
decades been predicated,~ This was caused not only by the accelerated
British withdrawal from the Malaysia/ Singapore area, but also and this
is of at least equal importance by the uncertainty that surrounded the
questions as to when, and with what forces and under what circumstances
the British would contribute to the defence and stability of the region
to our Near North after their withdrawal.
Clearly, a concept of forward defence by troops stationed
outside Australia. valid when based upon participation with Incal forces
of a major power, needed minute examination when the forces of that
major power were to be withdrawn and the circumstances of their re-entry
were unknown., Clearly any contribution by us to the stability of the
ion after 1971 cannot be fixed until we know what Britain, New Zealand,
* aysia and Singapore will do, or are likely to do, in the future..
Against this background ' I have asked before the visits took place
that our Defence Committee should prepare a new strategic assessment, a
~ wstrategic appreciation, taking into account those fundamental changes
ch had occurred some four to five months ago, and which had so radically
altered those assessments which, for more than two decades, we had accepted.
These journeys, and the initial meetings of the Five Power Pact
countries in Kuala Lumpur, have provided some of the answers to the questions
that we have to ask ourselves, The new assessment from the Defence
Committee when it is presented to Cabinet, as I expect it will be by
August at the latest,. will enable us, together with the facts gathered
on these journeys, properly to assess what the far future role of Australia
should be and I say " far future" because the end of 1971 is still three
and a half years away.,
0 But against this background, and until we get that appreciation
and assess it and set it up against the facts gathered in the conferences
and the journeys that have taken place, until we have examined a number
6 various possible alternatives for long-range planning, it would be
~ esponsible to settle long-range military planning, We would not
propose to do it until we have the full facts on which to settle those
plans; which is not to say that our forces will not gro~ w greatly in
capacity next year; for they will,
Against this background, there was added value in meeting
personally the leaders of Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesiaz In the case
of Indonesia, this was not because she was involved or is in any way
likely to be involved in such decisions as we may make in conjunction
with New Zealand, Britain-Singapore and Malaysia, but because she is our
nearest neighbour, because she is a significant power in this area, and
because that being so, I thought it proper and right that these matters
should be the subject of discussion between her President and myself,
Now, I turn very briefly to the countries visited on this
Asian tour,~ 9 o/ 3 
In Viet Nam * the fighting is as fierce and as cruel as ever
There are indications that since the partial embargo on bombing of North
Viet Nam: i there has been a very great build-up of North Vietnamese
regular forces in South Viet Nam.. It is belived these forces will be
used over the coming months in co-ordinated attacks on Saigon and other
centres of population, designed primarily to influence public opinion
outside South Viet Nam, and designed in the hope of influencing the
talks at present going on in Paris, These are talks which it is all
too easy to describ. e as peace talks, but which in fact are not, but
merely preliminary talks to see whether there is a basis for the
negotiation of a just and lasting peace, talks which regrettably have
so far made no discernible progress, talks which, as I said when they
were initiated, contained the seeds of hope, but talks which so far have
not shown any indication of the germination of those seeds.
I found an intention on the part of the South Vietnamese
Government to increase their own armed forces., to make a stronger
contribution themselves to the war-~ and I found;. too, a nagging fear
amongst all with whom I spoke that there might be in Paris some
further military concession without reciprocal concession by the
Worth Vietnamese which would undermine the morale of the armed forces
of South Viet Nam and of the population of South Viet Nam. I do not
believe these fears are justified,
Turning now, Mr President, to Singapore, I had long talks with
Wee Kuan Yew and with'the Foreign Minister Rajaratnam-There was
evidently a lively appreciation there of the need to build up Singapore's
capacity to defend itself, and a determination to do this side by side
with the successful efforts presently being made to provide better
living conditions for the people of Singapore.
There was a purposefull attempt being made to tackle the
problems of unemployment. which are still great, and a conscious attempt
to forge the divergent races living in Singapore into a unified whole
owing allegiance to that city state giving loyalty to that city state
and not to the origins from whence they sprang.
There is no doubt of the genuine belief of Lee Kuan Yew that
the defence of Singapore and Malaysia is indivisible and there is no
doubt of his intention to contribute to that defence and to do what he
* can to see that this indivisibility is not in any way divided,
For ourselves; it seemed to me that what we could do best to
help was to provide technical assistance defence aid in the form of
equipment and matters of that kind: to encourage private investment
in Singapore and to continue -that government assistance which we
already are contributing
In Malaysia. too ' there was an equal awareness of the
indivisibility of defence between Singapore and Malaysia and an
equal awareness of the need for defence in adequate strength in
in that area., defence to which they must contribute,
There I had the opportunity to speak at some length with the
Tunku and his Cabinet in private on these matters,' and had the honour of
being the first Commonwealth Prime Minister to be received on the floor
of the Malaysian Parliament and to receive an address of welcome by
the Prime Minister and by the Leader of the Opposition. Although I should
point out to this gathering that there are so many different parties
in the Opposition that they have been unable to agree amongst themselves
who is the leader, so the leader is designated by the Prime Minister, 
Sir.' if I have spoken largely of defence, it is because the
question of defence looms so largely in the minds of the leaders., both
in Singapore and in Malaysia. I found in these countries no acceptance
whatever of the proposition that what they need is economic aid in lieu
of defence. but rather the reverse, although; of course, they need both.
In Indonesia, on the other hand-the emphasis in all our talks
was on the economic conditions, particularly in Java, and what might
be done by the Indonesian Government itself for that must play the
primary part and by other nations in conjunction with the Indonesian
Government to improve those conditions.. This will take a massive effort
by the major powers and will require careful selection of projects and
effective administration in order to be successful,.
I found there, too, complete acceptance by the Indonesian
Government of Australia's peaceful intentions and complete acceptance
of any decisions we might make to contribute to Singapore's and
Malaysia-s defence after 1971.
Now, Mr President I know you wish to get to questions;. and I
Would merely conclude on thi's note. because after all, the question of
what is happening in Viet Nam is of major importance -in this country.
I see no reason for any change in Australia's attitude to this
~ truggle, We belive the Americans are right to seek for the South
ietnamese the right to elect their own government, to carry out that
election free from invasion, terrorism or threat and to have such
decision as they may make respected by all,
We belive that we have a stake in demonstrating that armed
aggression must not succeed.. We believe we now contribute sufficient
forces from Australia to carry out our duty in this respect,: and we
have the will to continue this contribution in concert with our Allies
until the political objective which the military operations are aimed
at is achieved; and until, if such political objective is achieved, we
can turn. as I would like to turn our efforts. to rebuilding that
ounryand providing to its people that kind of life which I feel under
terown control they can achieve..
I think I had better stop so that you have plenty of time for
use t on s Th a n k yo u
QUESTON SESSION:
Q Bob Baudino: Mr Prime Minister, if I may be forgiven, I
intend to indulge in the fashion of the Indonesian press
conferences and to ask you two entirely unrelated questions.
You have referred to our defence planning and mentioned it would
be irresponsible to go ahead with forward defence planning of
this kind You have also added that our forces will continue
to grow in the meantime.. Could you give us further details of
the interim plan for defence--Secondly,. at Nui Dat,, when
addressing our own troops, you told them that for every nut
who held up a placard or sat on the road in Australia-there were
one hundred others behind them. I think there may be points of
clarification needed here,~ C. 
1W
PM: Thank you, Mr Baudino. The answer to the first question
you have asked is this-As a result of decisions already taken on
defence, there will in the 1968-69 financial year be significant
growth in the Australian defence capacity. There will, during that
period, be delivered the 24 Fill strike aircraft which will be
arriving and be put into service.. There will be 36 Macchi jet trainer
fighters delivered ( which have an operational capacity). There will
be delivered one new corvette to the Navy.. There will be delivered
a large amount of new Army equipment, There will be delivered to the
Army. apart from the ordinary equipment from memory, I think some
36 light aircraft and light helicopters, And the size of our
Regular Armed Forces will grow by at least 3,. O00O men, In addition,
there will be very large works programmes carried out for the Army,
the Navy and the Air Force in areas spread throughout the whole of
Australia.. Even that is not a complete list of the new equipment
to be delivered during this period of time. For example, another
Oberon submarine will be delivered and put into service during
1968/ 69., So there will be during the coming year great accretion of
defence hardware, if I can put it that way. and an increase in
defence forces There will also be a considerable increase in
defence expenditure for it will, on any estimate I can make, go up
to at least $ 1,250,000. The overseas requirements that we will have
to extend will rise from round about $ 350 million this financial
year to something like certainly well over $ 400 million next
financial year. So there is no interruption to defence planning;
there is no interruption to the accretions to the strength of our
Forces.. But seeking to look a long way ahead, it will probably
be towards the end of the year before some new Three-Year Programme,
to be operative not in the next financial year but in the one after
and in the two years after that-will be able responsibly to be
brought down, That would be the answer I would give you to the
first question. On the second question, that relating to ' nuts-, I would
like to make two things clear. One is that this is not to be taken
as a reference to those who oppose a course a government is taking,
and who use the proper channels to express that opposition the
proper channels being the newspapers,. being any media of public
expression that can be attained, being the holding of public
meetings, being seeking to influence public opinion against the
last expression of majority public opinion; for this must be
maintained as a right of any minority. As Voltaire indeed said:
" I disagree with what you say, but I would defend to the death
your right to say it" But if that minority opposition is extended
to actions -actions such as throwing things at people with whom
the disagree, actions such as throwing paint over the cars of
representatives of nations with whose policies they disagree, actions
such as carrying placards and lying down in roadways to disrupt
traffqic; then that-I think, is something not known and not proper
to a democratic society, because it is not an assertion of minority
rights to seek to change majority opinion,. It is -the beginning, an
incipient requirement of a minority to force a change in majority
opinion by breaking the law and by disrupting the rights of the
majority,. This kind of thing, beginning in this way, can ultimately
lead to the sort of tragic consequences we have seen in other
countries, and I belive that perhaps ' nut' is rather too mild an
expression for those who break the law and disrupt the traffic and
throw and threaten those representatives of majority opinion with
which they disagree, A minority has rights which must be protected,
but it has no rights to seek to impose its will by any degree of
force on a majority which disagrees with it, .7 6 
Q Herschel Hurst. Melbourne Sun: Prime Minister. you said
in-your speech here today, in effect, '. that you believed the South
Vietnamese people wouldn~ t be sold out at the Paris talks, In the
course of your discussions with President Johnson in Washington
recently, did the President indicate to you just how far the United
States was prepared to go in concessions to the communists to end
the Viet Nam war?
PM: The President of the United States indicated to me both
privately and in public that he would not be prepared to accept
anything which he described as a ' face' peace; a " fake" peace as
I understand him to mean being a peace which was a formula designed
to cover a withdrawal without obtaining the objective of giving the
South Vietnamese people a change in freedom to express their own views.
He has said this privately, he has said this publicly, and I believe
that as far as he and his Administration are concerned he will not
make concessions which would lead to such an outcome, This
Administration. of course, has some six or seven months to run. He
spoke for himself as President, He made it clear he could not speak
for his successor as President and neither can I, but I did gather
the impression from the likely successors to whom I spoke that there,
too, there would be unlikely to be concessions which led to a disguishel
surrender and a disguished abandonment of the objectives which were
initially sought to be attained,.
Q Chris Forsyth: Sir, you mentioned a whole list of defence
hardware deliveries that we were going to get this year, It was
before your time that the decisions were made several years ago, Your
Government has delayed the Three-Year Defence Programme by a year, Sir,
Does this mean that Australia will have a years pause in defence
hardware buying and planning with obvious repercussions for deliveries
in the future?
PM: Well,. some of that hardware that you refer to wasn't before
my time.. In fact the submarine was ordered while I was Minister for
0the Navy, if you dont mind my saying so., Oh, you mean before I was
Prime Minister .,, but I do claim the ordering of some of that
hardware that will be in service during the coming year,, The point
of your question is should we not already have ordered a lot more
hardware for the subsequent year. and I don't believe that that is a
valid suggestion. When you order a ship., you are seeking to case your
mind forward to see what you want that ship to do for the next
twenty to twenty-five years, what part you want it to play in an
overall defence plan., When you order an aircraft you are seeking
to cast your mind forward to see what that aircraft is going to do
for the next ten to fifteen years, what part it is that you want
it to play in an overall defence programme, With such fundamental
changes as we have had and with the new strategic assessment coming
up, and with further matters to be resolved in the Five-Power Pact;
then I think it would be irresponsible until all the data is in
to order further hardware for immediate delivery,, It is more
responsible to wait until we have been able to assess and announce
where it is we believewe are going in five or six years time because,
after all, up until 1971, three and a half years' time it is known
what will happen there,, It would be irresponsible to assess beyond
that time before we have had a proper assessment and appreciation; and
if that is disagreed with, then it is disagreed with but it is the
view that the Government takes, C rc/ 
Q Frank________ ain Agence France Press and Macquarie
Radio: Can you tell us, Mr Prime Minister, whether this steady
rise in defence expenditure will lead to a steady decline in social
services and in national development?
PM: No. I don't believe the steady rise in defence expenditure
does mean a steady decline in social services and your other point
was national development because there will be a steady rise in
GNP, there will be a steady rise in national production and in its
value Indeed., we are now going through what I call the tantalising
years because two years ahead or two and a half years ahead, that
kind of period of time, we can see coming in to us the full benefits
of the minerals which are now being mined throughout the length and
breadth of this continent. We can see coming into to us the import
replacement value of the oil which is being discovered., We can see
coming in to us the benefit of the increased employment and the
increased industrial muscles which these will generate and which
other things will generate. So I not only see no decline in social
is services, but it is as I have said before, essential that we should
look at the areas of most need in social services and seek to overcome
them as part of a project of complete overhaul of our approach to
social services, Having said that, it is also clear that resources
spent on defence cannot be spent in other areas of national development
whether they be social services, whether they be education, whatever
they may be. It doesn't mean a decline, It does mean less capacity
to increase-
Q Jack Commins, ABC: Sir, has your recent visit led to any
rethinking on defence on your part? I refer to your initial statement
after becoming Prime Minister that the facts and future defence
expenditure must be balanced against internal development. I suppose
you answered that to a degree in the previous answer, but overall, I
think the question in all our minds is whether an increase in expenditure
will lead to an increase in taxation in the new Budget?
Now: really, do you honestly expect an answer which may
forecast Budget possibilities taxation. ( Commins: It was worth
a try') So youve tried, so thank you-
Alan Wood: Bearing in mind your reply to Mr Forsyth~ s
question,. I wonder if you could tell us where the defence hardware
already on order and ordered on the basis of an out-of-date defence
assessment, will fit into the new assessment?
PM: Before I answer that question, I would like to say that I
dont accept your statement that what has bee. n ordered has been
ordered on an out-of-date defence assessment, For example, I would
believe that the strike aircraft ordered would be necessary whatever
the future defence assessment may be-They have been ordered in the
United States you asked me, I think, where they had been ordered.
The submarine to which I referred and which also, I think, is an
integral part of a Navy however we may imagine that Navy to be
operating, has been ordered from the United Kingdom, as has its
predecessors. The Macchi jet trainers have been; or rather will be
built in Australia itself-The 12 Mirage fighters. which I omitted to
mention will be added to our defence capacity in the next year. will
be built in Australia itself. All the works programmes to which I
referred will obviously be handled in Australia itself, I cannot give
you them item by item because I haven't got it in my mind all the
pieces of defence hardware; but that would give various examples of
where this is coming from, and you will perhaps have noticed that we
have recently placed orders for electronic equipment for defence
purposes, again with Australian industry. 
QStan Hutchinson: " Mr Prime Minister, when you were abroad,
you made an enigmatic reference to an Israeli-type army, Now the
Israeli-type citizen soldier depends for his emotional stimulus on
virtually being able to look out his window and see what he can
identify as an enemy, What would you substitute for that to keep
the Australian citizen soldier keen and enthusiastic?
PM: We have had two world wars in which we have from the
beginning relied very considerably on that citizen soldier to which
you refer Indeed., I think, at the beginning of both the First and the
Second World Wars, we had no regular army worth the name to put
into the field.: In both those cases. we had time to prepare to call
the citizen soldier into camp, to weld him into a unit, to then send
him abroad whether he had chosen to join the AlP at the beginning or
whether subsequently he went as reinforcements. Now we do have a
Regular Army stronger than before, but it needs, I believe to be
backed up by Citizen Military Forces, adequately trained, able to be
quickly mobilised. I think it unnecessary to suggest that they need to
look out of a window in order to be galvanised into giving their
services in this way. I believe there are many Australians who are
prepared to devote their time to Citizen Military Force training
so that there will be able to be a back-up force for a Regular Army.
It appears to me, particularly in a country which for decades will have
a requirement to build its strength through development, that this kind
of back-up force is good, is effective and is necessary-
Q Harry Stein: Mr Prime Minister:, during your recent journey,
you were not able to obtain a non-aggression pact with some of the
nations, which you had indicated you would like-I put it to you, Sir,
dont you think that ata time when there are no Australian troops
fighting against Asians as they are doing now in Viet Nam, that it
will be easier to establish a non-aggression pact with our Asian
neighbours?,-
P Well I would put it back to you that I don't think anything
of the kind In the talks that I had with the leaders of the Asian
nations to whom I spoke.-that is in Singapore; in Malaysia and in
Indonesia, I had no indication whatevey that there was any suggestion
that Australian troops should not be engaged in seeking to protect, as I
believe they are seeking to protect, the rights of the people of South
Viet Nam It would have been a little strange, would it not, had it
been otherwise; because after all, the people of Singapore and leaders
of Singapore and of Malaysia are interested in their own defence and
in exercises to help their own defence, which will involve Australian
troops. So it would be quite an odd volte face if what you suggest were
so., By whatever name you call it, I don't think it matters, but I would
agree with what Mr Hasluck said in the House before I went away or
rather,-what I think he said in a conference before I went away that
non-aggression pacts in this area and the area fairly close to us could
do no harm and could indeed do good.. This was not a major objective
of my visit, but I have some hopes that as time passes, we could at
least obtain declarations from the countries in the region that they
respect. the one to the other, the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of each other.. While the cynics may say this means nothing; at least
it is; I think,' something which it would be hard to attack as wrong to
seek to obtain. / 9 
Q Mr Prime Minister, do you believe a resumption of the
bombing of North Viet Nam would necessarily jeopardise the Paris
preliminary talks?
PM: I haven't had any conversations or any suggestions
concerning hypothetical questions such as that.
Q Chalmers: Mr Prime Minister, this week Mr Holyoake was
quoted as saying thlat in lieu of a visit he was contemplating to
Canberra, he had a long telephone conversation with you. I was
wondering whether you could tell us anything of the telephone
conversation, particularly what he may have said, and in particular
whether that conversation contemplated a meeting between yourself
and Mr Holyoake either here or in Wellington?
PM: No, not really.. Mr Holyoake stayed behind in Kuala Lumpur
rather longer than he had intended in the hope that we might have had
a discussion there on what had transpired at the Five-Power Talks and
what he saw as the future after 1971 and matters of that kind. But
* there was a fa. irly split-second schedule arranged and except over a
dinner which was not a completely appropriate occasion, this kind of
discussion was unable to be properly developed. So he did ring me
up on the morning that I returned and he put to me then his own
tentative views, his own forecasts and asked me for mine and they were
purely discussions, exploratory and tentative in character. He was
seeking to find out what was in my own mind and I was seeking to find
out what was in his for some considerable time in the future.
QPeter Samuel: Mr Prime Minister, two months ago, our
delegate at the United Nations spoke on the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty and he expressed a lot of strong reservations about this treaty,
and this led to the expectation that we might join India and France in
not signing the treaty, Since then, you have been to the United States,
you have been to Asia,, I wonder if you can give us any more indication
of your thinking on this treaty?
Pie You will have noticed that the resolution which was passed
by the General Assembly was to comment the treaty. You will also have
noticed that we in Australia indicated that we agreed with the principle
of such a treaty but wanted to be sure before we signed it that it was an
effective treaty and that we would be requiring answers as to the
method of withdrawing from the treaty, questions as to control over
people from the international agency who might be sent to be stationed
here to examine various defence installations, questions as to the
rights one had for the civil uses of atomic energy, questions as to whd
in fact was going to sign the treaty and who in fact wasn't, and a large
number of related questions, So, yes in principle, we think that a
treaty of this kind, if it can be made effective, would be good, We
have therefore voted to commend it, it is open to signature, but we
would wish the answers to a lot of questions we raise to be given to
our own satisfaction before we would sign what we commend in principle.
Q Could I just ask a supplementary question to that one?
Will this our decision whether or not to sign depend to any extent
on the major strategic re-assessment that you spoke of and-expect in
August? 
PM: I don't believe so. No, I don't believe so. We have to look
decades ahead on this particular matter you have raised. After all, as
far as Australia itself is concerned, we have no nuclear capacity at all.
We have no nuclear plants at all, nor are likely to have any chance
of manufacturing any nuclear defence for at least a decade, so it is not
an immediate matter with which we are concerned. It is rather a matter
of seeking to see how it will work and, as far as one can, to look ahead
to the future of not you or I but younger ones living in Australia.
Q David Solomon: Prime Minister can you see any end to the Viet
Nam war coming other than through the Paris talks?
PM: Well, Mr Solomon, so far, I can see no end at all to the Viet
Nam war coming through the Paris talks because up to this stage there has
been nothing but an exchange of polemics, a refusal on the part of the
North Vietnamese to admit that there are any North Vietnamese troops
in South Viet Nam, a refusal on the part of the North Vietnamese to admit
that they are providing the rockets and mortar shells to bombard Saigon
in return for Hanoi being freed from bombardment, and this all carried on
in public0 So that is answer to a part of your question0 The answer
* to the second part is that it must merely be an impression and an
assessment. It cannot be taken as a clear indication of what will happen.
Of course it can't, looking ahead. But I believe, given sufficient will,
that the military objective of obtaining political freedom for the people
of South Viet Nam can be attained.
In the light of that answer, Sir, and in the light of your
earlier statement about the bombardment of Saigon and the build-up
following the cessation of American bombing, would you like to see, as
the American newspapers have suggested, some deadline put on the bombing
halt?
PM: I have already had a question similar to that from, I think,
the " Sydney Morning Herald" 0 This is a sort of hypothetical question
which I would not wish to give an answer to0
Sir, on the question of taxation, which you dismissed earlier,
Wcan I put it to you, how would it be possible to increase defence
expenditure by such a large amount and not neglect social services and
national development without increasing taxation.
I thought I had endeavoured to give an indication of the answer
Wto that, and I am not to be taken as forecasting anything concerning the
Budget this or future Budgets one way or the other, but as a country
grows, and as its population grows and as its GNP grows and as its taxable
income grows, so there is a capacity to increase not only one facet of
expenditure but a number of facets of expenditure0 Now, it is a matter
for decision as to whether they are increased sufficiently, or which ones
are increased sufficiently0 But there is not a fixed sum of Government
revenue which remains fixed year after year so that taking from that sum
a greater amount for Project A leaves lessfor Projects B and C and D,
rather there is a growing sum which year after year grows, and from the
growth, there can be distributed to Project A, B9 C or D that part of
that growth which it is believed contributes best to the national good.
Q David Gilmorgan: Mr Prime Minister, as there is no embargo
on culture, what is the point of having a cultrual pact between two
countries?. 0.00/ 11 
I think it a little surlxising,, Sir, that you should suggest there
is no value in a cultural pact merely because there happens to be no embargo
as you put it on culture I would have thought that if two countries,
who are as close together as are Indonesia and Australia, both indicated
publicly that they were interested in and would do what they could to
exchange artists; whether they be manual artists or performing artists
to exchange teachers, to exchange visits, to ( in the case of Indonesia
make known in Australia the materials they produce if you like, the
special batiks they produce the kind of ballet telling the stories long
rooted in Indonesian history, the sort of music which comes from parts of
that country and in exchange to receive the opportunity to hear music
of a different kind from our own symphony orchestras, to see dancing of a
different kind from our own culture., that this could do nothing but good,
and that it was rather a negative approach to say there is no embargo on
culture so let us do nothing, It is rather a positive approach to say
both our governments think that the more that can be done to see that each
country sees the culture of the other, the more each country may tend to
. understand the other, and that if that happens, this is not an insignificant
advance..
Q Stewart Harris: Sir.; I think next year Indonesia is going to
give West Irian an act of free choice to decide whether to stay under
* Indonesian administration or become independent. In the last six years
since Indonesia took over the administration of West Irian, Australia has
received in New Guinea about sixty-three refugees and their dependants from
West Irian,. Next year I think it is possible that the number may increase
for one reason or another., The frontier between West Irian and Papua/ New
Guinea is not defined on the ground and is not agreed to by the
Governments of Indonesia and Australia,. There could be problems on the
border-, I was recently up there.. There is no contact at the moment
between the Administrations of West Irian and Papua/ New Guinea. There was
i~ n the time of the Dutch:, Australia~ s relations with Indonesia are now
excellent-You were. in Djakarta yourself recently, Sir, so I was
0wondering if you could get contact going on the ground between the
* Administrations of West Irian and Papua/ New Guinea so that any problems
that might occur next year could be understood in advance?
IM: I think that is a matter, Mr Harris, that I would need to
* discuss with the Minister for External Territories and the Minister for
External Affairs. You surprise me a little because perhaps wrongly
but nevertheless certainly I was, and am, under the impression that the
boundary between West Irian and Papua/ New Guinea is on the map agreed
between the Government of Indonesia and ourselves. Certain exercises have
been carried out to demarcate the boundary and to seek to mark it insofar
as it can be marked. Cairns of stones have been built on the particular
parallel which,; I think, is accepted by both countries. But in between
those cairns, of course, there is just wild jungle, and so indication
of boundaries as one would find in more heavily populated areas, so that
one could easily wander across the boundary without knowing it, from Papua/
New Guinea into West Irian or from West Irian into Papua/ New Guinea-It
will take a long time before this can be stopped, All I can say in answer
to your specific question is that I would have to take that up with the
Minister for External Affairs and the Minister for External Territories,
But I do think that our relations with Indonesia are so good that if there
are problems there they are more likely to be overcome now than they might
ever have been likely to have been overcome in the past. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 67/ 1968
VIETNAM MEDAL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Queen has approved the Royal Warrant and design for
the Vietnam Medal. In announcing this today the Prime Minister said that it was
fitting that on the first occasion that Australia and New Zealand had designed
a medal to recognise the operational service for members of their Defence
Forces, both countries should again be fighting together helping to preserve
national independence and freedom.
The medal will be circular and, in keeping with all service
medals, will have the Queen's portrait on the obverse. The reverse will
have " Viet Nam" inscribed above a symbolic representation of the ideological
war in Vietnam, depicting the figure of man in the centre of the medal
standing between spherical shapes.
The design, a departure from customary medal designs, was
the work of the well-known Melbourne medallist Andor Messaros.
The n-e dal is to be manufactured in Australia by the Royal
Australian Mint6 Members of the Australian and New Zealand Armed Forces
who render service in operations in Vietnam are eligible for the medal.
Accredited members of approved Australian and New Zealand philanthropic
organisations attached to those forces may also qualify for the award.
CANBERRA 21 June 1968
Background: In 1966, The Queen signified her willingness to approve the
institution of the Vietnam Medal for award to Australian and New Zealand
Forces who have served in Vietnam. The late Prime Minister announced
this to the House of Representatives on 8 March 1966.
Since the First Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment,
returned to Australia on 8 June 1966, those qualified to receive the Medal
have been wearing the ribbon which includes the colours traditionally
symbolic of the three Services and also red and yellow which are the
national colours of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam. 



MESSAGE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER, Li
MR. JOHN GORTON, FOR NATIONAL HEART WEEK JUNE 1968
A message from the Prime Minister commending " National
Heart Week" will be telecast throughout Australia. tonight ( Sunday).
The National Heart Foundation's special week of community
education will begin tomorrow ( 1 July).
Following is the text of Mr. Gorton's message:-
" Australia ranks among the leading nations of the world in standards
of living and in the rate of scientific, cultural and industrial growth.
It also shares the distinction if so it can be called of one of the
highest rates of heart disease in the world. This disease is still
Australia's number one killer accounting for about forty per
cent of all deaths, and for one-third of the deaths of men in middle
age. The National Heart Foundation of Australia leads the Australian
effort to meet this challenge. It is fighting on many fronts through
its research programme, through its rehabilitation units and through
its professional and community education activities.
" National Heart Week" is a special effort to tell all Australians of
how to reduce the toll. Through the press, on television and over
the radio and by other means, the Foundation will be giving a message
of hope and action during the coming week.
The Heart Foundation will tell what activities and strains increase
the risk of heart disease, and of relatively simple measures to
reduce those risks. It will tell how to overcome the handicaps of
heart disease should it strike. It is a message for all, Young and
old, men and women, and I commend it to u" 



JUL WS8
FOR PRESS PM. N o. 68. 19 68
VISIT THE PRESIDENT OF KOREA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Corton
It gives me great pleasure to announce that
President Park Chung Hee of Korea accompanied by Madame Park,
will make a State Visit to Australia later this year,
The President and his wife are expected to arrive
in Canberra on Monday, 16 September and to leave from Sydney on
Thursday, 19 September. President and Madame Park"-will be very welcome
visitors and I am sure that they will be warmly greeted by the
Austraian people. Not on~ y nave Australia and the Republic of Korea
been united in a commnon effort to preserve tie independence of the
Republic of Korea under the auspices of the United Nations, but both
countries have forces fighting in Viet Nam to preserve the freedom
and sovereignty of the Vietnamese people.
CANBERRA, 1 July 1968 



3ARTOJ ELECTORATE DINNER
SANIS SOUCI, N. S. W. 2 JULY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mvr John Gorton
M r Arthur, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
That was quite a list of qualities you laid down that you hoped
would be possessed by a Prime Minister and I would not pretend to
lay claim to all of them. All I can say is that I would try to do as well
as 1 could to fulfil each one you have mentioned.
When you asked me, Mr Arthur, first to come to this gathering,
I was delighted for two reasons. One was because it would give me an
opportunity, as it has given me, to meet, however fleetingly, so many of
the people in this area, such a cross section of Australians living in your
electorate, and some from adjoining electorates. This in itself is for me
something that I think a Prime Minister should try and do as far as it is
possible. I was glad because this was the electorate which, after a long
perid of aberration before they finally decided, sent you to join us in Canberra.
That meant that we had added to our ranks somebody who was prepared to
work hard indeed one of ' the most energetic characters I have ever met in
my life, who works, as I am sure I don't have to tell you in the electorate
and I think spends more time questioning, cross-questioning, arguing with
Ministers on policy in Canberra than almost any other private Member,
often with great advantage to the nation.
Secondly I was glad because it would give me a chance to meet
some of the people who had sent to us a Member who would help us to
further an attitude to government, an approach to the running of the nation which
over the last twenty years or so has, I think, proved itself to be a proper
approach. Of course, there would in any period of such a time be errors
made, mistakes made, but taking the thing as a whole, it has shown itself
to be an approach which has built a nation, which twenty years ago was small,
to a nation which is now standing on the threshold of real greatness and which
has allowed in that period of time a foundation to be laid on which the great
edifice of a future Australia can be built.
These things do not come about by governments or by politicians.
They come about by the presentation of programmes to Australians and the
acceptance of those programmes by Australians, and the work done by
Australians which enables the programmes themselves to be fulfilled.
We tend too much to underwrite what we have done. We tend too
much to write down ourselves as a country. We must now begin not only
here, not only in New South Wales or in Victoria or in Western Australia,
but throughout the whole of this continent to further the pride of being an
Australian wherever in this continent that Australian may live.
Things are really exciting in this country today. I am going to
weary you a little now, just touching on some of the exciting things which will
affect all of us and our children and our descendants in the future. 2 
-2
One company alone, in the Pilbara region in Western Australia
has export contracts for 32 million tons of iron ore of the total value of,
$ 260 million to be coming in to us over the next two years. Another foTF
105 million tons worth $ 800 million. Another for 160 million tons worth
240 million coming in in the period ahead. The port facilities that have
grown as a result of this, the railways that have been built are all exciting
examples of what is happening in this nation of ours. The new town at
Dampier 170 miles of railways new ports the oil being discovered in
Barrow and under the waters of Bass Strait. soon, together with natural
gas, to revolutionise the z~ spccity of Australia to live on its own resources and
' lot be dependent on the world outside. All these are the sinews and I think
they have come about for two reasons.
One is because of the philosophical approach which the Member
you sent to support us agrees with and furthers that is for this kind of
growth to tak!-e place, it is necessary that the fullest support should be given to
iheprivate initiative of Australian citizens and that they should be able to
take risks, lose, but get rewards if they win, and that in such a climate you
can without too much government direction leave to the initiative and good
sense and brains of individual Australians the development df their nation,
I think it has come about too, because this having been demonstrated
to have worked in that way, has led to an investment in this country from
abroad which this year alone was 100, 000 and which enables us to get the
benefit of the quick development which the changing world around us demands
we should achieve because of stability here and because of the climate here
created. Now I said we tend to underwrite ourselves. This does not mean
that there are not many things still requiring to be done. This does not mean
that we can afford complacency. What it does mean is that looking at what
has been achieved, let us look to the future and say, " This is just the
beginning. All the past is really a prelude", which I roughly translate as:
" fYou ain't seen nothing yet". And I do believe that in these years ahead we
will, those of us sitting in this room, look back in ten years' time and say
how much we have grown, how much our material strength has improved, how
much the living conditions of our people have been improved.
But we stand at this point in history in a position we have never
been in before, For 200 years or more, the Royal Navy has protected us
from any assaultf from overseas against our shores, and we, when called
upon, have rallied to the support of the United Kingdom, Great Britain, but
in between times, have had to expend but little thought on our own defence.
Those times have gone. The United Kingdom can no longer provide that shield.
We, ourselves, must take up and are taking up more and more of the burden
which any prudent country must take up to protect itself against threats which
may not as yet be foreseen but which history indicates are always likely to
be present. And in taking up that burden, we have to examine the situation
where the old theories on which our defence was built are no longer valid, and
examine new possibilities and bring forward new programmes.
This is one of the great problems facing us today, and one which
as you know, we are studying, working for, and providing for. But this is
not the only point of change. 1/ 3 
* 0 
3
We have to make choices as to what we will do in
the immediate years ahead from the resources available to us how much,
a government must decide, should be provided for defence purposes;
how much, a government must decide, should be provided for increasing
the requirements for universities, for technological colleges, for schools,
for more teachersi how muich should be provided for scientific work further
to develop the capacity of the land to carry more wealth, to produce more
wealth; how much, and this cannot be skipped, must be provided to see that
the aged and the invalidi the needy, the ill amongst us are provided with
sufficient to live on in moderate comfort.
And how much must be left in the hands of the private
citizens so that that further development we need can take place because the
incentive to the private citizen is there. . These are the things on which
we must make choices, These are the things on which governments choose
priorities-, These are the tasks before us. We will let you know relatively
soon what the priorities are for the coming year,
It is possible that what we think is right may by some
be thought wrong, It would be most surprising if that were not so. * But
we will say what we think is right, We will say why we think it is right,
We will keep arguing unless some better arguments, convince us we are
wrong which I think is most unlikely and we will then leave it to the
Australian people to decide whether in fact we wete right or We were wrong
in what we did. But whatever those choices of Priorities we decide may
be, I know from the atmosphere in this Itoomi from the people that I have
met tonight, that what we decide Is only the beginning of achievement, what
we decidewill only make it possible for each individual Australian himself
to contribute to the growth for which we provide the possibilities if we
make the right choices. Never has there been a time in this nation's history
when it has been more necessary for each Australian going about his,
ordinary occasions wherever he : may be to adopt as his motto that saying:
Whatsoever thy right hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might. Because
if that is done, then not only will the individual get satisfaction from what
he is doing in life, and the work he is achieving, but the nation will grow,
he will get a feeling of service, which I am sure our young want more than
anything else, a feeling of giving over and above his own personal requirements.
This is another task, an urgent task of leadership in government to give
to Australians that feeling of participation, that feeling of service, that pride
in achievement which is latent in them and which I believe, stirred properly,
will make us the greatest nation in the world in time, not only in terms of
material strength, not only in terms of opportunities to the individual to
develop himself to the top of his bent, but also in an approach to social
problems which I think we can and will overcome. This is the task before
us as I see it. This is the task I am going to call on you, and others like
you, to carry out. This is the task which, in fact, can only be carried out by
you and us together. I conclude by saying I believe above all there is
amongst the Australian people a will, an ability, a desire and a goodness
which, properly utilised, will make our children proud. I thankc you. 



FOR PRESS: P. K No. 68/ 1968O
DEATH OF SIR NEIL O'SULLIVAN
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I was deeply saddened to learn of the death today of my
old friend and colleague, Sir Neil O'Sullivan, I recall with warmth my
association with him in the Senate where he served as Government Leader
for nine years. He demonstrated ability and energy during his sixteen
years as a Senator, and will be remembered with affection for his long
and distinguished service to Australia.
He was a strong peirsonality and one of the most popular
men in the Parliament. His death will be a great loss to his family and his large
circle of friends. I extend deep sympathy to Lady O'Sullivan and her two
sons. A State funeral will be held in Brisbane.
CANBERRA 4 July 1968 



FOR PRESS: JL16 P. M. No. 69/ 1968
ECONOMIC CONSULTAT IONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Government began its series of pre-Budget consultations
in Canberra today. The first day's discussions were with national organisations
representing primary industries, manufacturing industries and commerce.
Instead of holding these talks jointly as in previous years, the Government
today saw these organisations in three separate groups.
We had decided that there would be mutual advantage in
having separate meetings, and the new arrangements proved satisfactory.
The talks were worthwhile in providing Ministers with an up-to-date
appreciation of the views of those directly involved in commerce and industry.
The series of pre-Budget consultations will continue tomorrow
when Ministers will hold separate discussions with representatives of the
Manufacturing Industries' Advisory Council, the Export Development Council
and the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
Attached is a list of those taking part in today's talks.
CANBERRA 4 July 1968 
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED AT
ECONOMIC CONSULTAT IONS
4 JULY 1968
Primary Industry Group
National Farmers' Union
of Australia
Australian Primary Producers'
Union
Australian Wool Growers' and
Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers'
Federation
Australian Mining Industry
Council
Manufacturing Industry Group
Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation
of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries President President President Vice-President Vice-President
Acting President President President Executive Member Mr. F. J. McAvoy
Mr. J. R. McKindlay
Mr. T. B. C. Walker, 0. B. E.
Mr. L. H. Heaslip, O. B. E.
Mr. K. McDougall
Sir Harold Raggatt, C. B. E.
Mr. W. W. Pettingell, C B. E.
Mr. C. G. Archer
Mr. N. W. Lawrance
Commercial Group
Associated Chambers of Commerce
of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers Pres ident
Chairman President Mr. B. R. Macdin
Mr. C. H. Rennie
Mr. T. Luxton, D. S. o0., M. B. E.
Ministers accompanying the Prime Minister at today's discussions
were Mr. McEwen, Mr. McMahon, Mr. Anthony, Mr. Hulme, Mr. Fairbairn,
Mr. Bury, Mr. Sinclair and Senator Anderson. 



FOR( PRESS: SJUL 19t" PM. A0. 7u, 1968
LAWLESS DEMONSTRATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government will not permit
lawlessness, violence and destruction by mobs to occur in Australia.
Violence and disruption in the streets such as we
have seen in the last few days seriously interferes with the rights of
ordinary citizens. These rights must be protected and interference
with them by a minority is a direct attack on the only basis on which 4
democracy can operate. The Attorney-General is examining all the courses
open to the Commonwealth to impose severe penalties on any persons
convicted of such action. I-ie is consulting with the States and when this
has been done, I shall announce the results to the Australian people.
We will not interfere with, but will defend the right
of dissent. We will not interfere with publicly-expressed dissent.
But we do not recognise violence, intimidation or interference with the
rights of other citizens, or the invasion of public or private property
as a right which a dissenting minority possesses but as a wrong which
cannot be tolerated by the community.
CAl IBERRA,
July 1968 



EMBAR GO NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
MIDNIGHT ( EST) ON THURSDAY, JULY 11
FOR PRESS S
S . PM. No. 71/ 1968
VISIT BY MR HEATH
The Right Honourable Edward Heath, MBE, MP, Leader of
the Opposition in Britain will visit Australia next month.
Mr Heath will leave London for Australia on August 5 and
will be here for about 10 days. He plans to visit Perth, Adelaide,
Melbourne, Carberra and Sydney.
Mr Heath has had hopes of visiting Australia for some time.
The Prime Minister has sent him a message to say he is very glad Mr
Heath is now able to come. During his visit, Mr Heath will have talks
with the Prime Minister and with other Ministers.
CANBERRA, 11 July 1968
NOTE Mr Heath's present plans are that he will spend August 7, 8 and
9 in Western Australia, August 10 in Adelaide, August 11 and 12 in
Melbourne, August 13 and 14 in Canberra and August 15 and 16 in Sydney. 



ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RI HON. JOHN GORTON
AT THE CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
MINISTERS RESPONSIBLE FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, MELBOURNE .~ 4i
12 July 1968
AS a result of the 1967 Referendum the Commonwealth now shares with the
States powers and responsibilities for the advancement of our Aboriginals.
In fact, of course, the powers of the Commonwealth are paramount in the
sense that in any conflict of law its law will prevail, but there is no such
conflict at present and I have every confidence that none will arise. We are all
of us trying to do our best to advance our Aboriginals and I believe that we can
do this between us in an atmosphere of goodwill, and irrespective of whether
we are using a State or a Federal power.
Each State has a different problem-different numbers of Aboriginalsdifferent
levels of development-different priorities.
I take this'opportunity of congratulating the States on the vigour of their
approach to the question of Aboriginal welfare which has been manifest in their
policies over recent years. We recognise this and are ready and willing to play
our part, in full co-operation with the States, in the task of improving the pace
of our advance.
It will be recalled that the late Prime Minister, Mr Holt, had already made
some significant moves in this matter before his tragic death. He had appointed
a Commonwealth Council for Aboriginal Affairs, and had set up an Office of
Aboriginal Affairs within his own Department. It was as part of this plan that
the important conference of Federal and State officers was held early this year
to consider the whole Aboriginal situation.
At the end of February, I appointed the Hon. W. C. Wentworth especially
responsible to me for the development of Commonwealth policy and its cooperation
with that of the States and he is the Minister who will be working
directly with you.
Leaving aside the specific Commonwealth responsibilities for Federal Territories
I believe that the Minister and the Council, in their relations with the
States, should seek to discharge three main functions: 
1. To allocate funds from the Commonwealth to the State for Aboriginal
advancement, using State machinery to use these funds for an agreed
purpose to the greatest possible extent.
2. To gather information regarding Aboriginal matters ( especially welfare)
and to act as a clearing house for such information both as between the
various States and as between States and Commonwealth.
3. Where appropriate to assist the States in the co-ordination of their policy
and in setting the general direction of the Australian approach to
Aboriginal advancement.
We propose to give the fullest co-operation to the States, and I am sure we
will get the fullest co-operation in return.
Our ultimate objective is, of course, the assimilation of Aboriginal Australians
as fully effective members of a single Australian society. This policy was enunciated
by the 1965 Conference between the States and the Commonwealth on
Aboriginal affairs and, from the Aboriginal viewpoint, there is nothing arbitrary
about it. I think I should quote again the exact text there decided upon:
' The policy of assimilation seeks that all persons of Aboriginal descent
will choose to attain a similar manner and standard of living to that of
other Australians, and live as members of a single Australian community.'
In other words, without destroying Aboriginal culture, we want to help our
Aboriginals to become an integral part of the rest of the Australian people, and
we want the Aboriginals themselves to have a voice in the pace at which this
process occurs.
We will measure policy proposals against this objective, and will wish to
avoid measures which are likely to set Aboriginal citizens permanently apart
from other Australians through having their development based upon separate
or different standards.
We believe that if Aboriginal Australians can be helped, and encouraged to
help themselves, to develop their aptitudes more fully, to accept further responsibility
for their own individual activities, to become self-supporting and thus
re-acquire their dignity of life-that then they will be readily attracted to and
welcomed to the assimilation we aim for. In this way they could contribute
from their own traditional culture to the complex of influences so diverse in
origin which makes up our national life, and, while sharing in this complex,
continue to take pride in their own contribution to it.
However, we recognise that, despite progress over the last quarter-century,
many Aboriginal Australians are subject to special handicaps which impede
their advancement. We are ready, therefore, to support additional action designed
to help Aboriginals overcome these handicaps in the transitional phase.
We propose to assist State policies directed towards these ends in three
specific areas: Health Education Housing 
We have already had some information from the States on these aspects,
and we hope that some general principles in relation to them will be discussed
at this Conference. This will enable us to make definite arrangements with each
of the States without delay under each of these three headings.
We recognise that the needs of different States will need to be met in
different ways, so that a co-ordinated Australian policy need not be a uniform
one. It is because of this that we feel it is preferable to make individual arrangements
with the various States on the basis of the general principles which may
emerge from discussions at this Conference.
After we have received detailed proposals from the various States, and after
our own Budget has been brought down, we shall indicate to each State the way
in which we think we can best assist and the funds available for such assistance.
In dividing the available funds between the States, we shall get some guidance
from the size of their Aborginal populations, although we may not always conform
strictly to this rule.
Any amounts contributed by the Commonwealth will be in addition to the
normal annual allocations made at Premiers' Conferences and Loan Councils,
but we expect any Commonwealth assistance to be a net addition to and not in
substitution for any amount which would otherwise be spent by a State upon
Aboriginal welfare. And this will be a condition of the grant.
SWhile we believe that the major part of the application of this welfare policy
within each State should be done by the State Administration concerned, this
does not preclude the possibility of some independent Commonwealth action.
Clearly, in any such instance, we shall consult the States concerned before we
undertake any such measures within their boundaries.
It is clear that our Aboriginal population is now not only increasing, but is
also increasing at a faster rate than the Australian average. Unhappily, the
additional population is not yet self-supporting, but remains in large part
dependent upon charity, Social Service benefits and similar benefits. The continuance
of such a state of affairs is obviously incompatible with the general
concept of Aboriginal dignity which we all seek to foster. It should be a primary
aim of our policy to make our Aboriginals self-supporting as fully and as
quickly as possible. They are entitled to have the opportunity to attain their
economic independence. And indeed effective assimilation is dependent upon
Aboriginal citizens being able to stand on their own feet.
We are aware of, and welcome, the interest both of the States and of Church
and other organisations working towards this objective, and we propose to reinforce
what they are doing.
We have therefore approved in principle the provision of a Fund for special
assistance, including capital funds, for potentially viable enterprises to be established
for or by Aboriginals either indvidually or co-operatively. Provision of
such funds will not, of course, be unlimited or indiscriminate, and we shall be
glad of any comments which this conference may make upon the way in which
we should administer them. In due course we would hope to obtain advice and
help from the appropriate State authorities before approving any particular projects
within their boundaries. 
This capital assistance will be available on an Australia-wide basis, and will
be controlled by the Commonwealth through its Office of Aboriginal Affairs.
We regard this proposal as an essential part of our policy of assisting our
Aboriginals to become self-supporting, whether it be in the field of primary or
secondary industry. In parallel with this, the Commonwealth Department of
Labour and National Service will undertake detailed surveys of employment
opportunities for Aboriginals and of the necessary measures to expand them
and to provide incentives for Aboriginals to take them up. In this, we shall hope
to work with the fullest co-operation of the corresponding State machinery.
In short, we propose to apply ourselves constructively to the task of
Aboriginal advancement, with special emphasis upon making our Aboriginal
citizens independent. We shall rely very largely upon the State administrations
and we are ready to receive and evaluate any suggestions which the States may
make to us, either at this conference or subsequently.
Over the short term, the kind of proposals we envisage will undoubtedly increase
our outlay upon Aboriginal welfare, but in proportion as our policy succeeds
( and I believe, between us, it has every chance of success) our outlay will
diminish. In spite of the extra outlay initially involved, I consider this policy to
be not just an extension of the ' hand-out' principle, but in fact the very antithesis.
Finally, may I add that we have noted the efforts being made by the States
to involve Aboriginals themselves in the administration of their own affairs and
in the exercise of proper authority among their own people. This is also an
essential part of restoring Aboriginal motivation. We welcome these efforts, and
will ourselves emulate them.
We feel too that this Conference should now be established on an annual
basis, and the Commonwealth would be pleased next year to act as the host for
it, should this Conference decide that that is what they wish.
By Authority: A. J. A RTHuR, Cwlth Govt PrinteCra, n berra 



EXPO 70 L
ANNOUNCEMVEi-4T BY' TEE PRIME MI1NL* STER,
MjR1 N GORTON, OF DESiGN FOR AUSTRALLIN
PAVILION AT OSAKA JULY 1968
Admiral Morrison, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is an opportunity which I am glad to take to announce
the selection of the design for the Australian pavilion for EXPO 70. You
can see it, and I hope you will agree with me that it is an imaginative and
eye-catching concept and one which I think will do us credit in Osaka.
This design was chosen because it-was considered that it
had those qualities of originality and aesthetic appeal which are most
likely to capture the imaginations of those citizens who go through this
exhibition in Japan. I don't propose to dwell at any length on its interesting
features because these will be described to you later by those who know
them in -much more detail and who are able to give a much better detailed
description both of the building and of the tube in which the exhibition itself
is to be laid out. It is not surprising, but it is worth mentioning that the design
of the building, coming from the Department of Works, was due to the work
of the same architect who designed our building in Montreal a highl y
successful building in that exhibition.
Nor is it surprising that the layout of the exhibition itself,
as distinct from the building, has as its architect I expect that is the
word.... designer, whatever it might the man responsible is again
Robin Boyd who was responsible for the interior layout of the building
designed by Mr Maccormickc for Montreal.
I think the displays and I think you will agree when you hear a bout
, them. to be shown in this building, will be just as exciting as the
building is itself, and will be just as imaginative.
International expositions such as this bring together from all
parts of the world the most adva-aced innovations in design, architectq~ re,
in display of exhibits and in film techniques. To make an impact in this
kind of exposition, we have to be contemporary and we hrne to be imaginative.
I hope that as you learn more about the way in which the design is to be
laid out and as you examine the building, you will agree that we are being
contemporary and we are being imaginative in this instance.
I think all I wish to say in addition to that are some words on
the scale of our participation, as a nation, in this exposition. The
budget for this exhibit will be something of the order of $ 6 million ( Australian).
But we see this as well worth expending at a time when we are having closer
and closer contact with Japan in trade and indeed in many other ways. We
feel that the millions of people in Japan who will, we confidently expect, go
through this building, examine the exhibits and form an impression of our / 2 
-2-
nation from which the exhibits came and in which the building was designed,
will go away with. a better understanding of our nation-and will go away with
a feeling, perhaps developed above that high level at which it at present
stands. This, I think, is full justification for us, a growing nation,
and a nation to grow yet more, to take part in this international exposition
on the scale on which we propose and with the building you see before you
and with the exhibits that will be described to you. 



/ 71~ ~
S. C. B. G. S. ( SHORE) TRIDENT DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT LAUNCHING DINNER
SYDNEY, NSV# 22 JULY, 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Presiding Chairman, Mrs Dixon, Mr Headmaster, Member of Parliament,
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is extremely pleasant for me to have the opportunity to talk
tonight to a number of people who, for the most part, are directly
involved with Shore or, in the case of the female population present,
indirectly involved with Shore. The ladies, no doubt, have been regaled
with anecdotes of what happened when their husbands were at Shore. I
am going to add to some of those anecdotes, if you will forgive me,
because I am really a ring-in in a way.
Two or three years at a fairly early age, I suppose, is not
the same as staying for the whole of one's education'at the one institution,
but nevertheless, those two or three years left a number of indelible
impre. ssions upon me. As Tim Halstead and some of those others who
were with me in the old observatory, which was known as Robson House,
will bear out, those were days which one remembers.
I started as a boy, and that was wonderful, and then as
a weeldy boarder and that was not so bad, and then as a boarder, and I
suppose that was bearable. In those days and this is quite incredible
there was a system under which a housemaster in charge of a house was
paid a certain sum per head per pupil. And anything he could make on
keeping that pupil went into his own pocket, with the result that we were
fed, but I think that on the whole we would have been able to equate ourselves
with " yon Cassius" whom you may remember had a " lean and hungry look".
Tonight I have learnt in the dormitories in this house there
have just been installed carpets is that correct, Mr Headmaster?
Carpets really I don't know what the world is coming to, because my
mind goes back to when very large rats used to run over us every night
I assure you this is quite true:' and being young, and with all the things
that one has when one is young, we managed to buy ourselves these wire
mesh rat traps which we put on the bed. Every now and again somebody
would go " Clonk! I've got one" and we wo aid all rush out and drown it
in the bath and watch the bubbles coming up. This is perfectly true.
That was the way it used to be and I don't think it really did any of us any
harm. But I do remember by contrast between Shore and Geelong Grammar
one strange delicacy concerning Shore, which didn't obta in i~ n the later
schocl to which I went.
When one had somehow or other offended authority in Shore in
those days, they said, " V alk out in front of the class and get chastised"
and they had great canes in those days. They said, " Hold out your hiand"
and they would beat you on your hand. They were much more indelicate in
the later school to which I went. They didn't beat you on your hands at
all, though they beat you just as frequently and just as hard. / 2 
-2
I am sorry that tonight two people that I remember so
well and to whom I owe so much are not here. One is Pat Eldershaw, who
was a housemaster of distinction. He is a man to wthom I owe a great deal.
I am not sure that this wasn't in some way mitigated. You see, he did so
well at teaching me in Lower 4C that I managed to be sort of the top of the
class and was therefore promoted to Upper 4A, and that left a gap which
I didn't understand, and ever since that time, I have never been any good
at academic pursuits at all.
I did go to the Headmaster at the time, Mr Robson.. I was
a very small boy and this was obviously very wrong.... and I said, " I think
you'ye promoted me too far, I don't quite understand this, and he said,
" Take your hands off the desk and stand to attention. You will go where
you are told, so I went where I was told. But they were really, in spite
of these things all of which I said are true.... you didn't believe the rats
but it was true -it did no harm to any single one of us. I am positive of that.
0 The othaer m-an who I am sorry is not here tonight is Bingeye
tBoelSl, owehof ois a vhery alekanb, otakll Quaeennts lansddert whoe, rwnh en hoet first ocam ne dwown
Queenslanders weren't in those days, so on every possible occasion, he used
to take them off and tie the laces together and hang them around his nec.
But he turned into one of the best oarsmen and one of the best boxers and one
of the best house captains, and one of the best citizens that Shore or
Australia has ever had.
There we were in those days, and so many of you who are here
tonight were there with me, when we had education " reading, writing,
' rithmetic, taught with the aid of a hickory stick". And do you remember we
had thirties, the origin of which I never understood until tonight. If you
had somehow or other offended authority, you got one thirty and that didn't
matter you just wrote that in a book. If you did it again, you got two
thirties, and that didn't really matter. Nothing happened. But once you
b got three thirties, you had to go and drill under the sergeant. Do you
remember? On that asphalt place for half an hour. If you got four
thirties, you had to come back on Saturday mornings. I don' t know whether
that still obtains. I hope it does because I think it is a good disciplinary
application. Forty years ago there was a completely different approach to
education from that which we now have. In some ways, I think it was a
little better, because when you did wrong, you got clobbered, and when you
do wrong, you ought to get clobbered. But those days lacked the foresight,
the attempt to understand the individual chpracter and the individual capacities
of the schoolboy and this is now one of those hallmarks of schools such
as Shore, and of our general educational system.
Though I am a little sad I hope the Press won't take this down,
because if they do, it will be misreported though I am a little sad that
discipline and corporal punishment is not as freely. u sed as it was, and
instead people are given lectures which are much harder to take, never theless
the general approach to education mnust be agreed to be greatly improved.
Where, then, do the independent schools and where, then, does a national
as distinct from a state government come into the picture in endeavouring
to foster this improvement? / 3~ 
-3
Well, insofar as the independent schools are concerned, I
have no hesitation in saying this that there always has been in Australia
a right for people to choose whether they will, at some sacrifice to them ' selves,
send their children to a school other than those run freely by a government.
And there always ought to be a right for people to malke that choice. It is
a democratic right people ought to be alle to exercise.
Secondly, there is an educational advantage. I do not say
that merit lies in independent schools, or merit lies in government schools.
Quite clearly, as the development of education in Australia has shown, there
is no monopoly of merit either in the independent or in the government school
systems. But I think there would be a danger, if there were to be only one
system in a state or in a nation, that that system might become monolithic, and
because it became monolithic, might become moribund. Therefore, if there
is a chance of a different approach, of a different evaluation, of selecting this
method of education instead of that, then that can only be of benefit both to
the pupils at independent and to the pupils at government. schools. The
systems must interact upon each other, as they do, and the independent
schools must be prepared to take from the government schools the advances
which they have proved, and the government schools are prepared and have
taken from the independent schools the advances they have proved. This
reacts to the benefit of the children and the pupil. So this again is a reason
for the support by governments of independent schools.
I believe that Sir Robert Menzies as Prime Minister, and
if I may s ay so, myself as his first Minister of Education and Science,
and before that as the man to whom he gave the running of Commonwealth
intervention in education have fostered the growth, and the development
not only of independent but of government schools throughout Australia. In
doing this, we were not only motivated by the things I have put before you.
But also by another not insignificant matter, and that is that the economic
cost to the community of maintaining a pupil at an independent school of any
kind is much, much less than the economic cost to the community would be
if all pupils were to go to government schools and all were to be completely
supported by government taxation.
So there was not only a democratic, there was not only an
educational, but there was also an economic reason why schools such as Shore
should be supported and maintained by governments and by those who have
received the benefits of attending such schools and who wish their children
to receive similar benefits.
This is a great school with a great tradition in one State of
a nation, but little less than a fortnight ago, my wife was talking to another
great school in Brisbane, known up there as " Churchie", the Brisbane Church
of England Boys Grammar School. ' There are in Western Australia and
Tasmania and in every State of Australia, schools such as this, schools with
great and long traditions. It is my hope and my belief that those pupils who
attend these schools now will be taught that this country in which they live is
a nation and no longer a collection of six colonies... and that those who
come from Shore next year will in ten years be found working in Queensland,
or Western Australia or South Australia, or wherever it may be; and that
those who come from Brisbane Church of England Grammar School or from
Geelong Grammar School, or wherever, will be found working in New South
Wales because if there is one thing that is needed more than anything
else in this nation today in the situation in which it finds itself, it is the / 4 
-4
fostering of a national and not a colonial and not a state spirit. And I
believe that in schools such as this, and indeed not only in schools such
as this, this is the path of the future. But I air not sure, Sir, that schools
such as this have not led the way towards such a path.
This is another reason, I believe, why the Commonwealth
Government has come into the field of education, come into it not only for
the reasons I have already given you but because it is impossible to leave
such an important, such a significant field to be developed to different levels
in different parts of this nation such as ours. We could not now or in the
future exist if we allowed, for example, in Queensland, the standard of
educat-ion to fall below that in New South Wales or in Victoria, if we allowed
the basic standard of education in any one part of our country to fall below
the basic standard of education in all the rest.
It is necessary for a C-' ommonwealth Government to come in
and see that a child in any part of this nation of ours is enabled to be
provided with the facilities that the children in other parts of the nation have.
This is why there has been so much more involvement in education by
the Commonwealth than has ever occurred before. This is why in the last
three or four years the expenditure has increased three and a half times.
This is why, more importantly, in the last three and a half years or so, there
has been more advice given, more leadership given.
Let us try and get a little bit more agreement as to the
curricula between the various States. Let us try and get a little more
not uniformity, because that is not what is wanted a little more equality
of standards between the various States. Let us try and get to a situation
where a child educated in one State and his parents move to another....
can go to a university in that new State without having to meet special
matriculation requirements. This ultimately must be good for a nation.
I think there are only a-few things more, Mr Presiding
Chairman, I want to say. You will all know that the Commonwealth
Government for long has been interested in the provision of scientific
laboratories and science facilities in schools governmental and independentthroughout
Australia. Indeed, if you haven't received it, you are going to get
another offer of 000 very shortly for your science laboratcry's equipment.
We have heard tonight from a professor of physics, of the technological
requirements of a modern age, and these we can not undervalue, because
if our mterial standard of 1ivigi tpo increase if our capacity to increase the
material standarI of our neigriMus is to incredse, then we must use to the
utmost wivit is discovered by scionce and modern technology.
But I hope that none of us will ever believe that scientific
knowledge and technological knowledge can take the place of proper education,
because with a full and complete knowledge of science, two things are
possible. You can split an atom so that you can diagnose a disease and cure
it where previously it could not bce-diagnosed and cured; or you can split it
so that you can examine the material to be used in building to knaow whether
if it is used that building will stand up under any stress; or you can split it
so that from the isotopes you can discover how better to devel~ op the products
of your land and the products of your industry; or you can split it so that
you can devastate vast areas of land and destroy innumerable populations.
Science offers both those alternatives, 4 * 1 
Similarly with technology. You can use it so that you
can the better produce, so that you can with a smaller number of people
and gre-ter machinery, turn out more and more, or you can use it so that
you put your efforts into creating engines df destruction.
Now what is going to decide whether scientific knowledge
is used for the good or the bad? What is go ing to decide whether technological
advances are used to improve the lot of n'll of us and of our neighbours, or
to hold fears ov.-r the head of us an d of our neighbours? Is true education
the study of history because that shows us the problems which men have
had to face throughout the ages in tryiag to organise a society, and how in
one way or another, with this degree of success or that, they have managed
to overcome those problems, and how something which at first seems a
panacea has been tried and has not been successful. Or is true education
a study of religion, because that breaks the shackles of the present and
makes us look to the ultimate goal we all seek, and that has particular
application to a church school. A study of literature, perhaps, because that
shows the dreams and aspirations of the individuals who make up a nation,
half expressed or fully expressed, according to the capacity of the literary
figure one studies And the study of politics, which shows the duty owed
by a citizen to the community in which he lives, the duty not only to receive
from it, but to give to it. These are the aims of true education,
Fully understood, these will see that scientific and
technical knowledge is used for the furtherance of those aims and not for
the destruction which they make possible. Could anything be more impcr tant
than seeking to see that the forces which are now unleashed through science
and technology are through true education properly used? Can there be
any better way of seeing that this true education is provided to one's children
than by giving to schools throughout Australia the capacity to see that in
this way we become a great nation. This, I think, is what this dinner is all
about because here, in a small way, in one school, we can a little advance
the aims I believe we all have for the nation of Australia. 



FOR PRESS: ~ iL1 6
LrB RP No. 72/ 1968_
CONTROL OF ILLEGAL F ISH ING,
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, this evening replied to
the telegram he had received from the Premier of Queensland, Mr. Pizzey,
in regard to contravention of fisheries laws.
Here is the text of the Prime Minister's telegram to Mr.
Pizzey: " In reply to your telegram received this morning, the
Commonwealth has had under examination ways in which illegal
fishing operations might be controlled and Australia'o marine
resources protected. Recently extra patrol boats have become
available to the R. A. N. and these will alk~ w the coverage and
frequency of sea patrols to be considerably increased within
Australia's 12-mile exclusive fishing zone. The R. A. A. F.
also will participate regularly in patrolling activities
particularly Gver northern fishing grounds. It is anticipated
that amendments to Commonwealth legislation will shortly be
proposed in order to give the necessary legal powers to control
the taking of all sedentary species, including clams, from the
Continental Shelf, including the Reef. As to the incident reported
in your telegram, this has been brought to the attention of the
Chinese Embassy who have been made aware that further such
acts w*., uld render the vessels concerned liable to arrest and
legal prcceedings. The Embassy said that the Chinese Goveknrnent
fully appreciated the need to avoid breaches of the Australian
Fisheries Act. The Embassy would do everything possible to
ensure that Chinese vessels respected the 12-mile limit and
the Chinese Government was being informed immediately about
the recent incidents. The help received from the Queensland
authorities in repcrting the activities of foreign fishing vessels
is much appreciated and it is hoped that the present valuable
co-operation between Commonwealth and State in this field will
crkacinue. I am writing to you separately on this matter.
CANBERRA 23 July 1968 



FOR PRESS: Z I-3 JUL 196,
L P. M. No. 73/ 1968
ARCHITECT FOR NATIONAL GALLERY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
A Sydney firm Edwardsj Madigan, Torzillo and
Partners has been selected to design the Abstralian National
Gallery in Canberra. The competition to chose the architect was launched
in March this year among twelve architects practising in Australia.
The competition had as its aim not a final design for
the building but rather the selection of a vigorous and imaginative
architect who would then be commissioned to submit the actual design
of the Gallery, I believe that the competition has abhieved that aim.
The assessois, in their rejiitt, commented on the
high quality of all the entries submitted and stressed the ingenuity
and originality of their approawlh
Although a site for the Galeiy is not yet finally
determined, the selection of the architect allows the planning for the
National Gallery to proceed to the next stage. This will Involve
discussions between the successful architect, the eminent Gallery
Director, Mr. James J. Sweeney of New York, who has been engaged
as consultant, the development authority for the Gallery ( the National
Capital Development Commission) and the newly selected Interim
Council for the National Gallery.
CANBERRA 26 July 1968 
PACKGROUND NOTES
1. The decision to establish a National Gallery
in Canberra was announced by Sir Robert Menzies on
September 1965, and the report of the National Gallery
Committee of Enquiry ( Lindsay Committee) was tabled by
the late Prime Minister ( Mr. Harold Holt) in Parliament
on I November 1967.
2. The architectural competition was not for a
final design for a Gallery, but for the selection of an architect
whose entry convinced the assessors that his design approach
would warrant his appointment as the architect for the project.
( The assessors were Sir John Overall, Mr. Robin Boyd and
Mr. 1. L. McConnell).
3. The entries were judged anonymously, the
twelve competing architects ( list attached) having enclosed
their names in sealed envelopes when they submitted their
designs.
4. The envelopes were kept in security storage
at the Reserve Bank. The sealed envelope corresponding to
the winning entry was delivered to the Prime Minister today
by the Minister for the Interior, Mr. Nixon.
At a brief ceremony in his office this morning
( attended by Mr. Nixon, Sir John Overall, Sir Daryl Lindsay,
Mr. J. L. McConnell, Mr. Robin Boyd and Mr. C. L. S.
Hewitt), the Prime Minister opened the envelope and announced
the name of the successful architect. 
LIST OF ARCHITECTS IN THE COMPETITION
Ancher, Mortlock, Murray and Woolley
of North Sydney, N. S. W.
Cameron, Chisholm and Nicol
of Perth, W. A.
Clarke, Gazzard and Partners
of Sydney, N. S. W.
Edwards, Madigan, Torzillo and Partners
of Sydney, N. S. W. ( W INNER)
Don Fulton
of Melbourne, Vic.
Godfrey and Spowers, Hughes, Mewton and Lobb
of Melbourne, Vic.
Roy Grounds
of Melbourne, Vic.
Hely and Horne
of Sydney, N. S. W.
McIntyre and McIntyre Pty. Ltd.
of Melbourne, Vic.
Harry Seidler and Associates
of Sydney, N. S. W.
Evan Walker and Daryl Jackson
of East Melbourne, Vic.
Yuncken Freeman Architects Pty. Ltd.
of Melbourne, Vic. 



' FOR PRESS: ~ 2 JUL96 P. M. No. 74/ 1968
INTERIM CCUNCLL FOR NATIONAL GALLERY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Carton
An Interim Council has been appointed for the Australian
National Gallery in Canberra. The Council will be responsible for the
new Gallery during its planning and construction stages.
I am pleased to announce that twelve distinguished
Australians have accepted the Government?' s invitation to become
members of this Interim Council.
They are:
Sir Daryl LINDSAY ( Chairman)
Dame Zara HOLT
Dame Mabel MILLER
Sir Henry BASTEN
Professor Joseph BURKE
Mr. W. A. DARGIE
Mr. James 0. FAIRFAX
Mr. Leonard FRENCH
Mr. Kenneth MYER
Sir James FLIMSCLL
Professor Charles F. PRESLEY
Professor Bernard SMITH
I am sure they will make a valuable contribution to the
establishment of our National Gallery. During the design and
construction period, the Interim Council as the client will be
concerned with determining the needs of the Gallery itself, and its
methods of display and operation.
The Interim Council will be associated with the Prime
Minister's Department.
CANBERRA 26 July 1968 
BACKGROUND NCTES
CHAIRMAN: Sir Daryl LINDSAY, R. W. S. HON. LL. D. N. U.)
Distinguished artist; Director, National Gallery of
Victoria 1942-56. Chairman, Commonwealth Art Advisory Board of
which he has been a member since 1953; Chairman, National Art
Gallery Committee of Enquiry 1965/ 66; Member, National Capital
Planning Committee, Canberra. Represented in all Australian National
Galleries and Victoria and Albert Museum, London.
MEMBERS: ame Zara HOLT A wide knowledge of art, based on an active interest in
this field over many years.
DameMabel MILLER, LL. B.
M. H. A. for Franklin, Tasmania, 1955-64. Deputy Lord
Mayor of Hobart, 1954-56, 1964-66; Alderman since 1962. Barrister.
Past President, National Council of Women.
Sir HnyAS NC. M. M. A
Chairman, Australian Universities Commission; Vice-
Chancellor, University of Adelaide, South Australia, 1958-68. Member
of the National Art Gallery Committee of Enquiry 1965/ 66.
Professor Joseph BURKE, 0. B. E. M. A.
Professor of Fine Arts, University of Melbourne since
1947. Member, National Art Gallery Committee of Enquiry 1965/ 66.
Assistant Keeper Victoria and Albert Museum, London, 1938.
Mr. William Alexander DARGIE, 0. B. F. R. S. A. ( Londj..
F. R. A. S. S. W.)
Distinguished artist. Member, Commonwealth Art Advisory
Board since 1953; Member of the National Art Gallery Committee of Enquiry
1965/ 66; Head, National Gallery of Victoria Art School, 1946-53. Official
War Artist with A. 1. F. Winner of Archibald Prize for Portraiture on number
of occasions. Painted a portrait of H. M. The Queen for the C0orntnorwealrti
of Australia in 1954. Represented in many collections.
Mr. James Oswald FAIRFAX, M. A.
Director, John Fairfax Ltd. Sydney, since 1957. Director,
Amalgamated T. V. Services Pty. Ltd., since 1958 and Director, Associated
Newspapers Ltd. since 1958. Member of National Art Gallery Committee of
Enquiry 1965/ 66. / 2 
-2
Mr. Leonard William FRENCH
Distinguished artist. Exhibitions Officer, National
Gallery of Victoria, 1958-60. Awarded many prizes including Harkness
Fellowship 1965, Crouch Prize 1959, Sulman 1960, Blake 1963.
Commissioned to do the stained glass roof in the Victorian Arts Centre
and windows in the National Library, Canberra. Represented in
Australian National Galleries.
Mr. Kenneth MYER, D. S. C.
Deputy Chairman and Managing Director, Myer Emporium
Ltd., Melbourne, since 1960. Member, Council of National Library of
Australia; Deputy Chairman, Victorian National Art Gallery and
Cultural Centre Building Committee.
Sir James PLIMSOLL, C. B. E.
Secretary, Department of External Affairs, Canberra,
since 1965. Australian High Commissioner to India and Ambassador to
Nepal 1963-65. Australian Permanent Representative to United Nations,
New York, 1959-63,
Professor Charles F. PRESLEY) B. A. B. Litt.
Professor Philosophy, University of Queensland, since
1962.
Professor Bernard SMITH, B. Ph. D. F. S. A.
Professor of Contemporary Art and Director of the Power
Institute of Fine Arts, University of Sydney. Member Australian
Humanities Research Council since 1956. Formerly Art Critic of
" The Age" ( Melbourne). 



FOR PRESS: AUp1~ 96G8
I F I' P. M. No. 75/ 1968
RETIREMENT OF MR. J. R. WILLOUGHBY
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I am sure I can speak for all Members of the Parliamentary
Party in paying tribute to Bob Willoughby.
He has made an outstanding contribution to our side of
politics over a period of close to half a century. He has played no small
part in the development and progress of the Liberal Party, and for the
past 17 years has given distinguished service as Federal Director.
He enjoys the respect and friendship of us all, and we shall
be sorry to see him go.
CANBERRA July 1968 



THIRD MEETING OF THE ASIAN
AND PACIFIC COUNCIL
Opening Speech by the Prime Minister, 1. 5 AUG i968
Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, Mp
Canberra, ACT 3AR'
JULY 1968
It is my privilege to address you this morning on what is an
historic occasion for the Australian Government and people.
On behalf of the Australian Government, it is my pleasure
to welcome to Australia the distinguished representatives of the Republic
of China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Thailand, and the Republic of Viet Nam as well as the
observer from the kingdom of Laos.
The Asian and Pacific Council is a young organisation, having
been established in Seoul just two years ago. It has had a promising
beginning and it is the Australian Government's conviction that it will have
an increasingly important role to play in the future of the region.
ASPAC includes a representative group of significant countries
in the area and we in Australia are proud to be members of it.
As a regional organisation, ASPAC has some unique
characteristics. It includes countries from North Asia, South-East Asia
and the South Pacific, but it do-es not include countries from outside the
region. A number of other regional organisations do include
as full members the great powers from outside the region and it is right
and proper that this should be so. The region in which we all live will
for a long time to come need the help and support of the adv anced nations
outside it. But the existence of ASPAC testifies to the fact that there ip
a growing recognition in our region that in the long run our destinies will
be determined by our own efforts.
Since the end of World War 11 there has been a steady growth
of regional consciousness in many parts of the world. Increasingly
governments and peoples have realised that their individual efforts can
be made more fruitful if they work closely with their neighbours.
We now understand perhaps more clearly than in the past
that goodwill between neighbours, and a readiness to look forward to
friendliness and co-operation rather than backwards to old hostilities, is an
indispensable requirement for that progress towards the decent standards
of living to which all our peoples asp4:-e. We must have cordial co-operation
among ourselves and it is to be promotion of this co-operation to which the
Asian and Pacific Council is dedicated.
The need for regional co-operation was recognised in the
Asian and Pacific region as early as anywhere in the world, yet in some
ways the translation of this into practical action has not proceeded as
rapidly as it has elsewhere. 9/ 2 
-2
The reason for this perhaps is that the peoples of our region
have rich and diverse cultures, and in recent times they have followed*
very different historical paths. In some cases their links have been with
European countries rather than with their neighbours. But now the basic
facts of geography and economics are reasserting themselves and none Of
us can doubt that ultimately the future of this region lies in the hands of:
the peoples and countries within it, so many of whom are represented here
today. It is true that before ASPAC was founded, bodies like the Colombo
Plan and the regional commissions and institutions set up under the United
Nations played an important part in stimulating the sftse of a regional
community. Indeed, if you cast your minds back, two remarkable achievements
in regional economic co-operation that come immediately to mind are
the Asian Development Bank and the Mekong Development Project; and a
complex network of other regional activities has already been developed.
The principal purpose of all these existing activities has been to apply to the
development of the area the resources and knowledge available from countries
jutside the area. This is where ASPAC differs somewhat from previously
established regional organisations. Its main concern is to promote
co-operation among the countries inside the region itself and to develop the
potential strength within it through our own efforts.
The prospects for practical co-operation of this kind are
steadily increasing. For example, the rapid economic growth in several
ASPAC countries will help to ensure that trade between them continues to
grow. It is important that the rate of growth of a number of developing
countries in ASPAC is higher than that of all but a few countries outside
thiis region. The annual growth rates among the majority of ASPAC countries
ranges from 5 per cent to more than 8 per cent. This compares with an
approximate average of about 4 per cent for ' he total Asian and Far East
region. Our own Australian trade with ASPAC countries is growing
rapidly. In 1966/ 67 about one quarter of our total trade was with our
fellow members of ASPAC.
We are particularly pleased that ASPAC countries are beginning
to benefit from the Australian scheme for tariff preference on certain goods
manufactured by developing countries, and we hope that they will tak-e
increasing advantage of the scheme and the opportunities which it presents.
Economic and social progress can of course only be maintained
in our region in circumstances of peace and stability. Unfortunately, the
region is one which at the present time in history is most exposed to threats
of direct and indirect aggression. While these threats exist, we must
welcome the support of our major allies in contributing to the security of
the region but must at the same time do our best to provide for our defence
through our own efforts, and we should do our best to ensure that no
internal differences of opinion upset the peace and stability which the region
requires. / 3 
-2
The reason for this perhaps is that the peoples of our region
have rich and diverse cultures, and in recent times they have followed
very different historical paths. In some cases their links have been with
European countries rather than with their neighbours. But now the basic
facts of geography and economics are reasserting themselves and none of
us can doubt that ultimately the future of this region lies in the hands of
the peoples and countries within it, so many of whom are represented here
today. It is true that before ASPAC was founded, bodies like the Colombo
Plan and the regional commissions and institutions set up under the United
Nations played an important part in stimulating the sose of a regional
community. Indeed, if you cast your minds back, two remarkable achievements
in regional economic co-operation that come immediately to mind are
the Asian Development Bank and the Mekong Development Project; and a
complex networlk of other regional activities has already been developed.
The principal purpose of all these existing activities has been to apply to the
development of the area the. resources and knowledge available from countries
jutside the area. This is where ASPAC differs somewhat from previously
established regional organisations. Its main concern is to promote
co-operation among the countries inside the region itself and to develop the
potential strength within it through our own efforts.
The prospects for practical co -operation of this kind are
steadily increasing. For example, the rapid economic growth in several
ASPAC countries will help to ensure that trade between them continues to
grow. It is important that the rate of growth of a number of developing
countries in ASPAC is higher than that of all but a few countries outside
this region. The annual growth rates among the majority of ASPAC countries
ranges from 5 per cent to more than 8 per cent. This compares with an
approximate average of about 4 per cent for ' he total Asian and Far East
region. Our own Australian trade with ASPAC countries is growing
rapidly. In 1966/ 67 about one quarter of our total trade was with our
fellow members of ASPAC.
We are particularly pleased that ASPAC countries are beginning
to benefit from the Australian scheme for tariff preference on certain goods
manufactured by developing countries, and we hope that they will tak&amp;-e
increasing advantage of the scheme and the opportunities which it presents.
Economic and social progress can of course only be maintained
in our region in circumstances of peace and stability. Unfortunately, the
region is one which at the present time in history is most exposed to threats
of direct and indirect aggression. While these threats exist, we must
welcome the support of our major allies in contributing to the security of
the region but must at the same time do our best to provide for our defence
through our own efforts, and we should do our best to ensure that no
internal differences of opinion upset the peace and stability which the region
requires. / 3 
-3
Lt may be appropriate for mre to say that Australia has
long recognised her responsibilities for contributing to the security of
the region. Indeed, since the end of the Second World War, the youth of
Australia has participated in the fight against aggression in Korea, in
Malaysia and in Viet Nam, and its armed forces have made a small but
valuable contribution to the security of other countries in the region.
ASPAC is in no sense a security organisation and in the view
of the Australian Government it should not attempt to become one; even
though we recognise that if our efforts under ASPAC to promote the welfare
of the region are to succeed means it is necessary for the region to be
secure from aggression. The answer to aggression is not, of course, to be found
only in the military arena. Military strength itself flows from a prosperous
and progressive community, but so does political stability and freedom from
subversion, and in order to achieve that prospercui s and progressive
community 4ad that political stability,. neighbourly co-operation in paths
of peace is we believe, essential,
So in ASPAC, we are seeking to establish a close comradeship
and a practical working co-operation in the political, economic, cultural
and social fields. We also will maintain an open door through which other
countries in the region can join us whenever they wish to do so. This, of
course, is a matter for their free choice.
But we hope, however, that as the real objectives of the
organisation are increasingly appreciated and understood, there will be a
growing inclination in all the countries in the region to realise the value
of the kind of co-operation that ASPAC stands for.
What we are seeking to establish is a genuine and deep
understanding in all aspects of our relations of one another's points of view
and of one another's problems. None of us is seeking to force the adoption
of a common view upon others, but rather to develop a common approach
to those problems which all of us share. In short, to identify the problems
which are common and to seek to discover whether there is a common
solution which we can together apply.
One of the great advantages indeed of ASPAC is that it is not
an organisation which meets to make proposals which are to be voted upon,
to have decisions which are to be done by majority rule, but rather to meet
in order to discuss, to identify and to see whether there are common
approaches which can solve the problems of the region.
We have already become in ASPAC a valuable forum for the
exchange of those views between government leaders and the officials of
our countries. They meet together not only in this Council, but regu larly
between Council meetings in the Standing Committees of ASPAC, and at
numerous international conferences, they take the '-pportunity of holding
informal consultations among the delegations from this region, representing
each one of the countries here present.
I believe the organisation must be congratulated on the
practical way in which it has set about its task,, s. During the past year,
my col-league, the Minister for External Affairs has chaired the regular
meetings of the Standing Committee and those meetings have been most
valuable in promoting that kind of understanding of which I have spoken and
which is the basic objective of this organisation. / 4 
-4-
Durirg the year, the ASPAC Registry of Expert Services has
been established in Canberra and is now in operation, and at this Council
meeting, Ministers will be asked to give their final endorsement to the
agreement establishing the ASPAC Cultural and Social Centre in Seoul.
I have no doubt that further projects of this kind will be developed, and
each will have some contribution to make to those objectives of which I
have spoken to you this morning.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my welcome to the
distinguished representatives here today, and by expressing the hope and
confidence that your deliberations during this Third Asian and Pacific
Council Meeting will further strengthen the ties that unite us, I hnpe by
seeking, peering down the paths of the future, to put into your minds a
vision of this region with its people, politically free and economically
prosperous, working together for the good of all human beings in the region,
perhaps partly as a result of conferences such as these and of the work put
into those conferences by the representatives of the countries who are here
today and by the backing they will get from the ordinary men and women
who in this region, and perhaps ultimately in the world, have a common goal
which ASPAC seeks.
I declare the meeting open. 



OPENING OF
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John Gorton, MP AUGUST 1968
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
You, Sir Grenfell, have told us something of the
history of libraries, and in particular of the history of this building in
which we today find ourselves. While you were telling us about it, I muld
not but thinik how fortunate you were to have been driven out by the ferrets
of the Treasury from the burrow in which you once found yourself, if the
end result of that was that you find yourself in this if I may so describe it
warren. I know that at one stage, you described or Sir Robert
Menzies described the storage places in which the books of the National
Library were placed as " elegant igloos", those being those Nissen huts
scattered around the place. No-one, Sir, would have the temerity to
describe this as an " elegant igloo". Rather, I think, the proper name for
it might be Xanadu, because you will remember it was in Xanadu that
Kubla Khan " a stately pleasure dome decreed", and this perhaps might be
a fair description of what ought to be a stately building, a national library.
Many hearts and hands and minds have worked
effectively and devotedly over the years to bring to completion this building
in which we now find ourselves Only on the rarest occasions does
some accomplishment such as this result from anything other than the
devotion of many people, and the contributions of many thoughts and of
many minds. I think that as the years go by, and the decades go by
in our nation, and as they go by give more growth, give more colour,
give more depth to our national story, this building having already gained
the recognition that it has, will be counted in the world as one of the world's
great libraries. You have given thanks, Sir, to those who have worked
so effectively to bring to fruition this projact, but what you have not done
and what I propose to do is to say hc~ w much credit is due to you and to your
enthusiastic work as Chairman of the Council of the National Library of
Australia. I have some knowledge of this, having worked with you in other
directions, and know how much devotion you have given to this task, even if,
if I may say so, the standard of poetry of which you gave us an example
has not got quite the finish of the building in which it is stored. 2 
-2-
The early libraries of the world, Mvr Chairman, as I understand,
tended to be temples in which holy books were kept and where the priests
were the guardians of the books, and no doubt, like most librarians, refused
to allow the books to leave, on the very good grounds that if they did leaye,
it was unlikely they would be brought back.
VWe here have passed on from that, but there still is in the concept
of a library, something of that original -assessment in that in a building there
ftestored books which are not merely dogma, but books which in the sense
in which they encompass the thoughts and wisdoms of the past could be
regarded as having some great significance, if not some holy significance,
in the present. I have spoken of you, M r Chairman, and those who have worked
with you in bringing this to completion, but I also want to speak a little of
those who make it operate, of those who will see that it will work for the
end for which it is designed. This is where we rely on the staff of libraries
not the directors of libraries but the staff of libraries who catalogue the
books, who index the subject matter, who supply a research service and
give easy access to any area of study which is required by somebody who
comes to a library. It is these people, working quietly and devotedly in
their chosen tasks who alone make a building such as this, and the books
in a building such as this, fulfil a proper, effective and efficient task.
Without them, there would be so many books here that not only c ould the
mind of a would-be scholar not encompass them, but the hanids of a
would-be scholar could not find them. This is the task of those who run
this library I think, Sir, that in its practical application, the Library here
serves and will serve the nation through a central government, the
Australian Government, the most important government, working in
conjunction with State Libraries of State Governments throughout the length
and breadth of this nation.
It will serve our Territories. It will serve our Missions abroad,
and it will provide one main strand in the network of library services which
covers the whole of the world.
I think the nations of the world will draw closer and have drawn
closer as communications have improved. No longer is it enough, as it
once was, to live in a closed community of ideas. It is necessary that
there should be an exchange of ideas to the greatest possible extent among
the greatest possible number of people, and libraries such as this in various
countries are the best means by which this can take place.
just over one hundred years ago, another man opening another
library said great library contains the diary of the human race"
This library, as part of a world-wide library service, will keep that diary
up to date for us to study the world's Todays, as well as its iyesterdays,
and by being able to study its Todays and its Yesterdays, perhaps enable us
to be the more wise in seeking to shape the world's Tomorrows. ./ 3 
-3
The insistent pressures of growth and the enlarging executive
functions of the national library made its separation from the Parliamentary
Library sensible and necessary and part of the orderly progression of
events. Here today, we mark that final act of separation.
But it hasn't created two separate worlds of scholarship, this
separation. There will still be the closest and most intimate relationship
between the two libraries, and that will in each case give strength to the other.
We are keeping before us, as sixty years ago the joint Library
Committee established by Sir Edmund Barton kept before it as an idea] l that
such a library as this shall be worthy of the Australian nation, shall be the
home of literature, a part of the world and a part of all time.
Eight years ago, Sir Robert Menzies, the seventeenth Prime
Minister, presented the National Library Bill which supported the Paton
Committee' s recommendation for this library. Less than six years later,
Sir Robert laid the foundation stone of this library, this relatively inexpensive
library, I think you said, Sir, costing no more than $ 8 million without books.'
Now, on the 15th August, 1968, there is given to me, the nineteenth
Prime Minister, the great and enduring honour of being asked to open that
Library for which so many other people have woriked for so long, and
which those of you who have eyes to see will agree with mie, is what I have
sought to describe it as today.
With just one more quotation, Sir, I propose soon to declare this
Library open, but I did want to say something about books, or ratLr to say
what some other great man had said about books or rather, some gre-at
man had said about books. That is Joseph Conrad, whom I quote:
" Of all inanimate objects, of all man' s creations, books are the
nearest to us, for they contain our vey thoughts, our ambitions, our
indignations, our illusions, our fidelity to truth, and our persistent
leaning toward error, But most of all they resemble us in their
precarious hold on life".
This building, and those who attend these books will see that the hold on life
is not precarious and that the influence on life is that which those who read
these books choose that it shall be. That is one of the great achievements of
today and one reasou wblI have such pleasure in declaring this National
Library open. 



PRESENTATION OF PRESIDENTIAL UNITCITATION
TO THE SI-XTH BATTALION, RAR
TOWNSVILLE, QLD. 18 AUGUST 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mvr. John Gorton
The award which I have just presented on behalf of the
President of the United States, and the streamer which I have just attached
to the colours as a result of that award, is one which is not lightly given,
and one which is rarely given outside the Armed Services of the United States
itself. it has perhaps a special significance, something different
from the awards which we in the tradition of the British and Australian
armies give for service in the field, for it is an award not to an individual
for some specific act of bravery, but to a team, to a unit, who together
supporting each other in full comradeship, won the right to obtain the
award. You have heard the words of the citation itself, and I.
want you to form in your minds, those of you who were not there and 1 know
that a number to whom I speak were there I want you to form in your
minds the pictures that lie behind the words. The picture of a Company in
the green gloom of a rubber plantation in Viet Nam, with tropic rain pouring
down, curtaining the distance, causing discomfort to the individual, turning
the ground underfoot into mud and into morass. And to imagine that
Company pushing out from the ruins of a derelict village called Long Tan,
and suddenly in those circumstances being attacked and engaged without
warning with a storm of small arms, machine gun and mortar fire.
To those who thus launched this attack on the company,
with its platoons dispersed, it must have seemed as if the stage was set for
another classical exposition of guerrilla warfare as written by the enemy's
General Giap. For here was a small force by itself, able to be engaged with
overwhelming battalion strength by the enemy, and encircled on three sides
already, front and both flanks, shortly to be completely encircled from the
rear as well. So it must have seemed that here again was a situation where
one small force would be engaged by overwhelming enemy forces properly
entrenched, properly prepared, and that that small force would be overrun,
decimated and destroyed. But it did not turn out that way. Instead was a coolness w'Mch
must reflect the greatest credit on the unit, on the training the unit received,
and on the characters of those more than half of whom were National
Servicemen who made up the unit. The attack was received, the perimeter
was formied; thle attaclk1 was repulsed and repulsed until finally as other
companies camne to the assistance of Company, and as such succour as
could be given from the glowering skies was dropped from helicopters,
finally the enemy withdrew, with over 200 dead, plus over 500 wounded.
This in itself is a significant engagement, but over and above that, I think
it has this significance. / 2 
-2
It adds to the rich fabric of tradition of the Australian
Army which can look back over the years to those engagements in the First
and Second World War, and in Korea ( where indeed another Presidential
Unit Citation was wn by Australians). Such initiative, such courage, such
coolness,' such steadfastness contributes to a tradition which, should the
time come, will sustain the Army of the future in all its parts because that
is what traditions built by armed forces do.
It would be presumptuous of me, I think, to congratulate
those men in Company now. Some of them were not in Company then,
but they can wear this Presidential Citation while they serve in the Company.
Those who were in Company on that day will be able to wear this proud
insignia as long as they serve in the Army and wherever they serve.
i merely wish to express, speaking I believe for the
Australian nation, the admiration that we have for what then was done, And
the belief we have that what was done will, should need recur, be repeated.
It is my deep conviction that this addition to the annals of Australian arms
will keep thenm furbished, bright and keen in the years ahead of this nation.
And that is of great significance, for until the millennium arrives, we mpust
rely, in the ultimate, on those men and women of Australia, coming from
civilian pursuits, trained by those who give their lives to the Army, ready
when necessary to defend this country.
That is all I wish to say to you, concluding with thanlks
from Australians for what you have done. 



COMMONWEALTH DROUGHT RELIEF ASSISTANCE IN
1968-69
STATEMENTJ IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE
RT. HON. J. G. GORTON, M. P. ON
AUGUST, 1968
After consultation with New South Wales, Victoria,
Queensland and South Australia, my Government has decided that, subject
to certain limitations, drought relief assistance will continue to be provided
to those States in 1968-69. Although the drought which has been affecting
most of the eastern half of the Australian continent now appears to be
virtually over, we accept that the need for drought relief measures has not
ceased with the advent of rains and that some further Commonwealth
assistance in respect of State relief measures will be necessary in 1968-69.
The Commonwealth will continue to reimburse the
States in 1968-69 for their drought relief expenditures arising from
Loans made during the whole of 1968-69 to drought-affected
farmers who establish a need for " carry-on" loan
assistance prior to the end of September, 1968 or for
loan assistance for restocking prior to the end of
December;
Freight concessions extended to drought-affected farmers
prior to the end of December on the trrnsport of stock
back from agistment or for re-stocking purposes;
Expenditure actually incurred on other measures, including
expenditure by local authorities from grants for the
maintenance of employment in rural areas, pri or to the
end of September.
I emphasise that it is not the Commonwealth's intention
that the various State relief measures should necessarily cease on the dates
on which Commonwealth assistance to the States will cease. The Commonwealth's
approach is that, if a State feels that it is necessary to continue
a particular measure after the " cut-off'' date for Commonwealth assistance,
it would be reasonable for the State itself to meet the limited expenditure
likely to be involved. In this regard, I point out that contrary to the normal
arrangements in relation to natural disaster relief assistance, the Commonwealth
has been meeting virtually the whole cost of State expenditures on
drought relief measures. The arrangements have undoubtedly been the most
generous ever devised to meet such a situation and, in the three years to the
end of 1967-68, they have resulted in reimbursements of State relief
expenditur~ s amoucuing to nearly $ 60 million. For 1968-69, it is estimated
that, on the basis of the arrangements outlined, State expenditures eligible
for reimbursement will amount to a further $ 19 million made up as follows: /' 2 
2
New South Wales 6. 0 million
Victoria $ 11.0 million
Queensland 0.9 million
South Australia 4 million
$ 19. 3 million
These payments include reimbursements in respect of commitments
entered into during 1967-68.
I have made it clear to the four States concerned that the
Commonwealth will be prepared to consider new arrangements if
drought conditions happen to re-emerge on a large scale. However,
I am hopeful that present expectations for a generally favourable rural
season in 1968-69 will be fulfilled and that, in consequence, there will
be a substantial increase in rural output and incomes of farmers. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH 13Y
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M.
ON
CZECHOSLOVAKIA Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 22 August 19681
Mr G40RTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
[ 8.01--Mr Speaker, the House is
debating a motion proposed on behalf of
, the Government by the Minister for
kernal Affairs ( Mr Hasluck). The
-tnotion is:
That the House expresses its distress at and its
abhorrence of the armed intervention in Czechoslovaldia
by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
the East German regime, Poland, Hungary, and
Cilgaria; condemns this action as a breach of the
. ue Nations Charter and of accepted international
conduct; calls for the immediate withdrawal
of the forces unlawfully on Czechoslovakian
territory and expresses the sympathy of
the House for the people of Czechoslovakia in
their ordeal.
It may -be thought, Mr Speaker, that a
parliamentary motion of support for the
Czechs and a condemnation of the invaders
in this place is a frail weapon, at least in
the short term, to set against the tanks and
the tommy guns of the Russian invaders;
but it is a weapon available to us and, in
the long term, in this and other parliaments
C may not be as frail as it at first might
appear. At least it is a weapon which the
Czechoslovakian mission to the United
Nations, at the behest of the Czechoslovakian
National Assembly, asked us to
C'-se, saying:
We appeal to parliaments of all countries and
to the world public opinion and ask them to support
our legitimate requirements.
Tonight, Sir, this Parliament has its chance
to respond to that appeal. The history of
21419/ 68 this sad affair is this: On 5th January this
year Mr Novotny, First Secretary of the
Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, a
Stalin -type, hard line Communist, was
replaced as First Secretary by Mr Alexander
Dubeek. The Communist Party and the Government
of Czechoslovakia began reforms
of the existing political and economic system
in Czechoslovakia. One of their objectives
was to improve the material well-being of
the Czechs by diverting to consumer goods
those resources which had been almost
entirely used for the development of heavy
industry and of defence -to such an extent
that all that was left for the Czechoslovakian
people ' to live on were the base
necessities of life.
The second objective was to infuse some
elements of democracy into the previous
tyrannous, totalitarian Communist system of
government which ' had prevailed in
Czechoslovakia, and so freedom of
speech was permitted, censorship of
the Press, of radio and of television
was abolished. Real discussions began in
the national parliament. The courts were
instructed to administer the law in accordance
with the rule of law. The activities
of the secret police were curbed and the
free practice of religion was permitted. At
the same time the Communist Party, under
Mr Dubcek, remained in control of the
country. The Czech Government reaffirmed
its ' immutable friendship and alliance with 
the Soviet Union'. Czech forces remained
committed to the Warsaw Pact and the
military alliance between Russia, Czechoslovakia
and the other Warsaw Pact members
remained as firm as ever. So, Mr
Speaker, there was no abandonment of
military union; there was no abandonment
of Communist ideology. There was merely a
brave experiment, seeking to give material
benefit and seeking to give the right to
think and speak openly and freely to Czechs.
It was sought not to get rid of Communism
but to keep Communism and have a measure
of freedom too.
This brief endeavour was soon to be
crushed. Russia and the Communist regimes
in eastern Europe, who depend for their
existence on Soviet military power, could
not stomach the revival of free speech and
the revival of the rule of law. So at once
a hostile Press campaign against the Czech
Government began. In June of this year
infantry and tank divisions ringed the
frontiers of Czechoslovakia on the north,
on the east and on the south. In July tension
between Czechoslovakia and Russia began
to run high but it appeared to have
abated following a series of meetings
between Czech and Soviet leaders, ending
at Bratislava on 3rd August-the third of
this month-1968. After that meeting, in
the communique issued at its end, the
Czechs pledged their commitment to the
Soviet Union, to the Warsaw Pact and to
Communism, and in return the five other
countries taking part in that conference expressed
their ' firm intention to do everything
necessary to extend all round cooperation
on the basis of the principle of
equality, respect for sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity'. That was in
the communique issued by Russia and the
other Warsaw powers on 3rd August-this
month. But in spite of that Soviet troops
remained on the border and yesterday at
approximately 8 o'clock in the morning
Canberra time, which was night time in
Czechoslovakia, Soviet and satellite troops
launched an invasion over all the frontiers
of Czechoslovakia in overwhelming strength
while the Czech citizens slept. It is worth
noting at this point, as was said at the
Security Council meeting today, that that
invasion so launched by Communist countries
had obviously taken weeks of preparation.
Millions of leaflets were dropped on Czechoslovakia; massive forces had been
deployed; a dummy radio station and newspaper
had already been set up. This surely
indicates that the Soviet leaders, who
embraced the Czechs at Cierna and Bratislava
and who had issued the communique
I have just quoted to the House, had already
been planning all this invasion at a time
when the public air was filled with smiles.
This must be taken to be a gross act of
perfidy that should be universally condemned
by world opinion.
By morning on the day of the invasion
the country was under military occupation.
Airborne troops had taken over Prague.
Four to five hundred tanks ringed Prague,
and the other centres of population were
under military control. The glimmer of
freedom which had begun to be seen in
Czechoslovakia had gone, at least for now.
The experiment was over, because that
measure of criticism, that measure of free
expression of opinion, that permission of
argument which the Czechs had sought to
introduce into the Communist body corporate
had been judged too dangerous, too
poisonous for that body to imbibe and ttolerate
and to live with. The invade.
believed it impossible for a Communist
government to survive with the consent of
or even subject to any public criticism from
the governed of a Communist countrysurely
in itself, Mr Speaker, an eloquecommentary
on the Communist system J
seen from within.
As the Russian tanks rolled over the
border to occupy the main centres of the
country, as airborne troops dropped
throughout Czechoslovakia, reports came
over the Prague Government Radio. Those
reports announced the invasion, announced
that it was happening without the knowledge
of the President of the Republic,
the Chairman of the National Assembly,
the Premier or the First Secretary of the
Communist Party Central Committee-
Indeed, the Central Committee of tl
Czech Communist Party met and asked for
calm in the population. They sought a
lack of resistance to the marching troops,
for the odds were too great and they did
not wish a repetition of the blood bath r
Hungary. On the next day, 21st August, the
Czech Embassy in London issued a statement
from the Central Committee of the
Czech Communist Party which said: 
The invasion of Czechoslovakia and the armed
intervention by five states of the Warsaw Treaty
were made against the will of the Government,
against the will of the President of the National
Assembly and other constitutional organs.
No legal organ of the state power in
Czechoslovakia had given consent to it or
had requested it. Then came statements
from the Czech mission to the United
Nations, issued by the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, transmitting a resolute protest at
the Russian action and demanding the withdrawal
of all armed troops forthwith. Mr
Speaker, the troops remain. The whereabouts
of Czech Government leaders are
unknown. Whether or not they are safe.
whether or not they live, is unknown.
Faced with the need to justify an action
which the world had hoped it would never
see again, a repetition in the same unhalpy
country of that aggression which Hitler
committed in 1938, the Soviet Union now
seeks to pretend that its troops were
invited into Czechoslovakia. It has issued.
through Tass, a long statement which purports
to be the text of an appeal by a group
of members, unnamed, of the Cen-tral Comttee
of the Communist Party of Czecho-
-,. ovakia and of the Government. The -text
of the statement is signed simply and
anonymously: ' A group of members of the
Central Committee of the Communist
Party'. They are still unnamed, or at least
: y were still unnamed this afternoon.
-hey will remain unnamed unless and until
some puppet government can be installed
by the military. Some people who, I believe,
will forever after be reviled by the Czechs
may be bought into accepting the rule of
these invaders.
On this matter our own mission at the
United Nations has cabled us tonight that
the shattering weakness of the Soviet case
was that Malik, the USSR Ambassador to
the United Nations, was unable to name
even one prominent Czech in the Governi'nt
or the Communist Party who could
e identified as one of those who allegedly
had asked for the Soviet intervention. He
did not in fact name any Czech Government
or Party leader at all.
Because of what I have said in recounting
history of this matter and because of
the facts I have previously presented I do
not believe the Russian claim. The Government
does not believe the Russian claim.
I think the Parliament and people of Australia do not believe the Russian claim and
I doubt that anyone really believes the Russian
claim, although it is perhaps significant
that as far as we know only one government
has made a broadcast in firm support of
the Russian action in Czechoslovakia, and
that broadcast was made over Radio Hanoi.
What we have seen is brute military
strength used to crush a military ally, an
ideological partner, because some measure
of free opinion had been risked. All that is
needed to add a postscript, almost tragicomic,
to this sombre story is something
that appears in a letter written by the Soviet
Ambassador to the United Nations to the
Secretary-General of that body. In that
letter the Soviet Ambassador said, on
instructions from his Government, that the
Soviet Union vigorously opposed consideration
of this question by the Security Council
' and takes this opportunity to call once again
upon all states to observe strictly the principles
of sovereignty and independence and
of the inadmissibility of direct or indirect
aggression against other states or peoples'.
There must be, Mr Speaker, no limit to
the impertinence of these people. This is a
perfect example of what George Orwell
called double-think.
There is the history of this sorry matter.
There are the reasons why this Parliament
is asked on behalf of the Australian people
to vote-unanimously, I hope-in condemnation
of this Russian aggression, in support
of the Czech Parliament, which has asked
for our support, in support of the immediate
withdrawal of the invading forces. The
telling of this story may, perhaps necessarily,
have been dull and detailed.
But behind the words that describe
the events that have happened are
human tragedies in Czechoslovakia and
a check to humanity's hopes in the world.
I ask you to imagine the scenes, reported
over Prague radio to a stunned world, of
bloodshed as an invading tank crushed those
who stood in its way and of bloodshed as
a Czech woman was cut down by a tommy
gunner in the streets. Perhaps a transcript
of one such broadcast will underscore this
point. Over the sound of cannon and
machine gun fire which came across on the
broadcast came the announcer's voice as
follows: This is the last appeal. Shooting is heard outside.
The end is near. Dubcek-Dubcek-Dubcek. 
And then the broadcast ended-as, for a
while, Czech hopes for freedom are ended
and as, in sadness, are ended the hopes of
so many of us who had hoped that
European Communism might slowly allow
the leaven of freedom to work and might
slowly become more liberal. The falsity of
these hopes, at least for the present but I
hope not for the future, are now starkly
clear. [ Extension of time granted]
I thank the House. I will not trespass for
long on what has been granted to me. Perhaps
it may be said that this event does not
at once impinge on the Australian people,
but it does. Czechoslovakia, striving for
freedom and some independence, never was,
and is not now ' a far away country of which
we know nothing'. Indeed, that excuse for
ignoring its agony, which was once before
used in the time of its former travail,
impinged not only on Australians in the
long run but on the world, since it was one
of those steps which led to World War II. Czechoslovakia is a part of the community
of nations. When the bell tolls for her
attempt at freedom it tolls for attempts at
freedom everywhere.
There may be little enough that we can
do at present but let us do the little we
can. Let us pass this motion in the belief
that in -this Parliament and in the other
parliaments throughout the world, and in the
minds and hearts of people who elect the
members of this Parliament and the other
parliaments of the world, there will come
a force which, in the fullness of time, will
see that the torch of Czech freedom is
again raised high, as I believe it will be; that
in those other countries which now have
crushed Czechoslovakia the leaven still will
work; that they will get those measures of
freedom and, having them, will not feel
in any way impelled to interfere with the
rights of other countries-because in this
way, Sir, and in this way alone, ultimately
lies the path to peace.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



01 CZECHOSLOVAKIA_
COMMENTS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON
FEOLR EISINANRADIO 22 AUGUST 1968
I want to talk to you tonight about a matter which, though
it does not immediately impinge on the Australian people yet is of great
moment to them and to other free peoples throughout the world.
At approximately eight o'clock yesterday morning, Canberra
time, large forces of Russian troops, together with forces from other
satellite nations crossed the borders of Czechoslovakia in force against
the wishes of the Czechoslovakian Government and while most of the
citizens of Czechoslovakia were asleep. By the time morning came, they
were in military occupation of the country.
The Russian Charg6 d'Affaires called on me this morning
in order to present me a message, the gravamen of which was that
these Russian troops and other troops had entered Czechoslovakia at the
request of the Czechoslovakian Government.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I informed him
that I found this impossible to believe, and impossible to believe
particularly in view of the protests of the Czech Foreign Minister and
of the broadcasts from Prague indicating clearly, before the broadcasting
station was overrun, that this invasion was against the wishes of the legal
Czechoslovakian Government.
I said that I beliewd that the Australian Parliament and the
Australian people would share my disbelief. I asked him to convey to the
Russian Government this feeling on behalf of my Government, and I asked
him also to express to the Russian Government the distress and the
revulsion which my Government felt at -this action by the U. S. S. R.
This, I was told, is the message that would b. e conveyed.
The Parliament of Australia will be debating this matter
tonight, and while a Parliamentary motion may be a frail weapon to set
against the tanks and tommy-guns of the invaders, nevertheless, there
has been a message from the Parliament of Czechoslovakia before it
was overthrown, asking for the mobilisation of support from parliaments
and peoples throughout the rest of the world. This we are trying to do.
NOTE: The PM undertoolk this recording at the request of TV
and radio stations, to provide them with the substance
of his comments in Parliament this morning. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
APPROPRIATION BILL ( No. 1) 1968-69
Second Reading
( BUDGET DEBATE)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 27 August 1968]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
, D: 8. O]-This House has been asked, in the
farm of an amendment moved by the
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam), to
express the opinion that the Budget is
inadequate. I am sure the House will do
nothing of the kind and, indeed, I believe
that* the only thing inadequate connected
with the Budget is the speech upon it made
by the Leader of the Opposition. The
presentation of a Budget gives to an opposition
the opportunity to analyse a government's
assessment of the state of the economy.
It gives the opportunity to criticise
P õ ~ e objectives of the Government, to criti-
-cise its economic policy and to question the
methods by which a government seeks to
attain those objectives. It is perhaps significant
that virtually no -attempt was made
the Leader of the Opposition to use those
~ pportunities. Instead we listened : to a
speech which began with shallow and baseless
generalities, which proceeded to quote
misleading statistics to buttress an unsustain-
21691/ 68 able argument and which complained of a
lack of statistical information, although that
information was publicly available, and publicly
available to him. It was indeed-this
has not gone unnoticed-scarcely a speech
on the Budget at all.
To support what I have said aboult shallow
and baseless generalities let me draw
your attention to the Opposition Leader's
claim that yearly budgeting ' has denied Australians
opportunities for education, employment
and enterprise'.
As to education, the great Commonwealth
contributions through grants
to universities, grants to colleges of
advanced education, teacher training colleges,
technical schools, science blocks and
now libraries, have not been the subject of
yearly budgeting at all. They have been
triennial grants. The measure of the opportunity
' denied' is that these grants have
risen from $ 55m in 1961-62 to $ 210m this
vear. 
As to opportunities for employment
' denied', registered unemployment is below
the total of a year ago or for that matter
years ago. During the financial year just
passed employment increased by 131,000.
Vacancies have been rising faster than usual
and placements of persons in employment
in July were an all time record for the
month of July. As to the denial of opportunity
for enterprise, the economic advances
of our nation since 1949 have proceeded
at a rate unparalleled in our history.
Mr Stokes-Say that again, sir.
Mr GORTON-The economic advances
of our nation since 1949 have proceeded
at a rate unparalleled in our history.
Gross national product at constant prices
has increased from about $ 8,600m to
S19,500m last year. Moreover, on the basis
of our recent advances we can look forward
to a further doubling of the size of
our economy within the next 13 years. The
accelerating growth and development
throughout Australia, which is there for all
who have eyes to see, provides visual refutation
of this generality expresscd by the
Leader of the Opposition, and the Commonwealth
Statistician's figures on private capital
spending provide the statistical refutation.
Those sweeping statements of the Opposition
Leader, made at the beginning of his
Budget speech, are just not true, or perhaps
I should say are just not correct. Nor is
it correct for him to claim that he did not
have available to him adequate statistical,
information. To give an example, in
discussing the growth of the construction
industry he stated that building approvals
both in total and for new houses and fiats
were lower in May this year than they were
last December, and then went on to state
that there was no more recent information
available to him and went on to take the
Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) to task for withholding
more recent information from the
House. In -fact there was more recent
information available. It is contained in the
statement ' Building Approvals Australia,
June 1968' and it was issued by the Commonwealth
Statistician on 23rd July 1968
before the Budget Speech was dellivered and
long before the Leader of the Opposition
made his speech. But the significant fact is that total building approvals during the
last financial year-this is what we are concerned
with-moved up from $ 546m in the
December quarter to $ 555m in the March
quarter this year to $ 575m in the June
quarter this year, which is a record. It serves
-no purpose for an honourable member or
a Leader of the Opposition to come into
this House and seek to support an argument
by selecting one month's statistics when that
argument is refuted by the year's statistics
and by each quarter's statistics, all of which
were known, ought to have been known
and could have been known to a Leader of
the Opposition.
There are other instances of attempted
sleight of hand arguments dotted throughout
the speech, but they merely support the
general glib approach I have illustrated and
I will, not weary the House with them.
Rather will-I discuss some of the main
Budget features-the economic objectives
of the Budget and the methods chosen to
attain them.
One of the Budget features is the vote
for defence. The Leader of the Opposition
claims that this is not a defence Budget. If
he means that all else is not sacrificed tt
defence, then -he is right: although the very
great sums appropriated for defence do
prevent us from doing many things that we
would wish to do. But if, on the other hand,
he means that the defence capacity of Aus
tralia will not increase during this year a.
a result of the defence vote in this Budget
-his glancing references to defence seemed
designed to give this impression-then he
is demonstrably and, I think, deliberately
wrong. The vote for defence shows the
importance we place on defence, and,
subject to what I say later, the
importance we will continue to place on it.
From the money appropriated' this year
the strength of our regular forces will increase
during the year by some 3,800 and
the strength of the Citizen Military Force,
by some 2,200-odd. 2
During the year, the Navy will take
delivery of 12 coastal patrol boats, the
third guided missile destroyer will join the
fleet in Australia, the third Oberon sul'
marine will arrive in Australia, while wor.)
will -be continuing on the fourth submarine
due to be commissioned next August. 
Mr Barnard-You have not mentioned
the Fill1.
Mr GORTON-Oh, I will. There is a
great deal of defence equipment that is
going to arrive and this is why I am refuting
the impression that -the Leader of the
Opposition sought to give that there would
be no increase in Australia's defence capacity
this year. The aircraft carrier ' Melbourne',
having completed its extensive and
expensive refit, will rejoin the fleet with
its complement of Tracker and Skyhawk
aircraft. Work will be further advanced
on two type 12 frigates at present under
construction, the first of which is due to be
commissioned in something like one year's
time. The Army will take delivery of 27
light aircraft and helicopters and equipment
and arms worth some $ 331m.
Examples of such equipment-and they are
merely examples of such equipment-are
47 armoured personnel carriers, 700 Land
Rovers, 550 21-ton trucks, and ammunition,
arms and so on which it would take
too long to detail.
7) The Air Force-and this, I think,
interested somebody on the other side a
moment ago-will take delivery this year of
24 Fill strike reconnaissance aircraft. It
wvill take delivery of 12 Mirage fighters, of
J6 Macchi jet trainers which have an operaional
capacity, 8 HS748 navigational and
aero-electronic trainers; and during this
financial year the last of the Orion long
range anti-submarine aircraft have, in fact,
already arrived. So any suggestion that we
will not be better defended because of
money appropriated in this Budget is an
untrue suggestion.
As to the future we are now engaged in a
fundamental strategic reassessment. I will
not anticipate its outcome, but I will say
two things.
DFirstly, in the years ahead the amount
spent on defence will grow in volume, and
must grow as the -nation grows and as the
situation in which the nation finds itself
develops. Australia's capacity to fight will
Nncrease and the industrial capacity to back
-, gur fighbting forces will also expand. Defence
will not in any way be neglected.
Mr Devine-Who wrote this? Mr GORTON-I did. Secondly, there are
many competing needs in the years aheadthe
need to build our population, the need
to, strengthen our industrial muscles and
improve our technology, the need to develop
our resources, the need to improve education,
the need to eradicate poverty, and
many other needs. Meeting these needs, Mr
Deputy Speaker, will, in itself, increase and
improve our ability to defend this nation,
and under present international circumstances
we do not intend to sacrifice theseother
needs. We do not intend to seek guns
instead of growth at the cost of stunting
our growth. We will not ignore our other
requirements in order to mobilise for war;
but our forces will grow, their fighting
power will1 grow, the cost of defence will
grow, and this will be regarded as one
important need among many for the nation,
though not as a need which overrides all
else. I move on to consider the question of
welfare. We were told that this is not a
welfare Budget, but it is. It neither. solves
nor pretends to solve in a final way the
complex problems involved in selecting all
those who are in most need and catering to
those needs, but it does take significant steps
towards that solution. In the first speech I
made asking the electorate of Higgins to
select me for the House-which I am glad
to say they did-I said:
No nation can be great unless it seeks not only
materially to progress but also to take care of the
weaker, within it, the aged within it and the ill
within it.
This I believe to be true, and my Government
will make a continuing effort to
achieve those ends.
In health we have taken a great step
forward in this Budget by providing that
insured persons will receive the full hospital
benefits for which they are insured whether
in a public ward, an intermediate ward or
a private ward, no matter how long their
illness may continue and no matter how
long they may be required to stay in hospital.
We have begun a three-tiered attack
on the problem of bed care for those who
are ill. We seek to keep those who need
only light nursing at home by co-operating
and offering financial inducements to the
States in financing and running home nursing..
We are providing more daily allowances,
greater daily allowances, for those 
who need heavy nursing care-for those
who cannot stay at home and need heavy
nursing care in approved nursing homes.
We are offering $ 1m a year to help build
State nursing homes so that -the increased
benefits we offer patients will be the less
likely to be absorbed in increased fees. As
I have said, we have solved the problems
of those who are insured and who suffer
long continued illnesses.
We know there still remains the problem
of enabling all our citizens to insure themselves
without hardship. We know there still
remains the problem of a possible rise in
hospital fees causing a possible rise in
insurance rates, but the Welfare Committee
of Cabinet and the Nimmo inquiry
into hospital funds is working on these
matters now and we are determined to
solve them. In the field of social services
we sought to identify those most in need
and selected, as a first step, families
without bread winners-families of widows
and invalid pensioners, for example-as
those to whom in this first Budget we
should give most. In repatriation we have
quite deliberately devoted the money available
to those who have suffered most from
defending this country and who are, terefore,
likely to be most in need-the totally
and permanently incapacitated ex-soldier,
the intermediate pensioner, the ex-soldier in
receipt of a 100% war pension because
of war caused injuries. There is the
area in which we think it most likely
that need exists and to which we
think we should pay special attention.
We believe that most ex-soldiers would
wish to see available resources devoted to
those who have suffered most in the defence
of their country.
We had perforce-because it is not
possible in 6 months thoroughly to overhaul
a social services structure which has not
been overhauled for some decades-to raise
social service pensions generally across the
board. This will mean that some single and
married pensioners who may need more will
not get more, but this problem, too, we are
determined to work towards solving. Our
aim is a society where the fear of the
crippling cost of illness is removed from
those who are able and willing to contribute
towards removing it through insurance. Our
aim is a social welfare structure which
identifies the most needy and sees that those who have no other means are provided
with enough to live on in a modest, self
respecting way without requiring any other
assistance from outside the pension. Our aim
is to encourage all to work and to save so
that they can live at a standard above that
minimum. What we want to see is that the
aged needy, the ill needy, those really suffering
from some unfortunate circumstances
through no fault of their own, are
adequately pro. vided for by the nation, but
that this should be done without destroying
the incentive to save and without destroying
the incentive to self reliance. These goals
are not easy to achieve, but we have set
our hand to the plough and we will not
turn back. Step by step we will achieve
them. Mr Deputy Speaker, a Budget is designed
so to manage the economy that certain economic
objectives are attained. If we are to
achieve the goals we have set ourselves in
defence, in development and in social welfare,
we must ensure as an essential a
healthy and balanced growth of the economy.
On the economic side this is the
primary aim of this Budget. We must prevent
demand from running to an inflationary
excess, but, equally importantly, we must
ensure that all we can supply and all we
can acquire are demanded and are used
for growth. The general objectives of this
Budget are to achieve this. Firstly, the
Budget seeks to ensure that there will be
in the year ahead a continuation and an
acceleration of that growth and development
which have characterised the year just
past. The Budget seeks to ensure that there
will be full employment opportunities for
the present work force, for the migrant
intake-we have made provision for a
record migrant intake-and for the natural
addition to the work force from within this
country. The Budget seeks also to ensure that these
things will happen without the development
of conditions in which demand for manpower,
materials and goods outstrips production
and supply. For the development
of those conditions does not add to growth;
it adds merely to the cost of growth and
to the difficulty of selling exports and earning
foreign exchange. Those conditions,
once allowed to develop, require for their
correction far more stringent measures than
are required to prevent their development. 
In seeking growth, national development,
accretion to our strength, we do not accept
the view that this can be best achieved
mainly through government spending. So we
have in this Budget cut the rate of growth
in government spending rather than place
more limitations on the growth in private
spending. We believe that true growth
depends on the economic climate created by
a government and on a government assisting
the development by private enterprise
of the resources of the country. We believe
that true growth depends on the amount
of private investment and private saving
within Australia from Australian resources.
If we are to grow quickly, as I believe it
is imperative that we should, this depends
also on the attraction of overseas development
capital, without which we could not
grow as quickly as the times demand. We
have maintained and improved the climate
for growth. We are attaining significant
private savings. We are attracting development
capital. But the full benefit of this,
indeed the continuation of it at its present
level, depends on maintaining relatively
stable costs and prices. This does not mean
-any preoccupation with stability as such, for
stability as such is not enough. One can
Chave stability in conditions of stagnation.
But it is an affirmation of the need to see
that while all our resources for growth are
used to the utmost demands are not created
Cwh ich cannot be met from our production
. and from what we are able to import. We
C. should earn more this year from our
exports. Mr Beaton-You will need to.
Mr GORTON-We will, of course.
Mr Beaton-You will not, you know.
Mr GORTON-The honourable member
is underlining what I am saying-that
we should earn more from our exports.
CaB ucta piint alt hien flyoewa r asa hleaargde , woer cnaenarnloyt arse llya rgoen,
as we had last year. So, ' believing this and
C noting the trend of rising demand in Australia,
we have thought it necessary to
budget for a lower deficit in order to
restrain our expenditure. Two or three
Qimntoemrjeecntti oangso infdriocmat ed, thMe r DOeppuptoys iStipoena kera,
that honourable members opposite may
be thinking along the same lines. This is
the first indication we have had from them as to the economic objectives of this
Budget. The measures we have taken will
mean that the amount of bank credit
pumped into the economic bloodstream
could be reduced by about one-third in
the coming financial year.
Against the background I have sketched.
-are these objectives wrong? Are the
measures taken to achieve the objectives
wrong? On these points the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) was virtually
silent in his speech. There were no answers
to the questions I -have just asked. It
appears that by default the -members of
the Opposition agree that we are right.
This is, Sir, as the Leader of the Opposition
said, the nineteenth successive Budget
introduced by the Liberal-Country Patty
Government. In those 19 years Australia
has been transformed. Our
steel production has increased from
1.2 million tons to 6.3 million tons.
Our output of cement increased from 1
million tons to 3.8 millions tons. Electricity
generated increased from 9,000 million kilowatt
hours to 44,000 million kilowatt hours.
Our population has risen from less than 8
million to 12 million.
Dr J. F. Cairns-Are you responsible for
that too?
Mr GORTON-Not all of it. Real personal
consumption expenditure per head has
increased from $ 760 to $ 1,020. Motor
vehicle registrations have risen from 1 million
to over 4 million. More than 70% of
occupied dwellings in Australia are either
owned by or are being bought by the occupants-
a higher proportion than in any other
advanced country. The number of students
receiving university education has risen
from about 33,000 to about 100,000. Manufacturing
and heavy industries have gone
from strength to strength. [ Extension of time
granted.] I thank the House and again will
not trespass upon its generosity.
Greatly increased production is coming
from the land and new vistas are opening
for Australia from its mineral discoveries.
It we keep the economy on the growth
path which, as a result of these years of
Liberal-Country Party Government have led
to the improvements and increases I have
enumerated, if it follows that path which 
it has followed for the last 5 or 6 years,
a child born today will, on reaching the
age at which it could graduate from high
school, enter a work force in Australia
with an economy two and a half times its
present size. That record of what has been
done, and that promise of what can be
done, provided the administrations which
brought about what happened before continue, is why I say that though Australia
is not yet great in the councils of the world
it is destined so to be. This is no record
of opportunities denied, as we were told;
this is a record of achievement and of
management carried on in a very real sense
for the true welfare of the people of Australia.
This is a record we propose to continue
and improve.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 79. 1968
RENAMING OF U. S. NAVAL COMMUNICATION
STATION AT N. W. CAPE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The United States Communication Station at North West
Cape will be renamed next month in honour of the former Prime
Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
The ceremony will take place on 20 September, within a
few days of the first anniversary of the official opening of the Station.
( This was attended by Mr. Holt on 16 September 1967.)
Dame Zara Holt will be Guest of Honour at the renaming
ceremony, and will unveil a memorial designating the station as the
" United States Naval Communication Station, Harold E. Holt".
The American Ambassador will represent President
Johnson and will read a message from the President. I will also be
attending the ceraEn ony.
The renaming of the Station by the U. S. Government is
a gesture much appreciated by Australia. It is yet another indication
of America's high regard for Harold Holt who, in his relatively short
term as Prime Minister, did so much to strengthen the bonds of
friendship between our two countries.
CANBERRA 29 August 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 80/ 1968
VIS IT OF THE PRESIDENT OF KOREA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
President Park Chung He6 of the Republic of Korea, and
Madame Park, accompanied by an Off icial Suite of 15, including three
Cabinet Ministers, will make a State Visit to Australia from 16 to 19
September. The President and his wife and party are scheduled to
arrive at R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn at 10. 00 a. mi on 16 September
and will be given a 21-gun salute. They will be welcomed by the
Governor-General, Lord Casey and The Lady Casey and by myself and
my wife. The President will leave for Sydney on the morning of
18 September and will depart for New Zealand the following day.
Australia and the Republic of Korea enjoy cordial relations
and share many mutual interests. President and Madame Park will be
welcome visitors to Australia.
PROGRAMMF, FOR CANBERRA
Monday 16 September
Morning: President and Madame Park arrive at R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn
and after a ceremonial welcome leave for the Hotel Canberra-Rex
where they will stay. After a formal call by the Prime Minister
and Mrs. Gorton, the President and Madame Park will leave for
Government House where they will be received by the Governor-
General and The Lady Casey. Later they will meet Heads of
Diplomatic Missions and their wives and then proceed to the
residence of the Ambassador of Korea for Lunch.
Afternoon: No official engagements.
Evening: The President and Madame Park will attend Dinner at Government
House. Tuesday 17 September
Morning: The President visits the Australian War Memorial and lays a wreath
on the Stone of Remembrance.
Madame Park inspects the Marymead Children's Centre.
The President visits Parliament House for discussions with the
Prime Minister and Cabinet Ministers, after which he will be
the guest of the Government at luncheon.
Madame Park will be the guest of Mrs. Gorton for lunch at The Lodge. 
-2-
Afternoon: Evening: The Leader of the Federal Opposition, Mr. Gough Whitlam,
will call on the President.
Dinner given by the President and Madame Park.
Wednesday 18 September
Morning: The President and Madame Park leave for Sydney.
Please Note: Details of President Park's programme in Sydney will be
given by the New South Wales Premier's Department.
CANBERRA 12 September 1968 


14 September 1968
Mr Chairman, Mr Fox, Mr Southey, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is pleasant to be with you tonight. I hope later to have an opportunity to meet more people individually, but while it would be impossible to meet all individually, I do want you to know that it is delightful to be able to meet you collectively, and to meet you in Max Fox's bailiwick. Max has been with us for a long time. He did take over this seat from one of my greatest friends who was then in Parliament, Joe Gullett. He has represented it perhaps not as flamboyantly in some directions but certainly as solidly as Joe did. He is the Chairman of our Private Members! Social Services Committee, and social services, as I think you all know, is something which I believe goes to the heart of the running of P. country that we should take care of those who cannot take care of themselves, and he takes the approach that we must do this without discouraging thrift.
I think that perhaps today in Australia we live in the most exciting time that this country has ever known. There have been changes over past years of course, but on the whole they have been gradual. Was it a hundred years ago perhaps a hundred : years ago don't hold me to it, when Melbourne was served by square-rigged brigs and barquentines, and sailing ships coming slowly from other parts of the world, when we had horse-drawn transport, when those of you who have seen the paintings of what Burke Street used to look like, will know they represented a small and sleepy town, Gradually We became a city, but for so long we stood as a nation with a small population of 4 or 5 million. For so long we stood not really as a nation in our right, but as a nation the people of whom spoke of " home" and meant some other nation, meant Great Britain. My father used to do that, and I daresay there are some people in this room who used to do that, or whose parents used to do that. And it was taken as a natural thing that that was home, and Australia was a different place away from home small, distinct, colonial.
Again, the Second World War made some erosions in this approach, but just recently there has been not a gradual rate of change but a sudden explosion in this nation, an explosion which has not yet reached its height, and the end results of which we can only dream about.
 Who would have thought that suddenly at this point in this nation's history, all the old conceptions would have to be taken out, have to be re-examined, to be re-assessed because the world had changed and we had changed. No longer and I know these things are well known to all but no. longer, as was the case until a short time ago, do we live under the protection of Great Britain and the British Navy. That has gone. No longer do we live in a part of the world where all our neighbours were ruled by European powers British, Dutch, French and where the people themselves who were born there had no say in what happened. That has gone. There are now new nations all around us with new aspirations and new desires; a revolution in the area of the world in which we live is taking place at the same time as a revolution in the kind of protection t o which we used to be able to look.
 Well, that's all right. That happens. That poses difficulties and poses problems because it means we must reassess things and be more prepared to stand on our own feet in matters of defence, and give more of our substance to providing for matters of our own defence and make new approaches to the neighbours so close to us. Those are problems, but the solutions are also with us, or if not with us, within our grasp.
Let me illustrate that by telling you something of what is happening in this country something of what my wife and I saw in one brief visit in one week-.
We travelled around this nation. We saw in Gladstone a town in Queensland which we had visited before and which then was just a small, sleepy village with no future in front of it an alumina plant costing millions of dollars already increased by fifty per cent as to its capacity and now planned to be increased by another fifty per cent; coal loading wharves, a new harbour, and a prospect, provided cheap power can be given, of turning that alumina into aluminium, of smelting nickel, of putting in plants of half a dozen different kinds, of turning a town into a city, and turning a town into a city which has a chance of being a great city where previously there was none. That is happening now.
We went to Mt Isa, long-established of course, but suddenly discovering new ore bodies, owned, I am glad to say, as to about fifty per cent by Australians, and with another hundred years of earning export income for this country, which export income will enable our standards of living, here in Victoria, or in New South Wales, to rise as much as if it were earned here.
We went to Weipa, where the bauxite which has lain for hundreds of years is now being used to be turned into what the world wants, and to earn for us again millions on millions of dollars of overseas export income. On this frontier, as on the other frontiers I will tell you about, we saw the towns that had been built. No longer do people have to go into. the outback with a Coolgardie safe as we used to go and with kerosene refrigerator. Rather there are provided the most modern houses, air conditioning, electric stoves, everything that you would get in this blessed corner of the world, at a charge of about $ 6 a week by the company which provides these to those who work for it.
 We went to Cove, another enormous expansion for Australia, not yet producing, but which when it does produce, will provide in the present under-populated North, another city, another city which must strengthen our own security and help us to cope with the problems I have mentioned before, of defence and of our relations with our neighbours.
 And to Groote Eylandt, to find there again a thriving township, a growing township, and a company employing aboriginals from Groote Eylandt on precisely the same award wages as were available to Australian white-skinned people who went there, including a special hardship allowance for having to live on Groote Eylandt these people having been born there, and having lived all their lives there.
 Then on to the Ord, that still controversial irrigation project, where cotton may or may not be grown successfully, but where as I believe ultimately in this nation, there must be advantage from bringing some hundreds of thousands of acres under irrigation for whatever purpose.
 And then through the West ………….Mt. Newman not yet in producticn because there is a 270-mile railway line to be built by the company, a port to be completed by the company not by the State Government. This has already been done at cost to the company itself, which is mostly owned by Australians. A town built; Goldsworthy sending iron ore down; plans for producing iron pellets from the iron ore, and ultimately, I am sure, another iron and steel industry. There may be an offshoot here in Victoria of an existing iron and steel industry, but there will be another one in the west in time to come.
 And to Port Hedland, and Mt. Tom Price, through to the entirely Australian -owned Western Mining Corporation with some of the richest nickel mines in the world. These things will bring us in, within a measurable time at least one billion dollars a year of export income. Now what does this mean?
 Does this mean that because these things are situated in Western Australia, that Western Australia will get the benefit of this, or does it mean that because some of them are situated in Queensland, that Queensland will get the benefit of this? No it doesn't. What it means in terms of the export income it earns is that the whole of this nation will get the benefit and that a demand can be built up in this nation, all parts of it, which if our own resources cannot meet it, can be met in all parts of it by imports because of the export income so generated. And it means that of all the profits earned by all these companies now and in the years to come, all Australians are fifty per cent partners because the tax taken from these companies is 45 per cent of their earnings and the tax taken from all those who work in them is also flowing initially to the Australian Government and eventually perhaps there may be argument whether in large enough quantities or not but eventually to the other governments scattered around Australia.
 What I want to get into your minds by this very brief and necessarily insufficiently detailed catalogue is that there is now going on in this country something which ten years ago, five years ago, nobody could possibly have thought would happen. And this is probably only the beginning of other things which will be discovered, of other things which will be developed, of things which will be developed by billions of private capital and by, quite possibly, hundreds of millions of governmental capital which must necessarily be provided by the Australian Government.
 This will so transform this country that in a decade, or a decade and a half, we will be able, even more than we are now, to play a full full part in our own defence, we will be able to carry a population perhaps twice as great as that which we have now, and we will be able materially to be significant or more significant is the proper word in the councils of the world. I hope and believe that being more materially significant, we will also be able, if we adopt the proper approach, to present a society in which freedom for the individual is maintained, perhaps more than in any other society in the world, in which racial tensions have no part, as they have a part in too many other countries of the world, in which those who are not strong enough or who have not had the opportunity to provide for themselves in their old age or in their illness will, as a matter of right, be looked after by the community as a whole, properly looked after. A society in which we will have abandoned the philosophy that a pension for old age is not one which is intended to keep somebody but merely an addition to what would come from charity or a family. I hope we can abandon that and indeed, I have abandoned it so that there should be nobody provided with a pension which will not give them at least a modest standard of living so that they do not need blankets to be provided for them in the winter, so that they at least have enough to eat and a roof over their head.
These are the things that we can do because of the changes that are taking place, because of the possibilities that lie before us, and as we meet these challenges, it is essential, and I hope I don't offend anybody by saying this, and if I do, I don't much care, it is essential that we should develop a feeling of nationhood. Everybody wherever they live in Australia should say first, " I am an Australian and I am glad to be an Australian, and I am proud to be an Australian, and I am working for the Australian nation", and this) too, is in a sense a ' change from what would have been the situation ten years ago. I will illustrate it perhaps by a true story of what happened in Mt. Tom Price.
 Mr. Heath was out here, you may remember, and he went up there and he wanted to meet an Australian, and he was taken round by Mr. Court who is Minister for Industrial Development and they went to a gang of men working and he said to one, " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I am a Finn, and he said to another, " Are you an Australian?" and lie said, " No, I come from Germany", and he said to another, " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I come from Holland", but one was quite clearly identifiable as an Australian, and he said to him, " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I am a Victorian", and so he gave up:
But don't get me wrong. It is important to be a Victorian, or to be a New South Welshman, or to be a Western Australian, or to be a Queenslander, provided the overriding feeling is to be an Australian, and that we are going to build a country we will all be proud to belong to and let it be run in its divisions by those who have the responsibility for doing it.
I hope you will all help me in the years ahead to foster this feeling of real nationalism and I believe you will. I believe the Australia. n people want it, and I believe that with it and with the opportunities that lie within our grasp, we will be able to bring into existence on this continent a nation which will redress the sad balances in Europe and some countries in Asia and which, given wise material management and proper spiritual approach to the responsibilities towards individuals, will become a nation the like of which may never have been seen on this earth before.
Question: . As I understand it, the Chowilla Dam was intended to serve three purposes (rest of question mostly inaudible but dealing with purposes of Dam, salinity of the water; and shares by the States) . In recent South Australian elections, I am assured by friends in Renmark that Labor lost that seat solely through the failure of Mr. Dunstan' s Government to assume that the Chowilla Dam project would grow bigger. In the light of an impending Federal election, I have been asked by my friends in Renmark to find out whether the Commonwealth Government has any thoughts upon that particular project
 PM. Thank you. I don't know whether everybody heard that question. It was concerned with the Chowilla Dam which was a dam projected to be built virtually on the South Australian border near a place called Lake Victoria in order to provide a large storage of water which South Australia felt was to its advantage. Because the Murray River Commission agreed to it, that meant that it would be financed not only by the Commonwealth, the State of Victoria, and the State of South Australia, but also by the State of New South Wales, all of whom were to put some water in for it. It was considered wise to see whether ore could not build higher up in the Murray, in the head waters of the Murray, a dam more cheaply which would provide as much water and that that water could be earmarked for South Australia. That is under consideration now by the River Murray Commission and the engineers’ connected with that Commission. I wouldn't undertake to say what the recommendation of the Commission might be. But I think it likely that if the recommendation shows that a dam can be built for half the cost of Chowilla and can provide the water that South Australia wants and can provide it so that it runs all the way down the Murray and flushes it out and doesn't allow the salinity to build up, then I should imagine that the Commonwealth and the Premier of Victoria and the Premier of New South Wales would think that was a better proposition than building the dam at Chowilla.
Q. Question on Russian ships trading with Australia.
PM. I was asked a question on this in the Parliament last week. On Russian ships, the information that was provided to me by the Department was that there were some 13 Russian ships which had come to Australia to pick up wheat or wool or something like that and that only of those ships had in fact called at Hanoi before it came to Australia. There was no information provided nor, to the best of my knowledge do we have any, that that ship had delivered arms to Hanoi, but it had called in to Hanoi, and the legal advice given to us by the Attorney -General) by the Minister for Shipping and Transport and those concerned, was that there was an international convention that unless there was a state of hostilities declared, one did not shut one's ports to the entry of ships from any country, and there was therefore no reason for us to prevent the entry of such ships to Australian ports. I don't know the freight rates at which these ships would carry from Australia wheat or wool or any other of our primary produce, but considering the difficulties in which so many of our primary producers are now placed because they cannot pass on rises in wages and rises in costs the way other people can, I could not regard with disfavour a reduction in freights on produce of Australia to other countries because such a reduction in freights means an increase in incomes to those who produce things on the land in Australia. This must be read against the background that it is necessary to have a shipping conference in order to be sure that you have a guarantee that a number of ships will arrive in order to pick up your produce. Against that background, I think that the lower we can keep overseas freights, the better it is for us as long as it is not just a fly-by-night operation in which somebody rushes in and cuts prices and gets out.
Q. Question on Government policy for the Ord River scheme.
PM. I am not quite clear what you mean by a short term or a long term proposition, but the provision of a dam, the main dam, once it is made is there forever so it is clearly a long term scheme. At the moment, in the Ord there is the initial dam opened by Sir Robert Menzies and they have
been growing cotton there with some success. But it is still a matter of dispute and argument as to whether the growing of cotton is economic or not, that is to say, the growing of the kind of cotton they are growing at the Ord at the moment, but I don't know of any irrigation scheme anywhere in Australia which, at its inception, was not said to be uneconomic, which in many cases did prove for a while to be uneconomic, but which eventually proved to be a great boon to the country. If you have read the history of Mildura, for example, or of Renmark, you will remember that that was controversial. You will remember a lot of people went broke, and you will balance against that the development around Mildura and around Renmark which has since been made possible.
In a country such as ours, where perhaps our greatest disability is a lack of sufficient rainfall and a lack of sufficient water, I personally believe that it would be impossible in the long run to store water in an otherwise dry area which would not become an economic asset to the country. The choice, I think, is not whether one stores water, but where one stores it on a cost effective basis. There is no doubt in my mind at all, for example, that the Nogoa Dam, the Emerald Dam will produce 17 per cent to 27 per cent return on the capital investment in it. That is not a bad return, leaving out altogether the fact that in drought times it-will save in that area cattle and livestock which would otherwise die.
 I wouldn't predict the long term way in which the Ord will continue. It may well be that it will work in with the big cattle stations around and provide protection for the breeding herds there or provide some safflower or some other thing which will help to increase the carrying capacity of the cattle. It may well turn out that they will get a different kind of cotton. It may well turn out that a number of possibilities are open and I cannot believe that in a country as dry as Australia the storage of large quantities of water, the possibility of irrigating thousands of acres, will not, in the long term, be cost effective and be of advantage to us.
 Q. Question on future of Australia's sterling balances.
PM. The question was: In view of our relationship with sterling and the agreement that we have recently made with England to keep a proportion of our balances in sterling, are we guaranteed against a loss from that should England again devalue. Let me answer this way. Sterling has been under considerable pressure, and England felt that in order to strengthen sterling, in order to keep its credibility if I can use that word in the monetary system of the world it needed to have a significant guarantee from central banks. It arranged a $2,000 million guarantees from central banks throughout the world for sterling, but that arrangement was contingent upon those who were prepared to lend that money, or to make that money available if it were required, being assured that there would not be a flight from sterling by those countries who held their balances in sterling.
It was essential in the monetary markets of the world that sterling should not again have to devalue. This would have had repercussions throughout the dollar area, throughout the sterling area. It could have had grave repercussions on international trade, and so England came to us and said, " Will you help us? Will you keep some of your overseas reserves in sterling and will you guarantee to keep them there for a number of years? If you do this and other countries do this, but more particularly if Australia does this, then we will get the 000 million guarantee from the International Bank."
Because we thought it was responsible, because we thought it was to Britain' s advantage, to our advantage, to all trading nations' advantage, we said, " Yes, we will. We will keep a minimum of forty per cent of our total overseas reserves in sterling not all our reserves in sterling but at any given moment there will be forty per cent of our overseas reserves in sterling and we will do this for a period of three years. You can be assured we will do it, and then we will have a look at it again". And perhaps because we are a little tough, I don't know I carried out these negotiations myself I said we would do this but of course we have always been able to raise loans on the British market and there are a number of loans which are falling due for conversion. We would expect to have access to that market in order to convert those loans, . and should for any reason that access be impeded and should we be unable to convert, then by the amount by which we were unable to reconvert our loans we can reduce the sterling holdings that we have. That was a protection for us which I think was necessary. We also felt that we did not wish to have an interruption in the outflow to Australia of British capital for development and for portfolio investment, and we raised that matter and should there ever be a British Government impediment on that outflow, then there is provision for the thing to be discussed at once.
Now coming to the final points you have made as to whether we had protection against a further devaluation of what we agreed to keep . in sterling, the answer is yes, we have, to a very great extent but not entirely. We have received a guarantee that should Britain devalue# then she will repay or she will make available to us the dollar equivalent of sterling before it was devalued up to, I think eighty or ninety per cent of the total amount that we have over there. So we have got a guarantee against devaluation for by far the greater amount of the balances we will keep in sterling. We have got other advantages to ourselves. We are helping England, we are helping sterling and think we are helping the monetary system of the world by doing that.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY u b
,16 i~ 4
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
OVERSEAS INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 16 September 1969]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
by leave -The importance to
Australia of a strong and continuing inflow
of overseas capital has never been questioned
by my Government. During the years
after the end of World War HI, the accumulated
total of private overseas investment
in Australia has been about $ 7,000m. Without
that investment, it would have been
impossible for us to develop as quickly as
history demands we must. Our immigration
programme would have been restricted.
Import replacement and a growing independence
of many overseas commodities would
have been curtailed. And we would not have
grown the industrial muscles which we need.
This overseas flow of investment has
developed resources which were previously
not utilised. It has contributed to the sustained
growth in our export income, and
it has raised the general level of efficiency
and therefore of real incomes in many
sectors of the economy. It confers great
benefits on us and it is essential that it should
continue. It is, however, also true that overseas
capital does not come to Australia
merely because of a wish to confer these
advantages on us. Basically it comes here
because we are a politically stable country,
because there are great opportunities for
new development here, and because there
are good opportunities for profit, and for
growth as the nation grows.
Naturally, at a time when great new
possibilities are opening up in this country
22 179/ 69 we wish to see Australians get as good an
opportunity as possible, within the limits of
their resources and capacities for saving,
for participation in these developments and
growth and profits. This is not an attitude
that can or should be carried to the point
of discouraging people from abroad who
are willing to bring here their money and
their energies and their know-how. But it
is an attitude on the part of the Australian
community which overseas interests have to
recognise. To a very large extent they
already recognise and are prepared to
accept it. And many of them indeed, in
increasing numbers, have seen that it is an
attitude which is basically helpful to them
and can be turned, in a co-operative spirit,
to their and our good account.
As we see it, the central aim of policy
must be to provide, on terms which are fair
as between overseas investors and the Australian
people, the conditions under which
investment will be attracted here. Those
conditions should be such that overseas
enterprises can operate securely and
effectively, making the greatest contribution
they can to our development at a fair
return to themselves. And above all, conditions
under which they can work in
harmony, on even terms, and so far as
practicable on a joint basis and in close
collaboration with Australian enterprises.
We do not believe that we can or should
seek to legislate, in such a complex field. 
But we reiterate our wishes and have little
doubt that overseas companies of repute
will note and respond to those wishes.
Mr Uren-They have not in 20 years.
Mr GORTON-Yes. They are doing it
more and more. GUIDELINES
The Government has, as its general
objective, the encouragement of Australian
participation in and partnership
with, overseas enterprises. And in speaking
of partnership 1 place emphasis upon the
offer of equity participation to Australians
by overseas ventures. As encouragement
towards this end we have recently completed
a review of the restraints imposed on
overseas companies seeking to raise fixed
interest borrowings in Australia-or the
borrowing guidelines as they have come to
be known. These guidelines apply only to
proposed fixed interest borrowings, not to
the raising of share capital in Australia for
the purpose of financing operations by
enterprises incorporated here.
At present overseas interests proposing
any form of borrowing within Australia are
requested to consult the Reserve Bank and
Australian lending institutions are requested
to satisfy themselves that overseas interestsor
companies in which more than 25% of
the shares are held by overseas interestshave
received approvals from the Reserve
Bank covering any proposed borrowings.
This will continue. Generally speaking companies
will be allowed reasonable access to
Australian borrowings for financing normal
requirements of working capital, bridging
finance, and continuing carry-on requirements.
Further, in accordance with the
Government's general policy of ensuring
that every effort is made to increase exports
of Australian goods, ready approval will be
given to borrowings for the specific purpose
of financing export transactions.
In calculating the new local -borrowings
that will be approved to finance fixed assets
in future, the base will be the local borrowings
approved as acceptable as at 30th
June 1969 under the existing guidelines.
Companies that are now regarded as having
been established in Australia for a period
of 4 years or longer will be allowed to
borrow up to 10% of any increase subsequent
to June 1969 in the total of shareholders'
funds, other funds from overseas sources, and local borrowings excluding
those to finance increases in working capital
or to finance exports. For the sake of
brevity I will refer to those amounts as
the increase in funds employed.
Companies wholly overseas-owned and
established in Australia for periods of less
than 4 years wil be allowed local borrowings
of up to 2J% of the increase in funds
employed for each year that they have been
established. Such companies will henceforth
have a new base and a new percentage
applied each year until they have been
established here 4 years. From that time
onwards they will be allowed local borrowings
of up to 10% of subsequent increases
in funds employed. For companies in
which Australians have a share of the
equity, additional borrowings to those set
out above wil be allowed. The extent of
the additional borrowings wil be determined
by the share of the total equity in
the company held by Australians.
To meet requirements of funds additional
to the proceeds of new share issues and the
local borrowings in accordance with the
preceding paragraphs, a company will be
allowed to raise in Australia a proportion
of its total new borrowings which will
accord with the proportion of shares in
the company held by Australians. Australian
equity will be weighted on a four
for three basis so that the proportion for a
company with 30% Australian equity will
be 40%. If for special reasons overseas
loan funds to match local borrowings cannot
be arranged, access to local borrowings
will nevertheless be increased to take
account of the extent of the Australian
equity. In the application of this aspect of the
guidelines, the Reserve Bank will take into
account, for purposes of calculating the extent
of Australian equity, offers to Australians
of new or increased equity ( other
than through convertible notes) which have
not been taken up but which are considered
to have been genuine and reasonable offers
of local equity participation in the company.
If new or increased Australian equity
is offered bona fide through the issue of
convertible notes, the Reserve Bank will
take into account in calculating the extent
of Australian equity one-half the future
increase in Australian equity that would
result if the notes were converted. 
It should be mentioned here that
approval will not normally be granted for
borrowings that would facilitate the remittance
of funds abroad. Consistently, moreover,
with the longstanding exchange control
policy of requiring overseas interests
taking over enterprises in Australia to bring
in cash to the full extent of the purchase
price, approval will not normally be given
to borrowings intended to finance a takeover.
Overseas interests seeking exchange
control for a takeover are reminded
that on completion, the changed
ownership of the enterprise taken over will
necessitate discussions with the Reserve
Bank of the extent of local borrowings by
the enterprise as a whole.
CONVERTIBLE NOTES
I move on to discuss convertible notes.
During the developmental stages of many
major projects there are either no earnings,
or no surplus earnings available for distribution
to shareholders. This, of course, discourages
would-be investors who need a
return on their capital at once and limits
the amount of share capital which those
promoting the venture can raise. Therefore
the alternative of fixed interest borrowings,
with a guarantee of income, has had more
attraction to many lenders as well as to
those seeking to borrow. For the borrower
believes that by offering immediate return
on the investment as income he will increase
the likelihood of borrowing successfully. He
also knows that the interest he must pay on
fixed interest borrowings is cumulatively
deductible for income tax purposes, thus
substantially reducing the effective cost of
his borrowings.
As a step towards attaining our goal of
increasing Australian equity participation in
Australian development, we sought means
of diverting these fixed interest borrowings
into borrowings with a chance of equity
participation. It was for this reason that the
Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) announced in
his Budget Speech our proposal to amend
the Income Tax Law in order to restore
deductibility of interest for income tax purposes
on convertible company securities.
Before 1960 interest on all convertible securities
was deductible; but it became evident
that convertible notes were being widely
substituted for equity issues and that, in
the majority of cases, the plain purpose of
this substitution was tax avoidance. So to protect the revenue, deduction of interest
on all convertible securities was disallowed.
We do not intend to go back to a pre-
1960 situation. We shall minimise the scope
for tax avoidance and will lay down conditions
to which convertible securities must
conform if they are to qualify for deductibility
of interest. These conditions are:
1. The lender or noteholder, and not the
issuing company, has the option to
convert;
2. The noteholder's right to exercise the
option is not deferred longer than 24
months after the date of issue of
the security;
3. The convertible note has a currency
of not less than 7 nor more than
years but the company may make the
terminal date for the exercise of the
option as much as, but not more than,
12 months earlier than the maturity
date of the note;
4. The terms and conditions of the issue
are fixed and not subject to any variation
throughout the period of their
currency; and
5. The conversion price for shares is not
less than 90% of their market price
when the convertible securities are
issued, qr par, whichever is greater.
We believe that these conditions will have
a twofold advantage. They will give companies
adequate scope for using convertible
securities to their best advantage in business
financing and they will offer to Australian
investors a new opportunity to participate
in the equities of overseas-initiated
ventures in Australia, especially those in the
extractive industries. If such ventures issue
convertible'notes to finance development or
expansion, Australians who take up these
securities will have an assured rate of income
during the developmental period of
the project with the option to acquire equity,
and thus share in the growth of the business.
The opportunity that convertible notes opens
up for wider participation by Australians
in the ownership of such overseas-initiated
ventures has been a major consideration in
the decision we have taken to restore tax
deductibility of interest on such convertible
notes. In so seeking to widen opportunities for
Australian participation in ownership we
have sought to ensure that the opportunities
would be real and nQt merely nominal and 
that they will not be too long delayed. We
think that the option to convert to shares
should remain open long enough for ' the
company to have established itself and for
its shares to have value enough for noteholders
to take them rather than opt for
repayment of their loan in cash. It is in
order to provide adequate time for development
and profitability that we propose that
convertible notes should have a currency of
at least 7 years and that the option to
convert should not terminate earlier than
12 months before the maturity date of the
note. We also believe that 10 years will
for all practical purposes be long enough
for convertible notes to remain outstanding.
Certainly, if the development or expansion
of an overseas-initiated venture is to lead to
an issue of equity to Australians, it is
reasonable to expect this to be resolved
within a period not longer than 10 years.
Convertible issues proposed to be issued by
companies in which more than 25% of
the shares are held by overseas interests
will be subject to examination by the
Reserve Bank to determine that the terms
of issue are reasonable and genuine.
COMPANY TAKEOVERS
The question of Australian participation
in Australian development is not confined to
expressing a strong Government desire for
joint ventures, or to encouraging the offer
of equity to Australian shareholders through
borrowing guidelines. The question of protection
of Australian companies against
overseas takeovers also arises. The Government
has given special consideration to this
question of takeovers in general, whether
such takeovers are by overseas or by other
Australian companies.
We have been especially concerned to
prevent the use of takeover methods which
are unfair to a company's shareholders as
a body. I refer to such practices as the
large-scale purchase of shares through
nominees, to first come first served offers
and similar manoeuvres. These problems
were reported on by the Company Law
Advisory Committee and in March of this
year the Standing Committee of Attorneys-.
General agreed to adopt the report in
principle. As the Attorney-General informed the
House on 20th May the Commonwealth
Government has considered that report and has decided to amend the companies Ordinances
of the Australian Capital Territory
and Northern Territory to give effect to the
Advisory Committee's recommendations,
namely: Disclosure
A person having a beneficial interest of
10% or more in the voting capital of a
company listed on an Australian stock
exchange will be required to give notice of
that interest to the company. The company
will be required to enter this information in
a special register which will be available
for public inspection. The new provisions
are to apply to, but without discrimination
against, persons resident, or . companies
incorporated, outside the jurisdiction, as
well as to persons or corporations within
the jurisdiction of this Government. The
proposed provisions are generally in line
with the existing law in the United Kingdom
and the United States but, in view
of enforcement difficulties, are to be
accompanied by certain sanctions not provided
in those countries. A registered holder
who is aware that he holds on behalf of a
non-resident will be required to furnish to
that person information as to the requirements
of the legislation.
THE TAKEOVER CODE
A. The code will be made applicable to
offers by natural persons.
B. An invitation to make an offer-as,
for example, in first come first served
invitations will be treated as if it were
an offer.
C. The criterion for application of the
code will be 15% of the voting power,
instead of one-third as at present.
D. An offerer who increases the price
offered in respect of some shareholders
will be obliged to pay the
increased price to those who have
already accepted.
E. Provision will be made to prevent a
bid for less than the provided limit
of 15% of shares being used to
acquire shares in excess of that limit.
F. It will be an offence for a person to
make a takeover offer, or to give
notice of intention to do so without
having any reasonable or probable
grounds of expectation of being able
to provide the consideration for the
offer or proposed offer. 
G. All aspects of a takeover will be
governed by the law of the State or
Territory in which the offeree company
was incorporated.
It will be noted that the report does not
recommend the prohibition of first come
first served offers as such but the Eggleston
Committee reported that these changes will
ensure that this kind of offer will not escape
the control applicable to other kinds of
takeover offers.
There were additional proposals from the
Associated Stock Exchanges and although
these were not covered by the Committee
because it considered they were outside its
terms of reference, they will be incorporated
in the companies ordinances of the Australian
Capital Territory and the Northern
Territory. I1. One of the amendments will provide
that any amendment to the articles of
association restricting voting rights
shall require the affirmative vote of
not less than 51 in value of the
shareholders of the class of shares
affected. A similar requirement
already exists in the listing requirements
of the Australian Associated
Stock Exchanges. The present position
under the uniform Companies Act is
that any amendment of the articles
of association of a company requires
a special resolution, which in turn,
requires a three-fourth's majority of
members of the company voting in
person or by proxy.
The proposed provision will be in
the nature of an additional requirement,
which will recognise the
significance of a restriction on voting
rights. Shareholders who do not vote
affirmatively for a restriction-including
those who do not vote at
all-will, in effect, be treated as
opposed to the restriction.
2. The other additional, amendment
relates to the notice of intention that
must be given before a takeover is
made. The present position is that this
notice must be given not earlier than
28 days, and not later than 14 days,
before the offer is made. The amendment
will require the notice to be
given not earlier than 42 days and
not later tha 28 dlays. Th4 additional notice provided for by the amendment
will allow an offeree corporation a
better opportunity of considering the
terms of the offer and of taking steps,
if it so desires, to amend its articles of
association to restrict voting rights
attached to shares held by overseas
interests.
I turn now to takeovers which, irrespective
of the method used, mnay be judged
contrary to the national interest. In the past
the Government has acted to preserve
Australian ownership and control of enterprises
which for special reasons of national
interest or importance could not be permitted
to pass into foreign hands.
For many years we have opposed the
entry of overseas banks into the local
industry. And in the areas of television and
radio broadcasting the acquisition of control
by foreign interests has been excluded by
statute. Further statutory control is not at
present contemplated and we do not believe
that it is possible now to define further
classes or fields of enterprise which we
believe should not, in the national interest,
pass to overseas ownership.
However whilst our general experience
over the years has shown that almost all
overseas investment in Australia accords
with our country's interests it has also shown
that there remains a need for the Government
to be ready to guard against the
transfer from Australian control of established
companies in particular areas of
actii'ty. For example some few years ago
there were thought to be attempts by overseas
investors to take over an important
and long-established Australian mining company,
while more recently it was believed
that there was an attempt to take over
one of the principal Australian life assurance
organisations, which would have carried
with it the right to determine the
investment policy of assets totalling some
S700m of Australians' savings.
Although we expect the need to. arise
only on rare occasions as a Government
we reserve the right to do all in our power
to prevent particular takeovers when, in the
circumstances of the case, we would consider
it to be bad in the national interest.
The strengthening of the takeover code
through amendment of the Uniform Companies
Act should ensure not only that takeover
proposals proceed in a fair and open 
manner, but also that the Government will
have more time to intervene, or express a
Government view, if it considers the
national interest calls for it.
To sum up, Mr Speaker, we seek to encourage
the flow of overseas capital into
this country. We seek to make it crystal
clear that we look with favour on joint
enterprise and on the offer of Australian
equity in new ventures-and that we will
be disturbed where the opportunity for Australian
participation is not given. We seek
to encourage the growth of Australian
equity by offering more access to the fixed
interest borrowing as Australian equity in a
company increases. We seek to protect
companies against unfair methods of takeover
and to reserve to ourselves the right
to intervene in such takeovers when we
consider it is in the national interest, and
we seek the acceptance of the basic principles
of a code of good corporate behaviour.
Such a code was adopted by the
Canadian Government three years ago.
Speaking of overseas companies, and paraphrasing the language to our own environment,
I think there are three essentials for
which we look as a nation:
1. A high degree of Australian autonomy,
with Australian citizens participating
on the boards of directors
and in the management of companies;
2. The objective of a financial structure
which provides opportunity for equity
participation by Australians;
3. A sensitivity to the reasonable
national ' aspirations of Australia
which whilst somewhat indefinable in
detail are known quite well by all
those in this House and by anybody
who is at all sensitive to these aspirations,
and who as a company has
intentions of investing in this nation.
By the means outlined in this speech we
believe that we will, without interfering
with the flow of capital we need so badly,
offer considerable encouragement to greater
Australian equity participation and that,.
Sir, is the objective of this Government
and, I believe, of most of the citizens of
this country.
Printeo for the Government of the Commonwealth by w. G. MwuRRAaYt the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



STATE VISIT BY PRESIDENT PARK( OF KOREA
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 2SP98 N
17 SEPTEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mvr John Carton_
Mr President, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This function in our National Parliament gives the opportunity
to do you and your country honour. You represent a country with a history
which goes back much further than ours, and : you represent a country which,
in the course of that history, has had to face much harsher tests than ours.
You have known forcfign rule which we have not. You have
suffered direct armed aggression on your own people and your own land
which in any comparable way we have not, arid you are still subject to the
threat of aggression and indeed to the infiltration of armed commandos with
missions to kill those significant in your country including, Sir, yourself,
In recent history, you gained self-government in 1945,
after some thirty-six years of foreign domination which you could not, by
force of arms, resist or overthrow, but which you never at any time accepted
in your hearts and minds, which you consistently rejected and which ultimately
you managed to see removed.
Then, within but a short time of that, you faced an incursion
across your Northern border of well-armed, well-organised, well-prepared
military formations seeking to subject your government or the Government of
South Korea and the South Korean people by force. It took years for that
attack to be repulsed and for those who made it to be sent back from whence
they came. We remember the great sacrifices and devotion which the South
Korean people made themselves to throw back this assault and which the
United Nations, to its credit, helped and which we, as a nation, contributed
towards, as I believe, to our honour and to the honour of the United NatJons.
You are, Sir, as I have said, still challenged, and I believe
that that challenge is real. We have seen in recent weeks what can happen in
a country when the forces of suppression can walk in and can deny the
expression of the free will of the people of that country. What we saw happen
in Czechoslovakia could have happened and could happen in South Korea.
You have got to face this threat and are facing it a nation of 30 million
people with 600, 000 troops under arms because of this ever-present pressing
threat. You are providing those twin deterrents against aggression
and against subversion the willingness and ability to resist by military
force the breaching of a frontiiqr or a demarcation line, and the determination
to improve the economic living standards of the peoples of your country so that
by these both methods you will together prevent the dangers which threaten
you. 2 
-2-
We have admiration for both of these efforts on your part,
great admiration in particular for the determination you are showing to
increase your economic capacity and the living standards of your people.
Your first Five-Year Plan, I am told, was a great success. Your G NP
rose by an average of something like 10 per cent a year, and as a result, the
employment capacity and the wage capacity for the people of Korea rose with
it. Your second Plan is now off to what appears to be a
magnificent start. You are working towards complete self-sufficiency by
1980, and that, bearing in mind the war-torn recent history of your nation
and the way it had to be lifted up industrially by its bootstraps is, as has
been said in one of our journals, something that approaches an economic
miracle. And so you are engaged in these two great tasks, but you
have not only a determination to resist aggression, not only a realisation
that wherever a demarcation line or a border is violated that is a danger to
all small countries, not only an insistence on providing self-help in your
economic growth, but also beyond that an eye for the future in that it was on
your country's initiative that ASPAC came into being, That is an organisation
of which we in Australia are proud to be a foundation member and which is
designed towards regional co-operation in economic fields and in other fields
for the good of all and which will be far more effective and far more able to
advance the good of all if that day ever comes when those threats posed to
the region by communist aggression are removed.
For all these things, for all these efforts on your part, we
in Australia and the Australian Parliament are proud to do you honour.
Sir, you are a very welcome guest. 


 P. M. No. 81/1968
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, will make an official visit to Western Australia at the end of this month at the invitation of the Premier, Mr. David Brand.
The Prime Minister, accompanied by Mrs. Gorton, will begin the official visit on Sunday, 29 September. He will return to Canberra on Thursday, 3 October.
The itinerary includes a civic reception by the Lord Mayor of Perth, and lunch with the Premier and West Australian Cabinet Ministers. Mr. Gorton will also attend receptions given by the Perth Chamber of Commerce and by the Liberal Party, and address the 68th Annual General Meeting of the West Australian Chamber of Manufactures.
He will inspect the Kwinana industrial area and the Cockburn Sound installations, visit the port of Fremantle and attend a civic lunch given by the Mayor of Fremantle.
On Wednesday, 2 October he will drive to Bunbury, 115 miles from Perth.
Mr. Gorton said today that he was looking forward to the official visit, and the opportunities it would offer to see developments in the Perth area and to meet and talk with a cross section of the community. This would be a valuable sequel to his recent visit to development projects in the north west of the State and to Kambalda.
CANBERRA18 September 1968


P. M. No. 82/1968
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton( Commenting on Senator Gair's Press Statement)
I have made it clear that the Government wishes to provide  the Parliament with information on the arrangements made to purchase F-111's I have also stated that we will not provide information which has a security content or which is confidential between our Government and another Government should that Government object to such confidential information being made public.
Last night Senator Gair joined with the A. L. P. in the Senate in demanding, in effect, that such confidential documents should be made public whether or not the Government of the U. S. A. agreed and whether or not this disclosure would adversely affect our relationship with that Government now and in the future.
I regard this as quite irresponsible and can assure Senator Gair that whatever resolution he may move and whether or not the A. L. P. support him, information in this category will not be made public by this Government under any circumstances.
Meanwhile arrangements have been made for Australia and the United States to examine the documents relating to purchase arrangements to determine what can, by agreement, be disclosed.
CANBERRA18 September 1968



2 5SEP 1960
STATEMENT BY THE PRiME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
J. G. GORTON IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
CANBERRA
19TH SEPTEMBER 1968
AUSTRALIAN LOAN IN GERMANY
The Commonwealth Treasurer, Mr McMahon, today comple~ ed
a successful round of negotiations and signed a loan agreement in
Frankfurt, Germany, with the Deutsche Bank for the issue of DM 200 million
6 million) Commonwealth securities maturing in 1974. The Deutsche
Bank will arrange for the private placement of the securities with fina ncial
institutions. The terms and conditions of the loan were settled with the
approval of the Australian Loan Council. The securities will have an
interest coupon of 6. 25 per cent, and Will be issued at 99. 5 per cent to
give a yield to maturity of 6, 35 per cent. The net proceeds of the loan
will be paid to the Commonwealth on 30 September. The foreign currency
proceeds will be added to Australia's international reserves and the
Australian currency equivalent will be applied to the Commonwealth
Government's share of the 1968-69 works and housing programme approved
by the Australian Loan Council.
The Commonwealth has not previously borrowed for works and
housing programmes for periods of less than ten years. However, with
the pubki loan markets in New York and London effectively closed to
Australia because of high borrowing costs, the amount tha t could be
obtained through long-term loans is limited and advantage has been taken
of the availability of medium-term finance in Europe. This will add
usefully to our oversea loan raisings this year. The Government regards
this as a highly successful outcome which reflects great credit on
Australia's status as a borrower in the European market.
The Commonwealth has previously raised two public loans in
Germany, each for DM 100 million 3 million), in October 1967 and
July 1968, through underwriting syndicates led by the Deutsche Bank. In
addition a loan of DM 16. 8 million 8 million) was arranged with the
Deutsche Bank in February last for Trans-Australia Airlines. 



1i JOINT COMMUNIQUE ISSUED BY HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT PARK
CHUNG HEE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA AND THE RT. HON.
J. G. GORTON, PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
At the invitation of His Excellency the Right
Honourable Lord Casey, G. C. M D. S. O M. C.,
K St J Governor-General of Australia and the Lady Casey,
His Excellency Park Chung Hee, President of the Republic
of Korea and Madame Park arrived with their ( aughter,
Miss Park Keun Hye, in Canberra on September 16, 1968, for
a four day state visit to Australia. His Excellency the
President was accompanied by Choi Kyu Hai, Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Lee Kae Soon, Minister of Agriculture
and Forestry, Mr. Hong Jong Chul, Minister of Culture and
Information, Mr Park Joon Kyu, Chairman of the Foreign
Affairs Committee, National Assembly and Mr. Lee Hu Rak,
Secretary-General to the President and other high ranking
officials of the Government of the Republic of Korea.
2. During the visit, His Excellency the President
of the Republic of Korea and Madame Park were received by
His Excellency the Governor-General of Australia and the
Lady Casey. The two heads of State exchanged views on
matters of common interest. His Excellency the Governor-
General presented to His Excellency the President ti e
heads of diplomatic missions in Canberra.
3 His Excellency President Park also met the Prime
Minister of Australia, the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, M. P.,
and they had an exchange of views on matters of mutual
interest and common concern in a most cordial atmosphere.
His Excellency the President also had discussions with 
Australian Cabinet Ministers. Korean Ministers who
accompanied the President also had discussions with their
Australian counterparts.
4. Noting with satisfaction that the solid bonds of
friendship traditionally existing between the two countries
have been further strengthened in recent years through
increased co-operation between the two countries in various
fields political, economic, military, social, cultural
the two Governments expressed their determination to
continue to co-operate fully with each other in the pursuit
of their common objectives of a secure and lasting peace
based on freedom, justice and prosperity.
In reviewing the current situation of the world,
particular attention was paid to recent developments in
Asia and the Pacific. Problems arising out of developments
on the Chinese Mainland were discussed and it was
agreed that the situation was uncertain and should be
closely followed.
6. In describing the situation in Korea President
Park informed Prime Minister Gorton of the two-phase
efforts the Government and people of the Republic of
Korea are making to defend their nation and to continue
the rapid development of the national economy.
7. The Australian Government noted with serious
concern the infiltration of north Korean armed agents
into the Republic of Korea, including the raid directed by
31 armed agents upon the official residence of the 
President. It was agreed that such acts of aggression
directly threaten the peace and security of the Korean
peninsula and the area surrounding it. Recalling that it
was a party to the declaration of 1953 by which the
sixteen powers which had participated in the Korean War
had affirmed that if there was a renewal of armed attack
challenging again the principles of the United Nations
they would again be united and prompt to resist, the
Australian Government also affirms its support for the
Republic of Korea in its efforts to develop and strengthen
its national economy and ensure the prosperity of the
Korean people.
8. Taking note of the strong aspirations of the
Korean people for their national re-unification, the
Australian Government re-affirmed its support for the
United Nations objective to bring about by peaceful means
the establishment of a unified, independent and democratic
Korea under a representative form of government. The
President expressed his appreciation of Australia's
continued work as a member of the United Nations Commission
for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.
9. It was agreed that both countries should
continue to maintain the close accord already established
in all appropriate international organisations and
conferences. The continued constitutional progress in the
Republic of Viet-Nam and the progress being achieved in 
social and economic fields were noted with particular
satisfaction. It was agreed that this progress was all
the more notable for having taken place while the war
continued and the people of the Republic of Viet-Nam
were subjected to systematic terror and violence. The
determination of the two countries to play their part in
close consultation with their allies in assisting the
people and Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam to
defend themselves until a just and honourable peace is
attained was re-affirmed.
11. Discussions were also held on the present talks
in Paris between the representatives of the United States
and North Viet-Nam. It was regretted that the talks have
so far failed to make progress and that the North Vietnamese
continued to maintain an inflexible position. It was
hoped, nevertheless, that the meetings would lead to
substantive talks, in which the Republic of Viet-Nam
would naturally play a leading part. It was also agreed
that all the other allied countries should participate
in any settlement of the conflict.
12. The spirit of the Manila Summit Conference of
October 1966 and the commitment embodied in its joint
communique and in the joint communiques issued at
subsequent meetings of the allies were also re-affirmed.
In this regard it was agreed that continued close
consultation between their Governments through diplomatic
channels should be maintained. 
13. Particular satisfaction was expressed at the fact
that the co-operative system among the free nations in the
Asian and Pacific region established within the framework
of ASPAC had served to strengthen the sense of common
destiny and bonds of solidarity among nations in the region.
With reference to the Third Ministerial Meeting of ASPAC
which was held in Canberra in July/ August, particular
satisfaction was expressed that the inaugural meeting was
recently held in Seoul of the Executive Board of the
Cultural and Social Centre established under ASPAC.
14. President Park valued highly the significant role
that Australia has been playing in the common efforts of
nations of the region to promote co-operation in economic,
technical, cultural and social fields and to maintain
peace and security in the region.
The greatest importance was attached to economic
development and trade expansion in order to improve living
standards and human welfare of the nations of the region.
The progress already achieved by ECAFE, the Asian Development
Bank and similar Asian regional organisations in
promoting co-operation between countries in the area was
welcomed and the two Governments agreed to continue their
support for the work of these bodies. In this connexion
they noted that the Korean Government would host the 19th
Meeting of the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee in
Seoul in October.
16. Particular importance was attached to close
economic co-operation between the two countries. It was 
agreed that both Governments would see value in the
exploration of the possibility of commercial joint ventures
between Korean and Australian concerns, so as to serve
the interests of both countries, in such fields for example
as the development of the live stock industry in Korea,
of forest resources in Papua and New Guinea, and fisheries
in the waters off Papua and New Guinea. It was also agreed
that the development of air services would be desirable
between the Republic of Korea and Australia by their
respective national airlines when this proved to be
practicable. 17. It was noted that the Trade Agreement between the
two countries was operating smoothly and it was agreed
that trade promotion talks should be held in the near
future in order to discuss ways and means of further
expanding trade between the two countries. In particular
both Govenments agreed to encourage exchanges of visits
by businessmen between the two countries recognizing
that mutual trade can best be fostered by such closer
business contact.
18. Considering that the friendly relations and cooperation
between the two countries have been greatly
enhanced by exchanges in technical and cultural fields,
it was agreed to conclude an agreement for cultural and
technical co-operation between the two countries as soon
as practicable. The Australian Government undertook to
examine the possibility of providing a measure of technical
assistance in connection with the Korean Government's
programme for the development of the live stock industry. 
19. President Park was deeply impressed by the
remarkable accomplishments of the Government and people
of Australia, and by their vitality, freedom and resourcefulness.
He expressed his personal admiration for the
courage and wisdom shown by the Australian people throughout
their history in dedication to the common ideals of
peace, justice and democracy. Recalling the sacrifices
the armed forces of Australia made to help defend freedom
in Korea during the Korean War, President Park conveyed the
sincere gratitude of the Korean people to the people of
Australia for their contribution.
The Australian Government expressed its admiration
for the wisdom and courage with which the Government
and people of the Republic of Korea had successfully completed
their first five-year economic development plan, thus
attaining rapid economic development, and noted further
with satisfaction that the current second five-year
economic development plan was also being efficiently
executed. 21. Deep sympathy was expressed at the drought
suffered by the people of Korea in the past two seasons
and the Australian Government informed the President that
in addition to the aid already being provided by Australia
to the Republic of Korea under the Colombo Plan a gift
of 10,000 metric tons of wheat would be made this year.
President Park indicated on behalf of the Korean Government
and people his deep appreciation of this gift and of other
aid being provided by Australia. 
22. President Park stated that his Government
extended its cordial invitation to Prime Minister Gorton
to visit the Republic of Korea at a date to be mutually
agreed and Prime Minister Gorton accepted the invitation
with pleasure.
23. President Park expressed his deep appreciation to
the Government and people of Australia for the warm welcome
and cordial reception they extended to President and Madame
Park and his suite during the visit.
CANBERRA 19 September 1968. 



RENAMING OF U. S. NAVAL COMMUNICATION
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
I must begin, your Excellency, by thanking the President of
the United States, through you, for the message, which through you, he
delivered to us today. It is a unique thing for a United States Naval
Communication station of this kind to be named after the national of another
country. But I thin'k for a number of reasons, it is entirely fitting that in
this case it should be so.
For one thing, it is fitting because I do not think that there was
any Australian statesman or any statesm ' an from any other nation who
established such warm, close, personal relations with a President of the
United States as were established by Harold Holt. And this is a matter
which goes beyond a mere personal satisfaction in such relations and
extends into national benefits that flow from them.
It is fitting too because this station, as part of a giant network
keeping watch and ward on all the oceans of the world, is a station which
will enhance the military capacity, not only of the United States but also
of our own nation, Australia.
Military caepacity can be used in many ways. It can be used to
subjugate peoples and overthrow feeedom as we saw it used by Hitler and
Mussolini. It can be used to stifle freedom of expression as we recently
saw it used in Czechoslovakia. It can be used for invasion and aggression
as we saw it used in Korea, and as we are seeing it used by North Viet
Nam in South Viet
But military capacity can be used in other ways. It can be used
as a shield for freedom, It can be used as a method of deterring aggression,
of maintaining freedom, of succouring the weak. An d the United States
and Australia has used, and in my belief will always use, its military capacity
merely for the latter purposes. So it is fitting again that these purposes
should be served by a station named after a man who had these ideals as
those he would wish to see all over the world.
Finally, Sir, it is also fitting that this should be a Naval
Communication Station because the late Prime Minister was a man who loved
the sea and who was happiest when close to the sea.
We feel honour, Sir, at what you have done. We feel confidence
in what this station will help our countries to shield, and we remember that
a year agq the man after whom this station was named stood here and opened
the complex. I hope you will convey to your President the gratitude of the people
of Australia that this gesture has been made, and the resolution of the p eople
of Australia that in co-operation with the United States, we shall seek to
secure that peace with freedom of which, Sir, you have spoken.
I thank you. 



FOR PRESS (~ OT16 P. M. NO. 83/ 1968
AMENDMENT TO A. C. T. COMPANIES ORDINANCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
There are market repoirts of unusually large purchases of
shares in an Australian life insurance company M. L. C. Ltd. Shares so
bought have been registered in the names of nominee companies. They now
represent approximately 36 per cen~ t of the total issued capital of the
Company and the rate of purchasing has recently risen so dramatically as
to suggest the possibility of a " raid" designed to take over the Company.
Because the real buyers of the shares are cloaking their identity, and are
believed to be foreign buyers, this has caused concern to the Government.
The Australian insurance company concerned controls
$ 750 million worth of Australian and New Zealand savirV3 accumula-re-d over
the years and its invested funds are increasing at the rate of $ 75 million
a year as a result of savings by Australians a nd New Zealanders.
The Government does not believe that this accumulated
Australian capital should be allowed to fall under the control of anonymous
and probably foreign interests.
We therefore intend to amend the A. C. T. Companies Ordinance
in relation to life insurance companies to require that nominee shareholders
must reveal to the Insurance Commissioner the identity of the beneficial
owners of the shares, and to rostrict persons who are not residents of
Australia, or companies which are not controlled by residents of Australia,
from holding more than a certain percentage of shares in the Australian
Company. The amending ordinance will operate so as to redress the
effect of any transactions taking place after tochy and will provide a
transitional period within which existing shareholdings are to be adjusted.
The Government believes this action will protect the interests
of the policy holders. We also believe that Australians will share our
determination that control over their Australian savings, and decisions on
the investment of their Australian savings, shall remain in the control of
an Australian company and will not be allowed to fall under the control of
overseas interests.
CANBERRA, 22 September 1968 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
DROUGHT RELIEF
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 September 1968]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-I recently received representations
from the Premiers of New South
Wales and Victoria requesting the continuation
of Commonwealth reimbursement of
State expenditures on drought relief measures.
The Premier of New South Wales
asked for a continuation of Commonwealth
payments for drought relief measures in the
south east corner of the State and in the
Cobar district. The Premier of Victoria
asked for the continuation of drought assistance
for financing employment grants in
Victoria. Honourable members will recall that, in
my statement of 20th August 1968 in this
iuse, I pointed out that, contrary to the
f~ imal arrangements in relation to natural
disaster relief assistance, the Commonwealth
has been meeting virtually the whole cost
of State expenditure on drought relief mea-
O sures. These arrangements have undoubtedly
been the most generous ever designed to
meet such a situation. I also announced
that, as the drought which has been affecting
most of the eastern half of the Australian
continent had virtually ended, certain
cut-off dates for this assistance had been
set. I added that, if a State felt it necessary
to continue any particular measure after
the cut-off date for Commonwealth assistance,
it would be reasonable for the State
to meet the limited expenditure likely to
be involved. At the same time, I made it
23104/ 68 clear that, if drought conditions were to
re-emerge on a large scale, the Commonwealth
would be prepared to consult with
the States regarding the need for any new
arrangements which might be necessary.
Very favourable seasonal conditions exist
in most of eastern Australia and the areas
which are still drought affected make up
only a small proportion of that area. The
drought has not re-emerged generally on a
large scale. The Commonwealth therefore
does not feel able to continue the existing
scheme. We have decided however, that
the Commonwealth should make a contribution
towards meeting the special problem
which exists in New South Wales where
the south east corner and Cobar districts
are still very seriously affected by continuing
drought and which might be regarded
as areas of natural disaster. In order
to help the State Government alleviate hardship
being experienced by the people of
these regions, I have therefore informed
the Premier of New South Wales that the
Commonwealth will be prepared to meet
half the cost in this financial year of relief
measures which his Government may find
it necessary to continue in these areas, until
the drought breaks.
Victoria is not drought stricken and the
seasonal outlook in that State is generally
very good. There is no doubt that drought
conditions have disappeared over virtually
the whole of the State. Because this is the
0 
situation, 1 have informed the Premier that
we cannot meet his request for the continuation
of drought assistance for financing
employment grants beyond the end of this
month. However, I would remind honourable
members that, under existing arrangements,
the Commonwealth will be reimbursing
the States during the whole of
1968-69 for the cost of certain other relief
measures incurred after 30th September. I
refer here, in particular, to carry-on loans
to farmers who have established a case for
such assistance before 30th September and
to restocking loans to farmers who established
a case for such assistance before 31st
December. In addition, the Commonwealth
will be reimbursing the States for freight
concessions given prior to the end of
December on the transport of stock back
from agistment or for restocking purposes.
Under these arrangements a further advance of $ 1m is now being made to Victoria
bringing our total payments to that
State to $ 13m including $ 5m this financial
year. I would repeat that the four States which
suffered from the drought have been informed
that the Commonwealth will be
prepared to consider new arrangements if
drought conditions re-emerge on a large
scale. I am sure we all hope that this will
not be necessary and that the pockets of
drought which still remain in New South
Wales will be relieved-and that soonby
good general rains in those areas.
I present the following paper:
Drought Assistance-Ministerial Statement, 2
September 1968-
and move:
That the House take note of the paper. 0
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH By
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
F Ill AIRCRAFT
Ministerial Statement
[ From ihe ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 September 19681
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-Mr Speaker, I lay on the table certain
documents pertaining to the purchase of
* Fl111 aircraft and -ask leave of the House
to make a statement concerning the samne.
Mr SPEAKER-There being no objection,
leave is granted.
Mr GORTON-Mr Speaker, I have told
the House that the Government wishes to
provide Parliament with as much information
as possible concerning the arrangements
made for the purchase of Fill aircraft. I
have made it clear that we will not disclose
any document or part of any document
which has a security content, and I have
stated that we will not disclose any docu-
Snt which, being confidential between
* aGovernment of Australia and the
Government of the United States of
America, cannot be disclosed without agreement
between us; at least, cannot he dis-
* closed without agreement between us without
adversely affecting the relations between
our two governments.
These limitations stand, and will stand.
We have had an examination made of
the documents and we have had consultations
with representatives of the United
States Government who have come from thle
United States to discuss with us the disclosure
of the documents relating to the
whole of this transaction. As a result, as
I have said, I lay on the table certain documents
which I believe satisfy the proper
requirements of a House of Parliament to
23 105/ 68 be informed as to the spending of public
money. These documents include a Memorandum
of Understanding dated 19th October
1963 and signed by the then United
States Secretary of Defence and the then
Australian Minister for Defence. These
documents are laid here except that Annex 1
has been excluded from the documents on
security grounds. On examination of the
documents it will be clear which Annex has
been excluded on these grounds.
The second document is a letter of 23rd
October 1963 from the then Minister for
Defence to the then United States Secretary
of Defence accepting the proposal contained
in the Memorandum of Understanding.
The third document is a letter of 2nd
November 1963 from the then United
States Secretary of Defence to the then
Minister for Defence of Australia confirming
these arrangements.
The fourth document is a letter from the
then Minister for Defence of Australia to
the then United States Secretary of Defence
giving reasons for deciding not to pursue
the proposal to use B47 aircraft as interim
aircraft. The fifth document is the agreed technical
arrangements between the United
States and Australia for the purchase of the
aircraft concerned.
These technical arrangements provide:
for fabrication of our aircraft and equipment
to the same documentation and quality
standard~ s as those required for the United 
States aircraft; for the established United
States Department of Defence contracting
procedures to be used in relation to the purchase
of our own aircraft; for production
or work on our aircraft to be incorporated
in or placed on the same terms as contracts
let for the United States Government;
for inspection of all supplies for our
aircraft to be done to the same extent and
in the same manner as is inspection of
supplies for United States aircraft; and ( e)
for an Australian Project Manager to be
appointed with direct responsibility in conjunction
with the United States Project
Manager for initiating and monitoring all
implementation of actions under the arrangements.
The remaining documents laid upon the
table are minutes of meetings, from which
some extractions have been made, and
paragraph 4 of the last document reaffirms
-and I draw the House's attention to thisthe
ceiling price of $ 5.95m on the basic
Fill configuration which has already been
announced, subject only to the conditions
already announced in this House as to
various ways in which escalation may occur.
As to the subject of these documents, the
aircraft itself, I will at this stage say only
two things. If it is agreed that Australia
needs a long range strike bomber-and I had
gathered it was generally agreed that we did
-then the Fill fulfils the requirements of
the Australian Air Force staff for such a
bomber in all respects.
Mr Beaton-Does it now?
Mr GORTON-Yes, it does now. It
fulfils the requirements of the staff of the
Australian Air Force who are the military
advisers and who should know what is
required in all respects now just as much
as they did then. I know of no other
available bomber that does fulfil the requirements
of the Australian Air Force staff. If
it is agreed-and I would hope it were
agreed, but if it is not, then let us hear it
later-that Australia needs a bomber which
will fulfil these requirements of the Australian
Air Force staff far into the future,
instead of a bomber that only partly fulfils
our requirements, and that for a limited
time only, then this aircraft meets that need
better than any other available aircraft that
I know. Mr Connor-God help us.
Mr Curtin-Do you think they will last
long enough? Mr GORTON-I am not expressing my
own opinion. I am expressing the opinion
of the Air Force of Australia who advise
the Government and of whom I would have
thought the Opposition would take some
notice. Let me repeat: If it is agreed-and
perhaps it is not, and if it is not then let
those honourable members opposite who
are interjecting say so-that Australia needs
a bomber which will fulfil the requirements
of the Royal Australian Air Force staff far
into the future instead of a bomber that
only partly fulfils those requirements, such
as those that the Leader of the Opposition
( Mr Whitlam) has mentioned in this place,
and that for a limited time only, then this
Fill meets that need better than any other
aircraft which has been mentioned in th
House at any stage of this debate.
Mr Speaker, I believe that the present
difficulties into which this aircraft has run,
which are no greater than the difficulties
of any other aircraft at this stage of its
development, will be overcome.
Mr Bryant-You have been saying that
for 10 years.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The House will
come to order. Interjections are coming
from both sides of the House. I again
remind honourable members that all interjections
are out of order. The honourable
member for Wills will restrain himself or I
will deal with him.
Mr GORTON-Thank you, Mr Speaker.
I dare say that the honourable member for
Wills might be restrained by the expert
opinion of the Royal Australian Air Force,
although I suppose this would be a matter
that would be subject to debate. I would
not be the least surprised if the honourab,
member for Wills thought he was move
militarily competent than the Government's
RAAF advisers, but I would be surprised if
many people would agree with him. I believe
that the difficulties which this aircraft has
encountered, which are no greater at this
stage than any other aircraft has encountered,
will be overcome. If that is so, Australia
will have what I admit is a highly
expensive aircraft but an aircraft which will
rank among the most effective of any aircraft
in any air force in the world. On any
criterion the second best is not good enough
for any defence requirement that we have,
and it is not too expensive for a nation
which needs the best in the world. I present
the following papers:
F111I Aircraft-Documents relating to purchase.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS r
9 OCT 1968
-8RARI PM, No. 84,1968
DEATH OF SIR NORMAN BROOKES
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr john Gorton
Sir Norman Brookes was one of those rare men
who become a legend in their own lifetime. His name has been a
household word synonymous with sporting achievement for as long as
most Australians can remember.
His skill as a tennis player helped establish
Australia's sporting reputation, and he continued to make a contribution
to sport throughout his long life. He was an outstanding Australian whose
efforts in many fields will long be remembered.
I extend my deepest sympathy to Dame Mabel and
other members of the family.
CAB E RRA,
28 September 1968 


P. M. No. 79/1968 
The United States Communication Station at North West Cape will be renamed next month in honour of the former Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt.
The ceremony will take place on 20 September, within a few days of the first anniversary of the official opening of the Station. ( This was attended by Mr. Holt on 16 September 1967.
Dame Zara Holt will be Guest of Honour at the renaming ceremony, and will unveil a memorial designating the station as the " United States Naval Communication Station, Harold E. Holt".
The American Ambassador will represent President Johnson and will read a message from the President. I will also be attending the ceremony.
The renaming of the Station by the U. S. Government is a gesture much appreciated by Australia. It is yet another indication of America's high regard for Harold Holt who, in his relatively short term as Prime Minister, did so much to strengthen the bonds of friendship between our two countries.
CANBERRA29 August 1968



68TH ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF
WEST AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
PERTH, A" er~ ISEPTEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, _ NfC16n Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Premier, Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen:
This, I think, is the fourth, or possibly the fifth address
that I have made today in my visit to Western Australia. It will consequently
not be very long and, for those of you who may have been attending any of
the other occasions, I daresay it might tend to be a little repetitive.
First, Sir, may I say this. In the course of an address to
myself and to the Premier you said rather more nice things than nasty
things, which is quite pleasant but not altogether usual, but you did, and
for that I want to express my appreciation. But you also raised some
interesting points and I know that since you always, quite properly and
rightly believe that it is a good thing for the Chambers of Mauufactures
and others to tell governments what they ought to do, so you would not
object too strenuously if occasionally a representative of a government
suggested to Chambers of Manufactures what perhaps they ought to do.
This may have a little more relevance to this particular
State of Australia at the present time than it would have for many others.
You raised the question quite early in your speech of Commonwealth/ State
financial relations and how important they were, with perhaps some tinge
of a suggestion that Commonwealth/ State financial relations ought perhas~-
to be revised. But you went on to say, and to say quite properly, that the
developments that are taking place in this part of the nation today call for
vast amounts of capital from overseas and also call for large amounts of
capital from the State Government. And, you will agree with me, I am
sure, that the level of those requirements is far more than this State
Government could raise from the resources of this State and from the
taxpayers of this State, if those were the only resources on which they
could draw. If you would agree with me in that and I think it is
incontrovertible then there is one thing at least about Commonwealth/ State
financial relations with which you must agree. That is a system of uniform
taxation throughout Australia under which an Australian Government collects
all the income tax available and under which an Australian Government
provides for the states that are developing and that cannot from their own
resources get all that is needed.... this system cannot but be for the good
of the smaller developing states.
This is an argument, as I have said earlier today, which is
not always received with universal approbation in states like New South
Wales and in Victoria. But if this Chamber of Manufactures wants this
State to get as much capital as possible to progress, then the system at
present in existence is the best and indeed the only one. I hope, Sir, you
won't go too far in endeavouring to upset the basis of Commonwealth/ State
financial relations at present existing. / 2 
-2
You also mentioned the recent completion of the railway
line, which I think was opened the other day, and just as you gave credit
to that former product of Western Australia, Mr. Snedden, for pushing
ahead with the immigration policy, so may I be allowed to give credit to
that present product of Western Australia, Mr. Freeth. He didn't beg&amp; n
this project because it was begun by Mr. Opperman, but ever since, almost
ever since its inception, Mr. Freeth has been engaged in seeing that it'
was done at not more than 300 or 400 per cent above the initial estimate
for the cost of the railway:
You have spoken, too, of your problems, not least the
problem of labour, and you will I know you and the other manufacturers
here realise that in examining this two thoughts are thrown up. One of
them is and this is true for the whole of this nation and not just for this
State that if all the labour -one has available is in employment, and by
and large throughout Australia, all the employable labour is in employment,
and if all the material resources that can be produced are demanded and
are used, then, Sir, it is no use merely saying let us have more money
and then we can do more things. Because if that were acceded to, the
sole result of providing more money, all labour being employed, all
material being used, would be to push up the price of labour and push up
the price of materials and not in fact to get anything more done.
It may well be that resources should be diverted from
something to something else, but when all resources are used, that is the
only way in which some new things can be done, and you as manufacturers
would know that. The second problem, as you mentioned, is one for which I
think all in this room, in a way, would be grateful, and that is that you are
facing the problems of growth. Now, the problems of growth can be quite
uncomfortable, but surely they are more exciting than the problems of
stagnation or the problems of decay. Surely there is a knowledge that in
applying new managerial techniques, and if it is possible and I am not
suggesting it for a moment better managerial techniques to manufacturing
processes, then this help s to overcome the problems of growth, and once
that is overcome then new ones will arise because new growth will
immediately evolve. Indeed, new growth will evolve here and nothing can
stop it. But since it will evolve here, since nothing can stop it, then here
is a very great responsibility, not only on governments but on those charged
with the management of factories, on those charged with the supervision of
the production of the goods. It is a responsibility to see that in the
circumstances in which we find ourselves, every possible effort is made
to ensure that these goods are produced in the most efficient way and with
the most efficient management. I am sure you won't mind me saying that
to you. As I said earlier, this appears self-evident.
You mentioned another matter, that of tertiary education,
particularly tertiary technological education, and with w~ hat you have said
with one exception I completely and utterly agree. And I know, because
I have worked with them on this, that your State Government completely
and utterly agrees. You have created here in Wlestern Australia in your
Institute of Technology, which we now call the College of Advanced Education,
a technological institution separate from the universities, which is a blue
print for this kind of institution throughout Australia. You have given it,
your Government has given it autonomy. The courses in it will provide
the sort of people whom you said manufacturers wanted. There is no reason
/ 3 
-3
in the world why sandwich courses of the kind that you suggested should
not be provided there and every reason why they should. And if there is
to be some argument about whether the end product of this, the man who
is the end product, should be given a degree or a diploma, well, that is
an argument for another time and another place. What really counts,*
surely, is not his description at the en( I but what kind of an education hp
has had, what kind of a product that institution produces and what kincl
of a judgment you people in this room make of that end product. Because
that judgment will be translated into employing that end product at a
remuneration you think he is worth, and if he is worth what I believe he
will be and what I think you believe he will be, then these institutes will
be, as far as parents are concerned, something which will take the place
of universities, not altogether, but for those better fitted for this kind of
education. Sir, it is an exciting thing to come to Western Australia.
You can be sure that there will be visits from me as long as I maybe
destined to remain Prime Minister, not only annually, but more often than
that, just as in the past I have spent so much time here, either as Minister
for the Navy or as Minister for Education. But because I have been here
so much in the past, because I helped to start because I did start the
Leeuwin Naval Station, because I worked so closely in the Institute of
Technology and the Secondary Teachers' College and the science blocks
and the technical schools which jointly the State and ourselves built here,
I have been able to notice the increasing tempo of development. And on
this last quick tour of your North, it was for an Australian I would not
claim to be a West Australian for an Australian a most exciting thing to
see what is happening in Hamersley, in Mt. Tom Price, Port Hedland, in
Dampier, Kambalda, in all the places that you know so well. It was
exciting not only to see what is happening but to feel in the air the vibrancy
and the forward -look ing drive which is so evident and which has as one of
its results the growth of Perth and the growth of industrial opportunities
for those of you engaged in manufacture in Perth.
Not only does this feeling of excitement exhilirate the spirit,
but it makes somebody charged with the conduct of the nation's affairs realise
more fully how much overseas exchange is being earned by what is going
on here, and in Queensland, and in the Northern Territory and in other
similar places. But here tonight I speak of Western Australia of how much
this contributes to our defence capacity because so much of what we buy for
defence purposes now I am sure less in the future but so much of what
we buy for defence capacities now is bought from overseas, has been bought
from overseas, calls for overseas exchange, which on current account we
cannot earn, but which the overseas earnings you are making will help us
earn. This overseas exchange contributes to our capacity to help the nations
closest to us because there again it is an expenditure of overseas funds wvhich
we use in order to try and raise their living standards for purposes of
humanity and I suppose, if the truth were to be told, ultimately for purposes
of our own. Because as their living standards rise, so will their markets
become more available to us, so will their demands for our products rise,
so can we join together with them in trying to improve the general prosperity
of the whole region. So do we realise what is being done to help to build the
population which we must have, and must have as quickly as possible,
possibly for survival, certainly for arrival at that future which still lies
before us. / 4 
4
So these things, these things which contribute not only to
what I have spoken of but, as I am sure you West Australians would be
the first to agree, to contribute to the capacity of factories in Eastern
States to grow and to use the foreign exchange so earned though they
earn a little themselves, you know, from exports, from mining oil and
from things of this kind but it does . contribute as a whole. You would
agree with that and so would 1. But its importance I hope this has come
a little out of what I have said is not an importance confined to this part
of Australia, but because of the things I have just enumerated, an importance
to the nation of Australia which, on the whole, I think most of you here,
if not all of you here, wou] ld regard as being greater than any single part
of the nation. Having said that, I ask you also to remember this. What
you have done and what is happening here contributes, what happens in
Queensland contributes, what happens in Bass Strait contributes, all of
it together is going to build all of us together into a nation in which your
manufactures are wanted, but that is just a small part of it. I know each
one of you here wants to increase his factory, wants to increase his
production, wants to improve methods, but I don't believe that that is the
basic drive of any human being or of any Australian. Necessary? Yes.
Basic? No. I think you want to do these things for a purpose, and that
purpose is to feel that as you increase your production, as you improve
your manufactures, as you improve your factories, so you are not only
getting benefits from this yourselves, but so you are contributing to the
sort of life your children can lead, the sort of nation you want to see.
You want not only the satisfaction of achievement but the satisfaction of
contribution. This, I think, is happening here. This, I think, is happening
throughout Australia. How it may best be continued must, of course, be
a subject of debate and it would be a pity were it not. All kinds of
suggestions, Sir, I have no doubt will come from you as the President of
the Chamber of Manufactures or your successor, and will come from
other presidents in other states. Some of them will be sensible. Some
of them may be open to question Governments themselves will make
suggestions. It is possible that some of them may be sensible. It is
certain that they will all be open to question.
But one thing I am sure of, and forgive me if perhaps I am
just a little personal as I conclude on this note. For somebody who does
have a resp~ onsibility to try to see that we follow the proper path in Australia
economically and in other ways, there are from time to time burdens, there
are from time to time decisions to be taken which one cannot be sure are
correct decisions because there is so , nLuch on one side and so much on
another and one has to balance and take a choice. But the sustenance of
somebody who has to do that is very great because it comes from the
Australian people who I have found have been willing to accept honest
mistakes, have been willing to support what they believe to be honest
policies, have been in fact thoroughly decent as one would expect the
Australian population in general to be.
With this knowledge, and with this experience, I can but
tell you this, that the Commonwealth Government, with the State
Government, listening to but not necessarily taking all advice offered will
do what we can to make proper judgments, to choose the priorities we think
are right, to put on one side, if necessary, things that ought to be done but
which cannot yet be done because things clamour with more need on the other 
side. And I am certain that we will altogether go ahead, not in all parts
of Australia perhaps as quickly as we are going in the West now, but in
all parts go ahead, and that on the path on which we are moving, we will,
step by step, arrive as a nation which for strength and industry, for
compassion to its ill, for moral approach to world problems..... well,
perhaps, be a nation better than has been known before.
These words were written some time ago:-
" All of the past is prelude."
Sir, I translate that in my own words for Australia and Western
Australia, I translate:-
" All the past is prelude."
into:-" You ain't seen nothing yet."
And you haven't. 



0~/ 152
EXTRACT FROM PRIME MINISTER'S REMARKS
TO THE CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE RECEPTION
PERTH, W. A. SEPTEMBER 1968
There is just one other point I would make.
There was some discussion the other day as to action
which was taken over preventing an insurance company known as the
MLC from being taken over by capital from abroad. Some questions
were asked as to whether this meant there was a nalteration in the
Government's policy about overseas capital inflow. Well, it doesn't.
Our policy for a long time has been predicated on the
fact that we need to get as much developmental capital inflow from
abroad as it is possible to get if we are to develop as quickly as we
should. If there is any doubt about that, then let any West Australian
look at what is being done here and see whether it could possibly have
been done from capital generated within our own resources. But we
do want that capital to be overseas capital so that it is matched by
goods so that we don't lose our overseas balance. We don't want it
to be debenture capital raised inside Australia to be used by overseas
interests, and the overseas interests own what is built. And so we
wish to see that large amounts of Australian capital generated here
at present under the control of an Australian company don't fall under
the control of people outside. We saw no percentage in somebody
being able to spend $ 40 or $ 50 million to gain control of $ 750 million
of Australian capital. This desire that overseas capital should come
from overseas still persists, as does the desire that Australians
should be given the chance of equity participation in new developments.
But remember this. It's no good Australians expecting
to go along after risks have been taken, after a company has been
developed, after some years of input has gone on and dividends are
beginning to flow out and say, " Now we want to buy in. Not a bit.
They need to be offered the chance to take the risks at the beginning
and that is what we seek to see happen.
k 



PATERSON FEDERAL ELECTORATE CONFERENCE
ANNUAL DINNER AT MAITLAND TOWN HALL
MA rILAND, N. S. W. SEPTYEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Allen, Sir Alister, Distinguished Guests and Ladies and
Gentlemen: When I first received a suggestion that I might come and
talk to you tonight, I saw with a certain amount of horror that it was
suggested that there should be no limit on my speech.
Before I come to talk to any gathering of this kind, my wife
keeps reminding me of a quatrain which I think it would be a good thing
for all politicians to remember all the time, and that quatrain is:-
" I love a finished speaker,
1 really, truly do,
I don't mean one who's polished,
I just mean one who's through.
And so it won't be without limitation of time before I am through.
I would like to say some few things to you. Cne is that
speaking for my wife and myself, we have felt, on this visit to Maitland,
both during the Civic Reception and during the time we have spent with
you and during the time we have talked with the too few of you with whom
we have been able to converse, that in a way we feel at home because we,
too, come from country areas, country areas not quite so blessed as this,
After all, we have where we come from, an eleven-inch
annual rainfall -when we get it, and we don't often get it -and you have an
annual rainfall which apparently varies very considerably, but which by and
large enables ( except when you are sailing dinghies in the Town Hall here
where I stand today) more production and more ease of production than occurs
in the rather hot dry area we come from.
But the feeling has been the same, the feeling of people who
are out, by and large, on the land, doing things on the land, coping with
natural disasters, coping with the difficulties of price, of production, of
season, and carrying on, as Australians have carri~ d on for a couple of
hundred years now. Carrying on against the flood and fire and famine which
are a part of what is, basically, a rather hard land, and people who perhaps
as a result of that, or perhaps because of some innate Australianism I
don't know say, " All right. Well, it's tough this year, but it will be better
next year. There is always going to be another season. Maybe the prices
will go up. Maybe there will be better production, and who through it all
have a kind of friendly relationship which extends throughout the areas of
the country of Australia. We have felt at home with you, and I can only hope
that during this brief visit you have begun to feel at home with us. 
-2
You have got, if I may say so, one of the best Federal
representatives in Canberra of any electorate in Australia. Indeed, for
myself, who tends to fly off a little at angles, who tends to get swept
away with enthusiasm, it is of immense advantage to have somebody who
says, " Yes, that's wonderful, but just a moment, let's look at the
practicalities of this situation. Let's see whether it will work or not.
Let's see whether this in fact is going to turn out the way you want it to
turn out. It is of enormous advantage, and I am always prepared to
recognise that there can be two points of view mine, and onae that is
probably wrong: I am happy to say that on most occasions, mine and
Allen's tend to coincide, and those who as he explained to you happens
in a Cabinet those who have quite properly other questions to raise are,
for the most part, probably wroing. When they are not wrong, I think
both of us agree with the majority and we come out as he has said we do,
with a Government policy backed by all of us, whom you have elected, to
try and govern this country.
We both came in, Allen and I, and Sir Alister, in 1949, and
this is now some twenty years ago two decades. We only came in under
the leadership at that time because people who are in this room today, or
people who have taken the place and had the same ideals as people who
were in a room like this in ! 949, brought us in to off ice at that stage, and
we took over a nation which then was comparatively small. I don't know
the precise numbers maybe seven million, maybe seven million and a
half but we took over a nation which our opponents at the time said was
a nation which if it had seven per cent of unemployed, then had reached
the best ratio of employment the nation could hope to have; took over a
nation in which government interfered, greatly, in almost all aspects of
individual endeavour; took over a nation in which development had hardly
started. And because of what those who are now in this room did, and the
ideals they had, and the ideals their successors are still propagating, we
have in the course of two decades, we and you raised the nation from
seven and a half to twelve million, stopped interference in too great detail
with the individual initiative which alone can enable a country to progress.
Given a climate which enables those who are prepared to take risks, to
take risks, and to garner the fruits of the risks they take or accept the
losses of the risks they take personally, and which because individuals
are enabled to do this to garner the fruits or to talke the risks have
brought this nation to a point of international take-off which would have
been unthought of two decades ago.
I don't mean that in that period of time there have not been
some mistakes made by government. If there is anybody in this room today,
whether he be an industrialist, a manager, somebody on a farm, who can
look back for two decades and say at no stage did I make a mistake, then
that man is a miracle man because almost always, over a long period of
time when decisions have to be made, some of them will, in the light of
future circumstances, be wrong. But I believe that I can say on behalf of
the Government to which Allen and I and Sir Alister belong, that though
there have been on occasions some decisions which might not stand up to
examination afterwards, there have probably been fewer decisions of that
kind than have been taken by any government I know of in any country in the
world. And when I say this, this is no tribute to me, for I have just lately
taken up this position. This is a tribute to the people you have elected to
the national parliament and to the way they have worked together and to the
vision they have had of what Australia ought to be. And this is something
which in the future can only be continued and will be continued, I know, from
this gathering tonight, by the support given by those who say, " I think these 
S.
people have the right idea. I think these people have an objective for our
nation which is the objective which I in my heart have got. I will work for
them. I will ( as somebody said to me tonight) come hail, come snow, come
rain, hand out how-to-vote cards for them. I will argue for them, because,
in the main and on the whole, we have the same objectives. This is one
of the great sustenances of a Prime Minister that there are, throughout
Australia, so many people of the kind who are here tonight who will do this
work, who will give this trust because they believe that what they want will
eventually be achieved. We, as is common with all nations at all times, have great
problems before us at the moment. It is probably true that in Australia
we have reached a watershed, a time of decision in many, many fields,
and that those tenets on which previously we built our policy are not any
longer to be accepted without question.
In the field in which your Member is particularly interested,
that of Defence, we find ourselves in Australia in a completely changed
world situation. For almost two hundred years we lived under the protection
of the British Navy and England, and we did little or nothing to help ourselves
in between the crises that occurred in the world. We left it to others to
protect us, except, of course, that when the Boer War'broke out, or the
First World War broke out, or the Second World War broke out, or the
Malayan emergency broke out, or the Korean war broke out, then we came
in as a people, wholeheartedly and completely. And though in between
times we did not pay much attention to it, I still think, looking back on that
history that " if blood be the price of admiralty, Lord God we have paid
in full". But that has changed. We do not have and will not have this
protection from abroad any more. We ourselves must protect ourselves,
and this calls for resources which I do not myself wish or like to give
resources that must be diverted to ships and soldiers and aircraft and
guns and ammunition resources I would prefer to devote to development
and to social progress. But these resources must be diverted, according
to the judgment of your Government if we are, in the changed situation of
the world, to be able to take the first brunt of any attack which in the
future may fall upon us and to help in maintaining stability in the area to
our north a situation which has never faced this nation before but which
now faces us in all stark reality.
And as that occurs, we have before us the challenge of
developing the nation itself, a challenge which holds before us a vision
that previously was never known to the people of this country. Gradually
we have grown since the first settlement was made at Port Phillip, gradually
the tempo of our growth has increased, but latterly the tempo of our growth
has almost got out of control. We are growing in geometric progression.
The things that we need to do and can do, and the opportunities before us
are flowering in a way they have never flowered before.
And so we find that in Bass Strait we strike oil which gives
us defence capacity, which gives us a saving of overseas exchange, which
gives us a control of our own capacity, which people once thought we would
never have. And so we have in Western Australia, in the Northern Territory,
in Queensland, great new mineral prospects opening up which will require
billions of dollars orf private capital to bring to fruition, which will require
not only the tearing from the earth of the ore and the resources which are
there but the fabrication of the ore and resources through the various / 4 
4-
processes to the finished product. This will make us, God willing, one
of the great industrial nations of the world, but requiring billions of private
capital, hundreds of millions of governmental capital something which
two decades one decade previously was unthought of in this nation.
And we have, I think, a public conscience which has woken,
and which says, yes, in the years past we have said a government ought to
take note of those who are ill and those who are aged and those who are
handicapped; a government ought to contribute towards the maintenance
of these people, but it should only contribute, and it should take the stand
that families and charities should provide and a government should only
add the topping to what is provided; a public conscience which says this
is no longer good enough we ought to see if we are an affluent society,
that there is no-one in this land who does not have the capacity for a frugal
living when they are old or when they are ill or when they are in some other
way suffering the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.
For myself, I have left the concept of a contribution towards
the living costs of people of this kind and accepted on behalf of the
Government and of the Liberal Party that what is required is to see thal
nobody starves, that nobody has to have blankets bought for them, that
people of that kind can live in reasonable dignity and with frugality and
are provided with enough for that. And this is something which is different
from that which previously was accepted.
I have sketched in only a few of the challenges which face
us now. With these before us as a people, it is necessary to look again
at some of the dogmas which two decades ago were uncritically accepted,
because perhaps two decades ago, they were valid, they were reasonable,
and this is something which we as a party have got to do. I speak as a
party now, not so much as I have been in the past few minutes, as a people.
When we formed the Liberal Party in 1945, when we came
to Government in 1949, two decades ago, all of us accepted and all of us
believed that the sole task of an Australian Government was to act in a
sense as an honest broker, and that the governments of the various divisions
of Australia ought to take the full responsibility for the educational requirements
of a State, for the hospital requirements of a State, for the road
requirements, for all the other matters which were then, and still are, for
a large part, their responsibility.
But in that period of two decades, there has grown up in
the minds of the Australian people, as I believe I may be wrong, but
as I believe a requirement that an Australian Government should see
that no matter in what part of this nation a child may be born, it should
have the same facilities provided for its education as are provided i~ n any
other part of this nation. There has grown up as I believe a requirement
that if a person gets ill in any part of this nation, then an Australian
Government should see that the opportunities for treatment of that illness
are the same in any part of this nation. There has grown up a requirement
for an Australian Government to take a responsibility, a financial
responsibility to see that these things happen.
And what we need to question now are the dogmas of twenty
years ago and to see how, if a change is necessary and I think it is how
such a change can be worked out, to see that the facilities for education,
that the facilities for health, that t-he facilities for roads, that the facilities
in other directions are the same, while avoiding centralist administrative
coatrol from Canberra. This is going to be one of the siginif icant questions
to be decided in this nation of ours in the future. This 
is one of the questions that those who support the Liberal Party should
consider and to which they should direct their minds, not with adherence
to dogma, but with questioning of everything, with questioning of what a
State Government puts forward or a Commonwealth Government puts
forward, but with an attempt to arrive at a solution which will in the end
be best for the nation as a whole.
For if there is one thing of which I am convinced, it is this,
that we have reached a stage in our national history when there is in the
hearts of Australians in Western Austrcalia, in Quee-nsland in Tasmania
or wherever it may be, a burgeoning belief in our nationalism, a burgeoning
faith in ourselves as Australians first. There is a knowledge that what
happens in great development in any part of this continent benefits all parts
of this continent, and a feeling I believe a justified feeling that we should,
as nationals of a country which has much to be proud of, hold up our heads,
be proud of what we have done in the past, look forward with faith and hope
to the future, not as New South Welshmen, not as Victorians, not as West
Australians, but as people who belong to the nation of Australia first.
If I can spread throughout the confines of this continent
that belief which I think is held in the hearts of the people who live in it,
if you can help me spread throughout the confines of this continent that
belief, then I think we will have made the greatest step forward since
this nation was first founded so short a time ago.
I remember and for light relief I tell you this story
something which was told to me when I was at Mt. Tom Price not long ago,
when Mr. Heath, the Leader of the Opposition in the United Kingdom, was
out here. He was being taken around Mt. Tom Price by Mr. Court, the
Minister for Industrial Development in Western Australia. Mr. Heath
particularly wanted to meet an Australian working at Mt. Tom Price.
Mr. Court took him to a group of men who were working there, and he
went to one and said " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I come
from London. He went to another and said, " Are you an Australian?"
and he said, " No, I come from Poland. I only came out here a short time
ago. He went to another one and he said, " No, I'm not an Australian. I
come from Czechoslovakia. Finally, they came to somebody who clearly
was an Australian. I don't know how to describe it, but you know what an
Australian is he talked like an Australian, he looked like an Australian,
he rolled a cigarette like an Australian, he leant against things like an
Australian Finally Charles Court thought he had got Heath to meet an
Australian. He said, " Well, here you are. Surely you're an Australian.
The bloke said, " No, I'm a Victorian. So he gave up. But I haven't given
up. You haven't given up. Because the real future of this country, the
achievement of what is possible for us is if we all first say we are Australian,
and then we are New South Welshmen, and then we are people from Maitland
but first, we are the members of a nation destined to be great.
This is what, I think, the Liberal Party as such should seek
to achieve, and in achieving it because, perhaps, I have spoken in
generalities must keep in mind what was one of the first tenets of this
party when it was formed, and that was that it was dedicated to individual
freedom and the greatest possible amount of individual initiative, that
people could take risks and reap rewards, or that people could take risks
and if they made bad judgments, reap the consequences.
But what do people want? What do those Australians of whom
you are representative want? What should a-political party seek to give
them? Well we know some of the answers. We know the material answers.,
/ 6 
6-
We know they want more development. We know they wan,,-t better hospitals.
We know they want better education. We know they want better townplanning.
We know they wiant more sewerage or at least I am told so
by the Leader of the Cpposition well, it may turna out that we have
an argument as to whether we want an affluent or an effluent society. But
I think that over and above these things on which we can argue, and discuss
and argue properly, that people want more than that.
They want, I think, a feeling that in what they are doing in
their daily life they are not only seeking their own material advancement,
they are not only wanting to improve the farm on which they live or expand
the business in which they are employed though these are important both
for themselves and for the nation but they want a feeling, I think, that
the efforts that they put in are for an end which is above and beyond their
own particular material advancement. They want a feeling that what they
are doing is not only helping themselves but contributing to the community
in which they live, that they are helping the advancement of the community,
that they are bringing into existence, perhaps, a nation which can be great
materially, which can be great in terms of strength of defence, which cans
be great in compassion, which can be one step forward along the road
towards which nations throughout history have striven but so far have
striven in various degrees in vain but which I think we here have the
greatest opportunity of any nation in history, ultimately, to achieve.
This is what I think people want to be called on for sacrifice
as well as to be given the opportu-.-ity for individual betterment, and this
is what, w~ ith your support and the support of my colleagues, this Government
will seek to bring about and will seek to evoke in the hearts of the Australian
people. A long time ago somebody it may have been Banjo Paterson
think it was wrote these lines about Australia:-
" We see the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended
And at night, the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars."
We can and are gettinrg ito our hearts and minds the vision splendid of what
this nation can be, and if we do not reach the stars, at least we can aspire
towards them, and strive towards them, and according to the degree of our
competence, of our efforts, according to the degree to which we reach them,
so we will have contributed not only to this nation but to the evolution of
mankind towards the kind of world we all want to live in.
You have helped in this. You have helped me tonight by
coming here. I look to you to continue this help in the future.
Thank you. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER AND8
CHAIRMAN OF THE AUSTRALIAN LOAN COUNCIL
THE RT. HON. J. G. GORTON, J
AUSTRALIAN LOANS IN THE UNITED-STATES
A series of loan agreements has been successfully
negotiated in the U. S. In total, these borrowings by the
Commonwealth amount to $ US 180 million.
Three of the loans are from the Export-Import
Bank of the United States, and a fourth is a joint loan from
the Export-Import Bank and United States commercial banks.
The Export-Import Bank has agreed to lend the
Commonwealth $ US 50 million 44.6 million),. in two tranches
of $ US 25 million each, to finance the importation of specified
categories of capital equipment from the United. States. Since
the Export-Import Bank is an agency of the . United-States
Government, the loans are not subject to the U. S. Interest
Equalization Tax. The first tranche of the new loan will carry an
interest rate of 7 per cent per annum and will be issued at
par. It will mature finally in 1983,
The second loan is for an amount of $ US 75 million
67 million) to assist in financing the purchase of 2~ 4
F 111C aircraft, spares, associated equipment and services.
This is additional to an earlier borrowing of $ US 80 million
arranged in 1966 for this purpose.
The loan will carry an interest rate of 6 per
cent and will be issued at par. Repayment of amounts drawn
will be spread over 7 years.
The third loan agreement is for an amount of
$ US 53 million 47.3 million) to assist in financing the
purchase by Qantas Airways Ltd. of four Boeing 7147 (" Jumbo
Jet") Aircraft. 
One half of the loan will be. provided by the
Export-Import Bank and the Boeing Company, and the other half
by a syndicate of United States commercial. banks.
The proposed expenditure in. the United States
on the four aircraft and related equipment is $ US 132 million,
of which Qantas will finance 20 per cent from its own
resources. The Commonwealth will be looking to borrow the
remainder in two tranches of approximately $ US. 53 million
each, and the present loan represents the first. tranche.
Interest on the Export-Import Bank/ Boeing portion
will be at 6 per cent, and on the commercial bank portion
will be one-half per cent above the Morgan. Guaranty Trust
Company's prime rate,. with a minimum of 5.5 per cent and a
maximum of 7 per cent. At present, this would mean a rate
of 6-3/ 4 per cent. The loan will be repaid over a period
of 7 years. The. fourth loan agreement. covers a-borrowing of
$ US 2.5 million 2,3 million) to assist in financing the
purchase by Trans-Australia. Airlines of its. fifth-Boeing
727 Aircraft. It will carry an interest rate of 6 per cent,
and will be repaid over 7 years.
An agreement which the Treasurer signed on
behalf of the Commonwealth Government with the Union Bank of
Switzerland in Zurich two weeks ago provided for a loan of
approximately 10 million Swiss francs to complete the financing
of this purchase. When account is taken of the recent 200 million
Deutsche Mark loan in Frankfurt, and the Swiss loan for T. A. A.,
loan agreements totalling approximately $ A 208 million have
recently been concluded. 



QOULBURN LILAC TIME FESTIVAL
CIVIC RECEPTION
GOLJLBURN, N. S. W. 4 OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the-Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Mayor, the Mayoress, Members of Parliament and Distinguished
Guests:-The first thing I must do, Mr. Mayor, is to thank you for
being kind enough to extend to me this civic welcome and to give me the
opportunity to meet some of the leading citizens of Goulburn and its
surroundings. I must make clear though, Mr. Mayor, that this is by no'
means my first visit to this city, although it is my first visit as Prime
Minister. On more than one occasion in the past, I have been here and
have had a chance to tour the city and have had a chance to see it. One
occasion that stands out in my memory was when the State Member and
myself attended the opening and dedication of a science laboratory. at if
remember rightly St. Patrick's College. This also gave us an opportunity
to learn. something of the city of Goulburn. But this is the first visit as
Prime Minister, and it is therefore doubly important to me.
I should have liked to have been able to come earlier today.
In fact it was possible, but extremely difficult. After all, my wife and I
have just spent three days over in Western Australia, du~ ring which I think
we had one fifteen minute spell to ourselves. We arrived back at about
half past five last night in a state of almost utter exhaustion, and I really
did have to do some -work in the office today before I could come.
Nevertheless, I do apologise for having passed up the opportunity to come
earlier and to see Supertex and the other industries here.
It was a pleasure to me, for a variety of reasons, when
Dugald Munro asked me wouild I come to attend the Lilac Time festivities.
One of them, of course, is that it is so pleasantly named. Lilac Time
has got some aura of nostalgia about it for all of us or for most of us,
particularly those who were born about the same time as I was when we
remember Schubert and " Lilac Time" and the songs that came over and
we used to bash them out.
But also for another reason, because it seems to epitomise
a community spirit which is so utterly necessary in towns * such as Goulburn
or in towns such as the one in which I grew up. That was where, for a
while, I was Shire President -Kerang a smaller town, but nevertheless J/ 2 
-2-
one that needed this kind of community spirit. Because what is means is
that you began how long ago? fifteen years, sixteen years a long time
ago to work towards attaining something for the town and the citizens who
live in it. You began building that which you now have, the Festivities Hall,
which I haven't seen, but which, judging from the pictures of it, is a real
addition to this or any other community.
Rather than just say, ." Well, we hope someone will give us
the money for this" whether it be a state or whether it be a Commonwealth
Government you did something about it yourselves. You began to get
together as a community and to raise the funds and to build a hail, and you
have been doing it ever since, and.. I can't remember blt $ 70, 000:
or $ 80, 000 or something of that order has already been raised. Here is
this concrete result in this city of the effort that is being put into it. Really,
I think perhaps a manifestation of a community spirit of this kind means
more than the mere bricks and mortar which are seen in the form of a
building. It means,, I would have thought, great satisfaction to all those
who over the years have given something of themselves, something of their
time, in order to see that the community in which they live can be improved.
For these reasons, it appeared to me pleasant to be asked
to attend on this occasion.
I don't know, Sir, that I can comment very much on your
remarks about the development of Canberra and the development of Goulburn
because I haven't had the chance to study them, and therefore anything I
said would be just an immediate reaction.
But what I would hope would be that as the National Capital
develops, and develops as it will to a quarter of a million people before
very long, then it would be inevitable, whether some kind of light industries
were established in it or not, that all the region would benefit if it were only
as a market for what the region surrounding it could produce, if it were only
as a provider of opportunities for employment of young people at a centre
closer to the region than Sydney or Melbourne. I would think that kind of
development must have complementary development in the region around it.
Other than that, Sir, I can do nothing more than join in your
general approach that regional development is good. And when I say that,
I am not just talking because I do claim.. I don't know whether credit is
the right word.. I do claim some involvement with the decision which led
to the building of a teachers' college in this city of Goulburn. I was the
Minister at the time, and if you remember there was some question as to
whether it should go here, or whether it should go somewhere else, or
whether if it went here it would upset going to Canberra, or if Canberra
built one it would upset this one. But it didn't. There is one being built
here, and that will bring undoubtedly, not only those who will be attending
it as students and people who will be teaching the students, but the others
/ 3 
S3-
who will be required to meet their needs to maintain their motor cars,
do their laundry and provide what they eat and all the other things
which follow when an accretion of population happens in any particular
district. So at least one small act has been done before these words
were spoken. I finish because I was told I must not talk too long, and I
probably have already. I finish by thanking you once again for the
opportunity of meeting the citizens of Goulburn. I finish by expressing
the hope that in Goulburn and in the centres like it throughout the length
and breadth of Australia, there will be a growth, there will be a fostering
of community pride, of community service.. and through that, pride
and service to the nation. This nation is being built as the centres are
being built, and the centres are being built to a large degree by community
effort by people such as you. And I thank you for that.
r 



. COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
j7O~ fl~ SPEECH
L i B AB eRt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
TARIFF BOARD
Annual Report: Ministerial Statement
,[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates,' 9 October 19681
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-Mr Speaker, I ask leave to make a statement
on the Tariff Board report just tabled.
Mr SPEAKER-There being no objection,
leave is granted.
Mr GORTON-Mr Speaker, in the
course of its last annual report, the Tariff
Board outlined the changes which it considered
to be desirable in its approach to its
own work. In the report for 1967-68, which
my colleague the Minister for Shipping and
Transport and Acting Minister for Trade
and Industry ( Mr Sinclair) has just tabled,
the Board has reported upon its study of
the structure and levels of protection now
operating in the Australian Customs Tariff.
It is, I think, important to understand the
nature of the information contained in the
two main appendices-Nos. 3 and 4-to
this report. Appendix 3 is a compilation of
what is termed the ' significant tariff rates'
applying to individual products or groups
of products, listed by tariff item. For comparative
purposes, the Board has included
statistical information about Australian production,
imports and the estimated Australian
demand for each item. In addition, to
reduce this information to somewhat more
manageable proportions, the Board has provided
a shorter table in Appendix 4 in which
the value of production of each industry
is distributed between three leveks of protection
measured by the significant tariff rate,
namely over 50%, 21 to 50% and not
over 20%.
23715/ 68 In short, the Board has linked information
on production and imports to a rearranged
version of the Customs Tariff.
Within the limits imposed by the form of
the available data, the outcome is a useful
conspectus of the existing levels and structure
of tariff rates which are applied to the
final production of Australian industries. It
reflects, to an important degree, decisions
taken by the Government in the past on
recommendations made by the Tariff Board.
In interpreting the information in the
appendices to which I have referred, honourable
members will have in mind important
qualifications to which the Board itself
has drawn attention. For example, the
report refers to the fact that tariff rates
which have not been reviewed for many
years may substantially overstate the current
duty needs of the industries concerned.
Moreover, it is the actual duty rates applying
to the final products of industries which
are summarised in the tables. These may
differ substantially from the effective rates,
which represent the degree of protection
extended to the production processes of
those industries. For most of the products
included in the appendices the Board has
not bcen able to calculate effective rates of
protection because sufficient data are not
available to it, and it has therefore not been
able to classify industries according to
effective rates of protection. This in-formation
will only -become known to the Board
in the course of future public inquiries. The 
Board considers that the effective rate is
a better and more equitable method of
measuring protection than the nominal rates
shown in the Tariff.
For these and other reasons, the Board
has emphasised that the ranking of particular
products or groups of products in
its tables summarising present levels of tariff
rates should not be taken as indicating the
view which the Board would take at a
future tariff inquiry of the desirability of
assisting an industry or the level of any
protection it would recommend.
In the future, as in the past, recommendations
for changes in the level of duties will
be made only after public inquiries at which
all interested parties may be heard. The
information in the appendices to the Board's
report does not pre-judge in any way the
individual recommendations which the
Board will make in the future after public
inquiry. Requests from the Board for
references designed to facilitate public
inquiries into areas of the Tariff which the
Board considers to be in need of review will
of course be considered in accordance with
normal procedures for determining references
to the Board. Such inquiries would
follow the generally accepted procedures of
the Board conducting public inquiries at
which the views of all interested parties are
welcomed. Recommendations by the Board
as a result of such reviews would be considered
by the Government in accordance
with current practice.
It will be noted that the Board has established,
for its own guidance, points of
reference which it has expressed in terms of
effective rates of protection of 25% and
The Board acknowledges that the
assessment of these points involved a considerable
element of judgment. They are not
to be regarded as precise but as providing
orders of magnitude which the Board
believes will assist it in its approach to its
work. The Government has considered this
report in the context of our established and
well tried tariff policies. There has been no
change in those policies. The Government is committed to ensuring the growth of a
strong manufacturing industry which is in
fact at the very foundation of the Government's
population building policies. The
development of manufacturing industry is
encouraged in many ways, and most notably
by means of the Tariff. The Government has
always been prepared adequately to protect,
and will continue adequately to protect,
economic and efficient industries. The
Government will also afford adequate protection
to industries of high importance
from the standpoint of our strategic or other
vital national interests.
Tariff policy has been and remains the
responsibility of the Government, both in
general and in relation to every single
decision. In making these decisions we look
to the Tariff Board for sound and practical
advice. The Board has developed for almost
half a century as an independent body. The
Government does not attempt to set for the
Board the procedures it should follow. It is
therefore quite proper for the Board to
examine its own methods of work, the way
it shall conduct its inquiries and the bases
on which it makes its recommendations. The
Government expects the Board to take all
possible steps to improve the quality of its
advice. To enable the Government to exercise its
responsibility for tariff policy, it is clearly
necessary that it should have available to it
in the Board's reports the fullest possible
knowledge of all the elements relevant to
each particular case. We would, for example,
expect the Board to report fully not only on
the effective rates of protection that would
be afforded by the nominal rates of duty
recommended but also on other aspects that
might be relevant to a consideration of the
protection of the particular goods under
reference. It will, of course, continue to be
the Board's role to advise, and it will continue
to be the Government's role, in determining
levels of protection, to decide
whether or not it will follow the advice
given. These have been our policies and they
have served us well. We have no intention of
changing them.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
OIL PRICING POLICY
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates,' 10 October 1968]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-In September 1965 the
Government announced certain policy
decisions regarding the use of Australian
. indrigeenous acrudfe ofil. i Trhomse decisaions tweireon
of the policy that the
OGovernment was determined that local
refineries use all the crude oil produced in
Australia, and an announcement that the
price to be paid by refineries for Australian
crude would be SA3.14 a barrel at the
* ustoms port at the refining centre nearest
to the producing field. Any amounts of
money that I shall mention during this
speech will be in Australian dollars and
cents. Included in this price was 67c
a barrel as an incentive payment.* This
arrangement was to finish on 17th September
1970, and no decisions were announced
as to what would happen after that date.
At that time the Moonie field was the
only one in operation. The production of
the Moonie and Barrow fields was and is
W comparatively small and the extra cost
resulting from the crude oil they sell at
S3.14 a barrel, together with freight costs
paid by them around the Australian coast
or through the pipeline is already included
O, inv eryp eetrxotle nspirvicee so ili n fiAeludsst rawliear. e dSiusbcsoevqeureedn tlyin,
Bass Strait by Esso-BHP. Oil from these
fields should begin to flow in March 1969
23801/ 68 and by September 1970 it is expected that
the fields will be producing at over 250,000
barrels of crude oil a day. During that
period the fields may well produce in the
vicinity of sixty million barrels of crude oil.
The prospect of such large quantities of oil
which refineries had to buy at a price so
much higher than the price of imported oil
obviously created a new problem and led
to forecasts of considerable rises in prices
of petrol and other petroleum products to
the Australian consumer. Because of the
effects that this would have throughout the
economy generally the Government has
most carefully studied the various problems
raised and I have for some time been
engaged in a series of negotiations with
Australian oil producers and refiners.
I now wish to inform the House that the
Government reaffirms its policy that for a
period of 10 years beginning on 18th September
1970, refineries in Australia are to
be required to process Australian crude oil
in order to provide the full requirements
of the Australian market for petroleum products.
This is, of course, subject to the need
for sufficient imports to meet the requirements
in Australia for bitumen, lubricants
and fuel oil in excess of quantities that can
be realised from the Australian crude, which
is deficient in these quantities but which is
so rich in the lighter distillates-petroleum,
kerosene, dieselene and so on. 
Secondly, the Government announces as
policy that for a period of 5 years after
17th September 1970, when the present
policy arrangements terminate, the price
that refineries will be required to pay Australian
producers will be import parity.
Import parity is defined as the posted prices
of overseas oil as of today, less the discounts
allowed off those posted prices as of today,
plus overseas freights at the most efficient
and economic rates prevailing today plus
wharfage where applicable. To this price
will be added a sum for quality differential
worked out by the modified Nelson method,
this quality differential being added because
of the richness of Australian crude in the
lighter distillates. From the import parity
price so arrived at there will be deducted a
sum representing the average freight cost of
delivering Australian oil to the refineries
from the port of delivery by the most
economical means possible. This will mean
that as from September 1970 for a period of
years the price payable for Australian
crude oil should generally be neither higher
nor lower than the price now payable today
for overseas oil, except for the effect of
Australian coastal freights, if any. This in
turn should mean that as from that date the
price of petrol products produced from
Australian crude oil should not be higher
than the price payable today for products
produced today.
I now come to the period between March
1969 and September 1970, during which the
present arrangement operates, during which
the presently applying high prices for Australian
crudes were agreed to be paid, and
during which, as a result of that, significant
increases in the cost of petroleum products
have been suggested. I have already said
that the cost of oil from Moonie and
Barrow at those high prices has been
absorbed in existing petrol prices, and no
alteration is to be made to the prices payable
for oil from those fields until after
September 1970, when the import parity
prices which I have described will apply. In
the case of the oilfields discovered by Esso-
BHP we have agreed by negotiation that
there will be a reduction in the prices Australian
refineries are required to pay up to
September 1970. Our agreement is that
Esso-BHP1 will altogether forgo the 67c a
barrel known as the incentive allowance.
In addition, Esso-BHP will allow refineries a further discount of 5c a barrel. Tresult
is that between March 1969 and September
1970 the price to be paid for oil from this
field will be reduced from $ 3.14 a barrel to
$ 2.42 a barrel at the customs port at the
refining centre nearest to the producing
field. After September 1970 the price payable
for this oil to Esso-BHP will be import
parity as already explained, and this, of
course, will reduce the price still further.
To sum up, the new arrangements made
will mean that the large newly discovered
quantities of Australian oil to be used between
March 1969 and September 1970 will
cost 72c a barrel or a little over 2c a gallon
les than was previously anticipated. After
September 1970 the price payable for Australian
crudes will be, as I have said, no
more than the price of imported overseas
crudes today except for any extra costs
involved in coastal transportation, and will
be still less than the price payable between
March 1969 and September 1970. This
will not, between March 1969 and September
1970, in itself prevent any increase
in the price of petrol for other products but
it will undoubtedly very materially reduce
the size of any rise that might take place
or that would have taken place had this
agreement not been reached.
I have so far spoken only of the pricing
policy for Australian crudes and of the
Government's requirement that the Australian
market should be supplied from such
crudes. But we need to discover more oil
in Australia and the Government is therefore
currently studying the separate question
of the need for incentives for oil exploration
in the period after 17th September
1970. Various proposals are under examination
and we will in due course announce the
form of incentive, if any, which we will
adopt. In the meantime the arrangements 1
have just announced will provide a firm
basis upon which the refining industry can
plan ahead for the use of Australian crudes
and will materially reduce any possible
future rise in the price of petroleum
products. I present the following paper:
Oil Pricing Policy-Ministerial Statcment-
10 October 1968
and move:
That the House take note of the paper.
BY AUTHORrTY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 0 



6/ 155
AUSTRALIAN'INDI GEOUS CRUDE OIL'
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MI NISTER
I n September 1965 the Government announced certain policy
decisions regardin--the use of Australian indigenous crude oil.
Those decisions were a re-affirmation of the policy that the
Government was determined that local refineries use all the crude oil produced
in Australia, and an announcement that the price to be paid by refineries for
* Australian crude would be $ 3.14 cents a barrel at the customs port at the
refining centre nearest to the producin-field. Included in this price was 67
cents a barrel as an " incentive" payment.
This arrangement was to finish on September 17 197-and no
W" Cisions were announced as to what would happen after that date.
At that time the Moonie field was the only one in operdtion.
The production of the Moonie and Barrow fields was, and is, comparatively
small and the extra cost resulting from the crude oil they sell at $ 0.14 cents
a barrel, together with freight costs is already included in petrol prices in
Australia. Subsequently, very extensive oil fields were discovered in Bass
. Strait by Esso/ BHP. Oil from these fields should begin to flow in Aarch 196
and by September 1973 it is expected that the fields will be producing at over
253, 3 barrels of crude oil a day. During that period, this field may well
produce in the vicinity of 61 million barrels. The prospect of such large
quantities of oil which refineries had to buy at a price so much higher than the
O price of imported oil, obviously created a new problem and led to forecasts of
considerable rises in prices of petrol and other petroleum products.
0 Because of the effects that this would have throughout the
economy the Government has most carefully studied the various problems raised
and I nave for some time been engaged in a series of negotiations with Australian
oil producers and refiners.
I now wish to inform the House that the Government re-affirms its
policy that for a period of ten years beginning on September 18 1Q73 refineries
in Australia are to process Australian crude oil in order to provide the full
requirements of the Australian market for petroleum products.
This is of course subject to the need for sufficient imports to
meet the requirements in Australia f3r bitumen, lubricants and fuel oil in excess of
quantities that can be realised from Australian crude.
Secondly the Government announces as policy that for a period
of five years after September 17 1573 when the present policy arrangements
terminate the price that refineries will be required to pay Australian producers
will be import parity. Import parity is defined as the posted prices of overseas oil as of
today, less the discounts allowed off those posted prices as of today, plus
overseas freioghts at the most efficient and economic rates prevailing today, 
plus wnarfage where applicable.
To this price will be added a sum for quality differential worked
qut by the modified Nelson method.
From the import parity price so arrived at will be deducted
a sum representation the averagefreight cost. ofAdelivering Australian
oil to the refineries from the port of delivery by the most economical means
possible. This will mean that as from September 1972, for a period of
five years, the price payable for Australian oil should generally be neither
higher, nor lower, than the price now payable for overseas oil except for the
effect of Australian coastal freights.
I now come to the period between March 1969 and September 197?
during which the present arrangement operates, during which the presently
applying high prices for Australian crudes were agreed to be paid, and during
which significant increases in the cost of petroleum products have been
suggested. SI have already said that the cost of oil from Moonie and Barrow
at these hi ; h prices has been absorbed in existing petrol prices, and no
alteration is to be made to the prices payable for oil from those fields until
after September 1970 when the import parity prices which I have described
will apply. In the case of the oil fields discovered by Esso/ BHP we have
agreed by negotiation that there will be a reduction in the prices Australian
refineries are required to pay up to September 1973.
Our agreement is that Esso/ BHP will altogether forego the 67 cents
a barrel known as the " incentive" allowance. In addition, Esso/ BHP will allow
refineries a further discount of 5 cents a barrel.
The result is between vlMarch 1969 and September 1973 the price
to be paid for this oil will be reduced from 14 cents a barrel to $ 2.42 cents
obarrel at the customs port at the refining centre nearest to the producing field.
After September 1970 the price payable for this oil will be import
parity as already explained. This will reduce the price payable still further.
To sum up, Mr. Speaker, the new arrangements made will mean
that the large newly discovered quantities of Australian oil to be used between
March 1369 and September 197 will cost 72 cents a barrel, or a little over 2 cents
a gallon, less than was previously anticipated.
After September 1972 the price payable for Australian crudes will
be no more than the price of imported overseas crudes today except for any extra
cost involved in coastal transportation.
This will not between March 1969 and September 197'. in
itself prevent any increase in the price of petrol. But it will undoubtedly
materially reduce the size of any rise that might take place. 
I t. Ave so far spoken only of the pricini policy for Australian
crudes and of the Government's requirement that the Australian market should
be supplied from such crudes.
But we need to discover more oil in Australia.
The Government is therefore currently studying the sep t'rate
question of the need for incenitive for oil exploration in the period after
September 17 19711 Various proposals are under examination and we will in due
course announce the form of incentive, if any, which we will adopt.
In the meantime the arrangements I have just announced will
provide a firm basis upon which industry can plan ahead for the use of
Australian crudes and will reduce any future rise in the price of petroleum
j oducts.
CANBERRA-
* 13 October 19' 6!.. 



OPEvii4G OF NATIONAL EXPORT WEEK el OTl96
11 OCTOBER 1968
Seech by the Prime Mviinister, Mr John Gorton
This is a week of the year which . means something to
every Australian. It is one week'% in the year when, I think',, all of us here,
Federal and State representatives, primary producers, manufacturers,
miners, businessmen agree on one thing. Vie need to " export to prosper"
and we need to develop if we are to achieve what is within our grasr. in
national development. For that reason, I am glad to be honoured to be asked to
be present today and to have the opportunity of supporting you and all those
who have so energetically and enthusiastically organised this National
Export Week. W. hat Sir Charles has said has been to the point. L-Ie has
been perh'aps, I think, a little chilling, a little difficUlt in his assessment
of the future, but that is all to thle good. Let = i accept what he has said as
a warning of what could happen, not necessarily as a warning of what will
happen, but what could happen if we become backsliders in the export drive.
I agree entirely that Australia needs to do more in exports
and that the greatest danger we face is, as has been pointed out, complacency.
If complacency is an offspring of the success so far achieved, then let us
strangle her offspring at birth.
The whole purpose of National Export Weelk is to make the
nation more export-minded, to convince producers and mnanufacturers that
there are great benefits, direct and indirect, to be won from increased export
activity. I believe in this nation we have the will and the capacity to dQ more.
I think we have the will and thle capacity to succeed.
I want to say a little about the Federal Government's role in
this task. There is a lot we can do and indeed have done, but there are also
limits to tile Government's role because we live in, and believe in, a free
enterprise society. Governments can lead by example, by facilitation,. by
co-operation and by giving incentives of one kind and another. But with
industry itself primary or secondary lies the final response.
At national level, the Federal Government has a duty to
create, by the sensible use of the powers it has, the right climate for
stability and growth, a climate which will allow development at home and an
opportunity for access to world markets on reasonably competitive te tr-s.
It has to do this in full co-operation with State Governments.
Today the Australian economay is fundamentally sound, and the
base onl which we can build anl increased export effort is there and is expanding.
The problems which arise are, I think, only shiort term problems, providing
we accept the challenge that is inherent in this National Export Vleelc. .. s/ 2 
-2-
There are always incipient dangers in any expanding econprny.
W/ e can't control the weather not yet anyway and this can have a gie at
effect on export incomes and on production. We have no, or little I think
perhaps the proper word is " no" Government control over wage structureaand
wage levels. We have to compete in overseas markets where the n4. tional
self -interest of countries which provide those markets inevitably takes
precedence over the fortunes of the foreign trader which in this case wouldd be
us. We need more people and we need more capital.
None of this is a new phenomenon, nor have we been slow
in recognising our problems. The very existence of the Export Development
Council is evidence of a recognition by the Government and by industry; of
these problems. which I have set out. And may I say that I think the Cotancil
has done a splendid job for a good many years now as an adviser to the,
Commonwealth Government on exports.
The picture I see is this. If our export effort just paddles
along, then we are creating problems for ourselves and doing that with our
eyes open, and not achieving all that may lie within our grasp. When the
terms of trade ( as you have pointed out) broadly are against us, we cannot
afford to be casual about those balances of payments or to depend too heavily
on capital inflow to offset what we are losing on current account. I do hope
nobody will assume that that sentence means that I don't want as much
capital inflow as I can possibly get.
We have to earn more foreign exchange, and the best, the
safest, the most secure way in the long term is to build up an expanding
export programme. In that we can be sure of paying our import bills.
In that way we can develop our home industries by giving them new outlets
for their products. I look forward in our national planning to what Australia
will be in the year 2, 000, and I believe the 70' s here in Australia will usher
in for us a thirty-year period of quite remarkable change and of extraordinary
opportunity for growth, but we have to get moving now to be " with it".
By the end of this century, if all goes well, we could be
a nation of around 28 million people. To achieve that, though, we need to
sustain our birthrate and to develop our migration intake on the lines of
pre * sent planning. -If we do, this figure of 28 million is a reasonable figure
for which to aim. But this will mean a continuous pressure on our resources.
We will continue to need overseas capital, but insofar as you are successful,
we will be less dependent upon it. Our economy is vulnerable if we become
too dependent on it, and our solvency could be at risk because of factors
entirely beyond our own control. The best insurance policy, the only valid,
long term safeguard is that sustained export effort which I believe this
Ccuncil is dedicated to achieve,
The 70' s will bring us not only the population of which I have
spoken and indeed, these things, many of them will come before the seventies.
The 70' s will bring us the jumbo jets and supersonic airliners; it will turn
friends into next-door neighbours in terms of time. Perhaps man will land
on the moon, and what may result from that, even in terms of industry, can
only be guessed at. Perhaps nothing, perhaps a great deal. These are all part 
-3
of the drama of our age. They are going to affect us in ways we can't measure
now, but one thing is certain. They will draw us deeper than ever into the'
international community, where the current for freer trade between nations
has been flowing quite strongly for some time past.
The Australian exporter will acquire a new status and a'new
significance. He must be ready to respond, not only to the rising demapdij
of the large, recognised markets of the world, but to the emerging marlef@
which will be there as the developing nations of Asia establish viable
economies and, like us, become hungry for imports Some forty per cent
of our exports now go. to Asia, but as. you said, Japan takes the greatesv
share. But there will be opportunities among the others as their resoucs
increase, as their security is estalished, and I hope and believe that the'
members of this Council will recognise those opportunities as they ari~ e and
will work to take advantage of them for their industries' benefit and fov the
benefit of the nation. Whatever excitements the seventies bring, they won't $ submerge
the hard facts of economic life the business of meeting and paying
international bills. We are, in this field, deeply committed to a costly
Defence expansion programme and much of the defence " hardware" Jiich
is the term, for some reason or other, usually applied to anything to do'
with defence defence " hardware" has to be purchased abroad because it
can't yet be made here. This has been taking, and it will continue to take, for
some time yet, large bites from our foreign exchange resources.
It is essential spending, absolutely essential, but it is not
income -producing in business terms. It is not developing, in terms of
adding industrial rather than military muscles. It gives a dividend, of
course, in the form of security to the nation and ability to discharge treaty
obligations, and I suppose that without that, business could not prcaper and
exporters could not export, but those requirements being laid upon us are
added reasons for increasing our earnings by exports from this country.
Sir Charles has given you figures which show we are making
progress but that other nations, admittedly much bigger than ours bigger
in terms of population and bigger in terms of size of industries in many
cases has given you figures that other nations bigger than ours are doing
better. I believe that we can do better and that is why my Governm-ent supports
tis National Export Week up to the hilt.
Our policy, in basic terms, is constant. We stand for
economic growth, we stand for national security and we stand for full
employment. We aim to maintain what we already have, and that is one of
the highest living standards in the world. That is to say we aim to maintain
that, provided the workers, the manufacturers of this country take advantage
of the climate which has helped this situation to come about.
I think we are the thirteenth largest trading nation in the
world today. I don't know that it matters a great deal how we rank, but I
think we are. What matters more than how we rank is the contribution our
trading makes to our balance of payments.
We have proved ourselves to be one of the world's most
efficient producers of temperate farm products, and by a tariff poikcy of
protection for economic and efficient industry, we have developed a
sophisticated and diversified economy. I -" think it is hardly necessary to ./ 4 
-4
mention mifleralq oil and gas because we read about them every day at
breakfast. Now all this provides exports and export potential. We
have already penetrated, in some form or other, most of the recognised
mnarkets of the world, but there are still new ones to be found and there are
still opportunities for stepping up sales in the markets we have. There is
plenty of scope for Australian ingenuity and originality. Although we have
displayed quite a lot already, the more we can display, the greater will be
the success of the efforts you are making.
I know that some of you know, but did you all know that we
export stainless steel cutlery, for example, to Sheffield, that we export
tulip bulbs to Holland? Di d you know we export spaghetti to Italy, ball
bearings to the Ruhr and windscreen wiper bla~ ies to Iceland? Did you
knww xotchqebost Angok Our responsibility fiishes though
with providing the cheque books! We export waffle-making machinery to
America, safari suits to Zambia and Irish stew to Scotland? I could go on,
but I think these examples are enough of the ingenuity and the taking advantage
of opportunity of which I have spoken.
The pattern of our trade has already changed significantly
and it will continue to change. Vie have to adjust to that change and it is
the individual exporters, the . meni in the field, who have ultimately to do the
job. So I appeal to you today under five headings
1. Be adventurous
2. Aim for higher productivity
3. Improve your products in such cases where it is
possible for a product to be improved
4. Research your industries and the Government is
prepared to help research in industries.
Double your efforts.
I daresay you could well appeal to me under exactly the same headings, but
well fair enough, let us both try.
You, Sir Charles, ackmo w ledged the part the Gover nment
is ptaying in encouraging exports. This will go on, through the commercial
services of the Department of Trade and Industry, through insurance
facilities, export incentives of one kind and another and by research and
development grants. These are constantly under review to meet changes
as they occur, and I think, Sir, that you bring suggested changes to our
notice without noticeable inhibition.
I would add that mñ-y Government has always looked
syrnpathetically at proposals from industry designed to give Australian
exporters a stronger competitive position overseas. It has also given
leadership in negotiating commodity agreements and access to world markets
under international trade arrangements. But I stress again at this point that
this is where we hand over to you. 
There is only one more thing I want to say and it concerns
an export less tangible than the ones we have been talking about, It is*: the
status of the Australian nation.
W-e have, I think, a reputation among the nations of tIp
world for stability and responsible administration; we pay our bills a-Ad
we honour our obligations. This is an export commodity we must nourish carefully,
just as carefully as we must watch the standard of the goods we prod~ ce
to sell in the tough, competitive markets of the world. This again helps
us to attract capital and market oppo rtunities.
I believe we have the resdurces and the skills, and our
people you people have the character and the integrity to be a really
great nation. This is a period of bbilding Which in itself carries its own
excitement. We are one peop le, living in an area of change and
opportunity. I am confident we can make our future secure and also make
a significant contribution to the peace and stability of thc Asian and
Pacific environment in which we live.
This we can do, not only by our industry at home and the
development of our own country, but as a trading nation sharing the export
markets of the world on a fair, permanent and enlarging basis. This is
your objective, this is the objective of those who are attending this Week,
this is the Government's objective. M-,-ay I express the hope that t~ og--ether
we achieve those objectives for the good of us all. 


FLINDERS ELECTORATE LIBERAL PARTY LUNCHEONMORNINGTON, VIC." IA 14 OCTOBER 1968Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonMr. President, Mr. Minister, Councillors and Members and Workersfor the Liberal Party:-I think perhaps the first thing I should say is that it ismore than pleasant for me to be here in an electorate represented byPhil Lynch. I suppose it is not inappropriate for a Minister of theArmy to have begun his tasks by having to undergo a certain baptismof fire, not only from the matters which happened in the Army, notonly from difficulties with the Opposition, but with various otherdifficulties which many of you here will understand as well as I do.He has overcome them all and he is accepted completely and thoroughlyas a hard-working and dedicated local Member and as a Ministersomebody who has met and overcome the problems so far inherentin his portfolio, and who seems to me to be avoiding new problemswith great skill. I suppose before I say anything else, Sir, people herewould expect me to make one or two general comments, because Ihave gathered from random remarks appearing here and there in thenewspapers over the last few weeks that there appears to be somediscussion or some speculation as to whether there is likely to be anelection before the due time at which an election has to take place.Now, the one thing that I really want to say about that is that it isquite fascinating that I have never said a word about it, one way orthe other, up until this point of time. And I don't propose to sayanything about it at this point of time:' But I will let you into thissecret. I made my mind up about it some time ago and I will beinforming my Party about it tomorrow. I think that is the proper wayfor this information to be conveyed to a party meeting.It has been quite fascinating to me to discover how peoplecan suggest and build on things, speculate about things without reallygetting any indication whatsoever from people who have to decide them.But we will find out about that all in good time.What I do want to say to you, so many of whom I havemet before, so many of whom I have known over such a long period oftime, is this. Nearly two decades ago, you got tired of a governmentwhich seemed to regard five per cent of unemployment as a reasonableamount of unemployment, which seemed to regard controls as a substitutefor progress, which soemed to ra-rd stagiaatian as a substitute forexpansion. You suddenly got tirW-of that and you changed it. There werepeople who came out and asked you to help them to-change it, and I was oneof them, but it waat you, ind people like you. throughout the whole of Australiawho made that change. I think you can take some satisfaction from the results ofthat change, and in saying this I am speaking of the results under SirRobert Menzies and under the late Harold Halt, indeed under theadministration which you substituted in 1950 for the previous Administration. o / 2
2-It is true to say that beginning then and progressing ever more andmore quickly, those old concepts have been discarded. So that nowwe have, to all intents and purposes, every employable person inAustralia gainfully employed, so that now we have as this shireindicates an upsurge of growth, an upsurge of development, throughoutthe length and breadth of this, our nation; so that we have anabandonment of oppressive control; so that we have more than wasever possible then, an opportunity for that individual initiative ofwhich Phil Lynch spoke, the opportunity of people to take risks andreap rewards if they are successful, take risks and reap theconsequences if they are not successful, but at least use their ownjudgment and advance the nation in so doing.And for nearly two decades this progress continued.It continued without a great deal of basic change in Australia's posit ionin the world or in the problems Australia had internally to face.Things have changed now. We have come to a watershed in Australianaffairs. No longer can we, as we have done for I suppose two centuriessay, " We are Australian. We are protected by the British Navy. Wedo not need to protect ourselves. We are available when a First Waror a Second War or a Korean War breaks out. We send our contingents.We make what sacrifices are needed, but in the meantime, we areprotected by one of the great powers of the world."Now that has gone, gradually at first, and then suddenlyand quickly with the decision by Great Britain to withdraw from Eastof Suez altogether. So that now, besides the efforts we ourselves canmake, we are, for our own security, dependent more than ever beforeon the United States Government providing the protection understood tobe provided under the ANZUS Pact. This is a change, a basic changein the history of this nation, and it means, among other things, thatwe must devote more and more, not of our gross national product,but more and more towards building up our own defences, so that wecan, should the time ever arise when it is needed, meet any first.shock of attack upon ourselves or the territories for which we areresponsible, meet it, hold it, perhaps beat it back by ourselves, butif not at least meet it, hold it, until further assistance can come.That is why the vote for the defences of this country hasrisen from what for so long was about $ 400 million, to 250 millionthis year. It is not something which can bring joy to the heart of anyof us because there are so many other requirements for this money,and for what this money could provide. But while it cannot bring joy,it is an -inescapable obligation. I do not propose to provide as muchas some of our opponents or some of our I don't know what they aresome of the people who stand between us and our opponents, wouldrequire to be provided for defence because I believe we need to buildup the nation as well. But there is this requirement we are meetingand there is this change in Australia's position in the world and whatit has to do. We have another change, I think, a change in socialconscience. Up until recently, even during Liberal administration,we took the view that those who are old or ill or invalided or in someother way the subject of the slings and arrows of outrageous fortuneshould be helped, yes, but should be helped only to a certain degree.
-3We expected that the families of those persons, the charities outside,should contribute to what a government, a people was prepared to do,and that therefore a government and a people were only prepared tomake some gestures of help towards those who were so handicapped,towards those who were aged. I don't believe that any longer this isa tenable philosophy. I have abandoned it myself and I have abandonedit on behalf of the Liberal Party. I feel it is necessary to see thatpeople such as this are -provided with enough to live on without havingto depend on outside assistance, enough to live on in a simple, frugalway, because after all, we do want savings to continue as well, andself-reliance to continue as well, but at least enough to see there issufficient to eat, and that there is no requirement to donate blanketsin order to keep people warm. This is one of the things this Governmentwill seek to do, is seeking to do. It is a change in approach from whatwas previously that of the Liberal Party.We have another change. We have suddenly discoveredthat it is possible to develop this nation far more quickly than everwas thought possible before. I speak not only of the enormous mineraldiscoveries which have been made, though they are of great significancein the development of areas which previously had nobody living in themat all, enormous significance in adding to our overseas earnings. Ispeak also of the development of new industries. I speak of the increasein production from each acre of farm land in Australia. I speak of whatnew technology can contribute and is contributing. This is progressinggeometrically. It is not going slowly. It is bounding ahead, and thisrequires enormous amounts of capital, and enormous amounts ofenthusiasm and energy and understanding from the Australian people.This takes me, particularly at this Liberal gathering,to a need to examine some of the basic tenets which, since 1949, havenot been examined at all. I speak of a need to stand and quitedispassionately survey the relationships between the various levelsof government in Australia the Australian Government, the StateGovernment, the Municipal Government. There was a time, whenthis party was formed, when it was believed, and when it was a dogmaand when it was unquestionable that all an Australian Government oughtto do was to hand out particular sums of money to Queensland, or toWestern Australia, or to whoever it may be and say, " Spend these inthe way in which you think best. I do not think that those conditionsprevail any longer. Is it or is it not necessary that an AustralianGovernment should be charged with the responsibility of seeing thatthe economy of Australia as a whole is managed as a whole so thatinflation is kept under control, so that deflation is met by an infusionof credit, so that overseas investment keeps coming in?These are things that need to be examined and argued anddiscussed. Is it necessary now and here I am going to put my ownviews and say that I think it is to see that an Australian child, inwhatever part of Australia he is born, is offered uniform facilities foreducation? Is it necessary to see that somebody who falls ill in anydivision of Australia has the sam e opportunity for treatment in hospital,has the same opportunity for care as he would have in any other part ofAustralia? / 4
-4It is my belief that the Australian people believe thatit is necessary to see that this should happen. But how it is to bebrought about is something for discussion by an Australian Government,by State Governments, by Liberal Members and by workers for Liberalparties. Because I do believe that while it is necessary to see that theiethings happen, it is also necessary to see that centralist administrationfrom Canberra should not take place, but rather the goal having beenset, the achievement of the goal is left to those governments closer tothe people than is the central government. This is not to be taken asan abdication of the responsibility of setting the goal:There is something else beyond that, something I havebeen preaching and something I will continue to preach. That is I thin~ kthe time has come, indeed perhaps it is past time when we, whereverwe may live in this nation of ours, should begin to feel a real sense ofAustralianism. We should begin to feel a pride in the nation to which.we belong, begin to look ahead to what this nation should achieve in theway of helping other nations abroad, in the way of compassion inside itsown boundaries, in the way of social justice between its people, f eela belief that whatever we may be we belong to an exciting country. Webelong to a nation which in a mere blink of an eye by the end of thiscentury will be 28 million, and then we will go on and on and begin tothink with a sense, not of chauvinism, but of national humility how wein this lucky country, as Liberals and as Australians, can best use theopportunities presented to us. We must see that when' we grow to thatsize, we will not only have mighty industrial muscles, we will not onlyhave vastly increased defence potential, we will not only have, as I hope,an internal compassion for our ill and sick which might not have beenseen in any nation before, but we will have also as we go abroad a lightin our eye, a fire in our heart, as we hold up our heads and say, weare Australians. And this, in a sense, is a watershed. This in a sense isa goal, and this is something with which you, as you have helped in thepast, can help immensely in the future.What is it that Australians want? What is it thatindividual human beings ought to want? Not only though this isimportant the opportunity for material well-being, not only thechance to improve the farm on which they live or expand the businesswhich they run or do better work in the factory in which they work andreceive more wages; not only that but also a belief which we must instilin them and which we must make real a belief that in improving afarm, in expanding a business, in working harder and getting more wages,they are not only materially improving their position but they arecontributing to the sort of thing that I have tried to outline for you.That they are contributing to that kind of country in which their childrencan grow up, and in their turn contribute for their children. These arethe things, the tasks before us some easy, some hard, some specific,some not easy to spell out because they are matters more of feeling thanof direct figures. These are what we are after. These are what I think youare after, and judging by the success that you have so far had, if youcontinue the help you have so far given, I will try to see in the shorttime I am here that your expectations are fulfilled. They won't be
fulfilled without mistakes being made from time to time because allpeople make mistakes. Indeed, one would need to be a superman notto. But the attempt that will be made will be honest and I believe thatthe team we've got will advance along that road which I've tried topoint out. I come now, Sir, to a remembrance of something mywife always says to me before I make a speech. She says, " Alwaysremember that those people who are sitting in the room would thoroughlyendorse these four lines of poetry:-" I love a finished speakerI really truly do,I don't mean one who's polishedI just mean one who's through.I'm through



I
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 85/ 1968
CAPTAIN COOK BI-CENTENARY CELEBRATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Rear Admiral G. C. Oldham, C. B. D. S. has
been appointed Commonwealth Director of the Captain Cook Bi-centenary
Celebrations. A wide range of proposals to celebrate the 200th
anniversary of Captain Cook's discovery and exploration of the
eastern coast of Australia has been received and the Government
proposes to mark the historic occasion in a fitting manner.
The Government is pleased to have obtained the
services of Rear Admiral Oldham who will supervise the planning
and development of all Commonwealth activities and also co-operate
as necessary with the authorities or committees appointed by the
States to organise celebrations.
Rear Admiral Oldham retired from the Navy in 1962
after a long and distinguished career. He served in many ships of
the Royal Australian Navy and was Captain of H. M. A. ships " Swan",
" Warramunga", " Australia" and " Sydney". At the time of his
retirement he was Flag Officer in Charge, East Australia Area.
CANBERRA 17 October 1968 



66/ 161
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
ROBERTSON ELECTORATE
TERRIGAL, N. S. W. 18 OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President,. Mr. Bridges-Maxwell, other Members of Parliament
and Members of this Federal Conference:-
it has been very pleasant for me today to come to this
electorate. I was able to meet too few of the people because time was
so short, but, nevertheless, it has been, insofar as I have been able
to meet some people, quite delightful. It has been doubly delightful,
in a way, because I am with a member of the Federal Parliament who
I think perhaps more than most members, more than almost all members,
0 is really concerned with social welfare questions in Australia.
He has given a great deal of time to this, a great deal
of thought to this. He bombards me with memoranda about this, and
much of what he has to say not all but a great deal of what he has
to say has been extremely significant, and some of it has found its
way into something that we are going to carry out. This is important
to us, I think, as a country, as I will develop later.
What I really want to say to you all here tonight is that
you are, some of you initially, some of you as spiritual successors,
the same sort of people who, over two decades ago, decided that Australia
was going in the wrong direction. Those people who came together
in 1945, nearly twenty-five years ago, decided the type of government
they had, the philosophy which that government was following, was one
0 which would neither make our nation great nor give to the individuals
in that nation the full chance to develop their own capacity. They
therefore formed a new political party, and subsequently changed the
government. This has been significant, I believe, because if that
change had not been brought about by those who belonged to conferences
such as this throughout all Australia then we would not now be withincooee
of the kind of nation that we are. It was because you and your
predecessors did this that we were able to get away from a conception
that the individual existed only to serve the state, and rather to accept
the unalterable truth that a state ought to exist, and the only proper basis
for a state to exist, is for that state to serve the interests of the individuals
who make it up. So you got away from all the controls, you got away from
all the dogma, you got away from all the old-fashioned thinking which, had
it continued, would have prevented us from being what we are now.
And I believe that what you did then has already -paid enormous
dividends to the nation in which we live. At that time people were saying,
if you have five or six per cent of unemployment, that is reasonable, that
is the sort of thing that we can expect. At that time, people were saying,
we ought to have profit control. It doesn't matter if somebody invents
something new a new patent, a new way of doing things, a better way
let me use this example in this electorate a better way of growing oranges
so that we get more cases per tree, more trees per acre that doesn't matter.
/ 2 
-2
And we moved away from that, and during the period
between then and now, we have advanced because of the assistance
you then gave and are still giving.
But there has been a change now. We are facing a
period of change almost comparable with that period we faced two
and a half decades ago, because there are new problems facing our
nation, there are new courses we have to chart, there are new decisions
we have to take. Some two and a half decades ago, there was no question
about who would defend Australia. Great Britain would defend it. When
the time came that she was in danger, we would go to her assistance
and we went to her assistance in 19 14-18, in 1939-45 ( even before that
in the Boer War), and th flower of our manhood. died in those two
conflagrations. But in between times, we had no worry about defending
ourselves because we were defended by the British Empire, as it then
was, and the British Navy which ruled the seas and secured our
independence. All that has changed.
Now Britain has withdrawn, or is withdrawing from this
part of the world. Now those countries to our north, which for so long
were ruled either by Britain or by Holland, or by France, or by some'
other European power, have become independent nations in their own
right. Now there lies behind those indpcpendent nations the threat of I
won't say communism but the threat of expansion on the Marxist-Leninist
dogma that communism must be imposed by force over the whole world.
We find ourselves contiguous to new nations and we find ourselves with
this new threat, and we find ourselves without the shield on which, as
long as we have been a nation, we have depended.
This is one of the great changes we must admit has
happened. There are two things that flow from it.
First we must cement our relations with the United States
under the ANZUS pact, for our own protection. Second, we must see
what we can do to maintain the stability of those nations to our north,
and thirdly we must contribute to our own capacity for our own defence
more of our resources than we have ever had to contribute before.
So we find ourselves requiring not $ 400 million for our
own defence, but in this year 250 million, and we will find, as the
years go by that the amount of money required for this will increase,
though the amount ' of GNP for this, as far as I am concerned ( the
percentage of Gross National Product) will not. I do not li be this. I
doubt if you like this, because this kind of expenditure, thwje kind of
resources could go into schools, roads and developments, and that area
in which my opponent seems to be so engrossed sewerage and many
other fields which are important and significant, but no so important and
significant as this. This is one great change which recently has come about
and which we must face, and are facing.
Then I believe I do not necessarily put these in order of
priority, but they are all important that we must adopt, as a nation in
the situation in which we find ourselves today, a new concept for looking
after those who are old or ill or handicapped or in some other way the
subject of the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. / 3 
-3
. Up until very recently, the Party which I lead and which
you support accepted the philosophy that what we had to do in the field
of social welfare was to make a contribution, that we gave something,
but that we didn't expect that something which we gave to be enough to
meet all the needs of the human individual who was in need. We expected
that the family, as it used to do, should be able to look after, to some
extent, people who were in need.. We thought the charities from outside
should contribute too. I don't think, in the nation in which we find
ourselves today, we can any longer accept this. For myself, and for
the Party which I lead, and I hope and believe for you, I am of the opinion
that we must accept the philosophy that we need to be sure that the
contribution the community makes to people in this position is enough
to enable them to live in frugal comfort without any assistance from
outside though if that assistance from family or charity omes, well
that is so much the better. But there should be nobody who, in need,
in illness, perhaps without a family, perhaps without access to a
charity, does not have einoug h to eat, does not have enough to heat their
home, does not have suff icient blan'kets to keep them warm at night. This
we must stop, anid this will stop because that is another new approach
that we must make. It is not easy to make it because the requirements of
people of this kind vary so enormously. Some who live in aged persons'
homes can save on what the community gives them. Others who live
by themselves in small back streets and pay high rents cannot, but
these are problems we are now examining. These are problems the
Welfare Committee of the Government is trying to work out, and I
believe will work out. These are problems to which your member in
particular is turning his attention. These are problems which present
again a change in the attitude which we must take as a nation to those
who have served the nation well in their time, and who deserve, in my
view, at least a decent, respectable self-respecting chance to live in
their old age or in their invalidism.
Then we have, here now in'-this nation, a sort of
excitement, an opportunity for development which has never been
known in it before. For a long time we grew gradually. Yes, there
were gold rushes. People suddenly came here. They built ghost
towns. They mined the gold. They went away, and the population
increased as they came and decreased as they left. Apart from that,
there was just a gradual development of industry, a gradual development
of agriculture, a gradual lzcrease in the size of towns arnd c2&gt; s.
All of a sudden, we are finding all throughout Australia new
things iron ore, which will bring us in enormous overseas income oil
in Bass Strait maybe oil in this electorate, who knows? We hope so.
AMuasytbrea loiail. ofIfr sohno roer ef rfoomr Athuiss trealleicat. o raNteic. kelI t fdoor eAsnu'st trmaliaat. t erN.. e.. w tooiwl nfsol~ r" ips
being built, new ports being dredged, new railways being constructed,: the
whole face of the north of Austradlia being changed. Along with it, we . have
the great development in our own industrial capacity inside Australia, the
great requirement for people with new technological skills, the desire for
people who will work and who have knowledge. This requires billions
not millions but billions of dollars of private investment and millions,
perhaps hundreds of millions of Government investment.. But the point
is that instead of the gradual progress which for so long continued, we
are now progressing geometrically. The sky is the limit now, as long
as we can get the capital from outside, or from inaide, and the manpower
from outside, and the technological skills from inside to take advantage
of all the opportunities which suddenly have opened up to us. / 4 
4-
This is a thing that has only happened in the last few
years and this is a thing we must reach out and grasp because in
grasping it and in using the opportunity so grasped properly lies the
decision of what we will. be in two or three or four decades ahead as
a nation. We will be by the turn of the century, twenty-eight million
people not the twelve we are nowo and the turn of the century is only
some thirty years ahead which, in the life of a nation, is but the blinking
of an eye. Yet what we do now to seize that opportunity will decide
whether, at that times we have achieved all that it is possible for us to0
do or whether th,= e living then will -say " Thirty years ago people didn't
have vision. They didn't see what was possible. They didn't t-r-ke the
measures that were necessaryi They fell short, and we would have
been a greater nation had they not fallen short.
There are some other things that are changing too. I
did see, Sir, on my way here, as you pointed out, the great roadworks
which were taking place in order to enable people from here to get to
Sydney quickly, and people from Sydney to get here quickly. These 1:
have seen in quite a number of places in New South Wales and indeed
in other States, and it made me think about whether in fact it was quite
so impossible for a State Government to run its requirements, as has
sometimes been suggested to me.' But I put that aside and what I say
quite seriously to you all is that you are all Liberals, you are all people
who, in the long run, will make a considered opinion felt not accepted
by direction but felt, considered, and if reasonable, accepted. When
this party was formed two and a half decades ago, there were certain
dogmas accepted concerning the relations between an Australian
Government and the State Governments which made up the divisions
of this nation. They may have been right I think they were then; they
may have been wrong, but surely you cannot ossify, surely something
which has been accepted two and a half decades ago, it is reasonable
to say ought to be taken out and looked at and examined again to see
what a nation twenty-five years later now needs if it is properly to be
a nation. I do not tonight wish to argue philosophical cases, merely
to ask you to think about them. But I don't believe that in a nation of the
size we are and in a nation with the destiny we have, it is possible for
any other government than an Australian Government to have the overall
control of the economy, to say whether a deficit should be large or small,
to let credit run free if that is necessary or to constrict credit if that
is necessary, to control taxation, to see indeed that the economic management
of all our nation is run in one way.
I think there is growing in our population as I think there
ought to be growing in our population, a requirement that the educati onal
facilities available to a child should be of roughly comparable standard,
whether that child is born in Western Australia or New South Wales or
Queensland or wherever it may be. I think that there is growing in our
population a requirement that if somebody becomes ill and is in need of
care, then they should be able to get roughly comparable care, no matter
in what division of this nation they may become ill. If I am wrong in this,
then I am wrong, but these are things you should think about because they
are things that I am thinking about, because they are things the Liberal
Party will have to think about if it is to move with the times. 
I 
I give only those examples there are many others but
in giving them, I do not want to be accused, as I have been accused, of
being a centralist. I am not. I think the administration of all these matters
should remain in governments closer to the people than any government
in Canberra can be, But think about whether the goals that I have suggested,
the provision of finances that I have suggested for special purposes in
education or in roads or in transport or in health ought not really to be
something in which an Australian Government has a leading part and in
which a state government has the administration and the disbursement
of the funds. This is heresy if it is to be compared to the 1945 Constitution
of the Liberal Party. What I am asking you to do is to put your minds on it
and see whether you think it is a reasonai-. e sort of heresy or not. I think
it is. But in the long run, it is conferences here and in all the other
electorates in Australia who will have a great voice in deciding just what
ought to be done. Certainly I am sure of this. The whole matter needs
examination and discussion because this is another of the great changes
facing us as a nation today.
The rest what is it that a political party such as ours
should seek to hold out to the people of Australia? Full employment?
Yes, we have done that. A chance for material benefit? Yes, we have
done that. The opportunity to take a risk and lose if the risk was not
wisely chosen, an opportunity to take a risk and win and keep one'ss
winnings if the risk was wisely chosen, an opportunity for material
benefit, for harder work and greater rewards for that harder work? Of
course these things we need to hold out, and I believe these things are
now available. We need to give to people more than that because this is
not enough. This material benefit, this material advantage, these
material advances are not for individuals. People want something more.
They want a chance not only to get but to give, not only to accumulate but
to contribu te, a feeling that in what they are doing they are not only,
improving the farm on which they live, expanding the factory which they
manage, getting a better business, but a feeling that in doing that and in
the other community work in which they may be involved, they are enabling
their children to inherit a country which is a better one than the one they
inherited themselves. They want a country with better opportunities for
those who are willing to take them, with a requirement, and indeed a demand
for sacrifice and contribution as well as material benefit from what they
may do in their daily lives.
I think that people want this. I am sure they ought to want
it. I believe it is at the basis of Liberal philosophy. I think this kind of
feeling in one way or another, with whatever nuances there may be about
it is what has drawn you to support the kind of political philosophy which
we apply and which has brought you to this dinner tonight. And if I am
right in this, then I think that at the turn of the century we will 1.5 not
only twenty-eight million people but that we will be twenty-eight million
people who are materially great, who are becoming a power in the world,
who are able to defend themselves, who see the horizons towards which
they are going and who are in themselves fulfilled individuals. */ 6 
6-
If this is the end result of what we are trying for, then
it is an end result which I think has not yet been attained by any other
nation I can think of in the world. So it is not only these material matters.
It is the chance * to provide along with material advancement self -satisfaction
that is the wrong word self-fulfilment and at that time a horizon which
is quite unlimited. If you and others like you believe in this and help us
in this and see that we have a chance to do this, then while you will not
see the results any more than I will, you can, I think, have faith that
those results will be great in the annals of the world.
I believe that you are contributing to some thing which
will be greater than anything we have seen before. You know, it was
said, " A man' s reach must exceed his grasp or what's a Heaven for."
I'd translate that as saying, " A nation's reach must exceed its grasp
or what's a future for?", and a great deal depends on you to see whether
our nation's reach does exceed its grasp and the future that is possible
is attained. I will do my best; those with me will do their best, but
we depend in the ultimate on you, and I hope you will give us your support. 


1 69/ 158OPENING OF OLYMPIC SWIMMING POOLWOY WOY, N. S. W. 19 OCTOBER 1968Mr. President, Distinguished Guests, Members of Parliament, Ladiesand Gentlemen: There has been one lesson I have learnt during theltimethat I have been opening various buildin gs, swimming pools and thingsof that kind. That lesson is that I am usually so pleased and relievedto have reached the end of whatever it is I have to say, and I know thateverybody sitting around is so pleased and relieved that I have reachedthe end of whatever it is I have to say, that I generally forget to declareopen whatever it is that is supposed to be declared open! Now somebodyhas got to remind me on this occasion because there is a button therewhich I need to press.This occasion has something quite unique about it. Veryoften one comes along and opens whatever it is, and in fact it has beenin use for weeks or even months before one gets there. I gather that onthis occasion this pool has not been in use at all and that this really willbe an opening. That is another reason for me not to delay too long soall those excited children who want to get in can do so. All of you, too,who I am sure want to get in and se~ e how magnificent it is, will in factbe able to do so. Those members of the Pool Committee, must feel somesense of pride and satisfaction today as their minds go back to the timewhen they banded together and decided they would do something to helpthe community in which they live, and as they remember the work thatthey did and the time that it took. I am sure many evenings were engagedand much travelling was entailed I hope that today they feel a full senseof satisfaction and a full sense that what they have done has been worthwhile,as indeed it has been.
We, as Mr. Bridges-Maxwell has said, are going to build between us all a really great Australian nation for Australians, and that will require from those of us who are now able to work and from those who are at school and being taught, that will require a considerable amount of effort, a considerable amount of concentration, a considerable amount of  hard work. But a life for a country is no good if the whole of it is engaged in hard work and effort, necessary though that is. There must be room along the way for play and laughter and gaiety and song as well as the hard work; and for the provision of sporting facilities. such as this pool, or football ovals or the beaches that you have and I hope will preserve. These are the things which give. to our growing generation that opportunity for healthy recreation, that opportunity for building up their muscles which will in turn enable them to turn their minds and efforts to building a country and advancing it for their children.
paricuar ote think this has been a magnificent effort. I have taken paricuar oteof a suggestion that at some future time I might be invitedback. Now that appeals to me not because I have seen much of the Shire of Woy Woy, but because I have felt since I got out of the car today' that Ihave met a great number of people who are friends and whom I would liketo see again if I could come back here. So all I need is an invitation again from the Mayor. Now amnot going to delay you any more. I remember fourlines of poetry which my wife keeps dinning into me whenever I am aboutto become engaged in making a public speech. What she says is: " Listen,look at those people out in front of you and something like this is runningthrough their minds:-" I love the finished speakerI really, truly do.1 don't mean one who's polishedI just mean one who's through."And I think it's time I was through and the pool opened. So I do declare the pool open.. I remembered'



FOR PRESS: I 2 5 ~ C a P. M. No. 86/ 1968
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS
COMMISSION APPOINTMENTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, announced
today the re-appointment of Sir Leslie Melville, K. B. as
Chairman of the Commonwealth Grants Commission for a period
of three years, and the re-appointment of Mr. H. J. Goodes, C. B. E.,
for a period of one year.
Sir Leslie has been Chairman of the Commission
since 1966 and was first appointed to the Grants Commission in
1965. Mr. Goodes has been a member of the Commission
since 1965. The other member of the Grants Commission is
Mr. W. R. Lane.
CANBERRA 21 October 1968 



FEDERAL~~~ COUNCI OFTELBEA AT
OF AUSTALI
HoeCaner CabraACT
DlgHtoeCla imCnab ra: aberA . T
It is in some ways a very awesome thing to stand here in
front of you at a place where two great leaders have previously stood and
to address a Party which for so long has kept in power a government which
has enabled Australia to be transformed. I think that most of you will
understand the humility with which anybody must, for the first time, appear
before you in a place where those other leaders have for so long appeared.
I don't propose to talk to you for very long tonight, but there are some
matters I think we must regard, as a party, as new matters for Australia
to consider, as new matters for the members of this Party to solve.
Some of them, of course, are not entirely new but they are
new in the degree to which they impinge upon us, and one of those is the matter
of defending our country. it has been since the last Federal Conferencq Of
this Party that the final decision has been taken for the accelerated withdrawal,
and what appears virtually a complete withdrawal, of the United Kingdom from
the countries to our North and from East of Suez. And though for a lor~ g time
we have been talking, all of us, of the need for more defence for Australia,
of the need to look more to ourselves for our own security, yet this has only
recently been brought home in the starkest terms.
It may be traversing ground which ought not to be traversed,
but yet we should have it in our mind that for nearly two centuries we lived
under the protection of Great Britain. It was her Navy that kept us safe,
and it was only when crises arose that young men and women flocked from all
corners of this Cornonwealth and made sacrifices, at whatever level was
required, during the time of conflict. In between little attention was devoted
to defence. Now that has changed and must be accepted as a new situation
facing Australia. So we find that we have had, as a government, to raise a
vote for our own defences which was running at some $ 400 million a year
to a vote which is running at 250 million and which in terms of money,
I think, will over the years ahead need to Ire raised still more ( though not, if
I can help it in terms of our gross national product).
Not only has this new situation forced this vast diversion
of resources upon us but it has exacerbated the solution of the other new
problems to which as a nation and as a party we are pledged. And yet
some of these problems cannot just be put aside. I hate, and I believe most
of the peop le in this room would hate the thought of all those resources
devoted to defence. When we think of the number of schools, of the number
of hospitals, of the new freeways, of all the things for which the people of
Australia are calling which could be provided with that sum of money, we 
-2
must regret that it is necessary for that sum to go to defence. However,
schools, freeways, hospitals and all these other things are of little use
unless they can be safely held and defended by the country which has them.
But there are matters which cannot, in a modern nation
with a modern conscience, be put aside or denied. Here, too, though these
are not new matters yet, Sir, I think there needs to be a new approach, a
new examination. You have all heard me speak from time to time of the
essential need to care for the old, the ill, the handicapped in our population,
But up until very recently we, as a Liberal Party, took the view that our
contribution towards such people should be just that, a contribution, and
that we would expect them to receive from other sources, from their
family or from some charity, or from another source somewhere,
additional assistance to enable them to live in reasonable self-respect.
I don't believe that is an approach that can any longer be accepted by the
Liberal Party. I believe that the new and necessary approach and the one
which my Government will take must be to see that a contribution made to
such people is sufficient for them to live in frugal comfort and with
reasonable self-respect, so that there is no need for appeals to be made
for blankets to keep them warm or for fuel for their houses in the winter
or for additional food because they do not have enough. This, in a sense,
is a new approach but it is an approach, Sir, that we must make.
In its application it is not simple. Again, always in the past
in seeking to help people of this kind, we have dealt with a broad buh. we
have said, " Let us raise this pension or that pension by so much across the
board. This approach, I think, is wrong and wasteful in that it on occasions
leads to the provision of more than is required for the standards of which
I have spoken to be attained, and on occasions leads to less. For that.
reason we have, as a government, a Welfare Committee researching and
searching into the requirements of people of this kind so that the aid ca * n be
given where the need is greatest and so that there will be, from the resources
available, sufficient to meet those areas where the need is great.
This Committee, which has already resulted in your
Government removing one great fear that was in the hearts of the Australian
people and that is the fear of a long-continued illness being unable to be
paid for by the community, is bringing down recommendations to us which
will seek to attain the ends and ideals I have been putting before you. And
while they are seeking to do that, they will also, as I believe from the ' work
they have already done, ensure that in doing what I have suggested shoul d
be done, they will not remove the incentive, will not remove the rewaroi for
those who have saved to assist themselves over and above what the com~ munity
may give them when they retire.
We have, you have, all this period of time since 1949,
created a climate in which, gradually at first, then with ever-increasing
speed, Australia has become transformed. All that time ago, you rejected
a concept which I believe was inherent in the philosophy of our opponents,
and that concept was that the individual existed to serve the state and that
the state did not exist to serve the individual. And from that grew an
insistence on controls, unnecessary controls, and from that grew a .9/ 3 
-3
stagnation which became so impossible to bear, which resulted in a rate
of unemployment of five per cent which was said to be all that a developed
country could expect to attain, that you revolted against it and changed it
and changed the philosophy. As a result, you brought about that climate of
development, that Possibility for the individual to take his risks and reqp
his rewards if he were successful and to take the consequences if he wasn'tt,
according to his own efforts and according to his own ability and energy.
So in that period of time, this country grew to the stage of incipient gr~ atness
in which it now finds itself.
It finds itself now in a position it has never been inbefore.
This again is something new which faces the nation and which faces
us as a Liberal Party. You all know of the enormous developments now
taking place in the North of Western Australia, in the seas off the coast
of Victoria, in Queensland, and of the immense material benefits which will
flow and are flowing from them nickel, iron ore, oil, minerals of all
kinds, requiring not millions, but billions of capital for their full and
proper -development; another call upon the national resources which is
new, a requirement as I believe, Sir, for this Party to accept that it is
necessary, with these possibilities before us, with the capital required for
their full development being hard to get, that priorities of development for
the good of the nation need to be examined and need to be decided.
Then we come to another matter, on upon which, Sir,
we touched this morning, one which will be the subject of future discussion
by the Party, and that is, in your own. words: What sort of a Federal
system do w want, and how can we best make a Federal system work?
Is it right and proper that nearly a quarter of a century after a general
philosophical programme was adopted in a country which was then different
from the position in which it now finds itself, in a country which had
problems not measurable against those now to be faced, that we should look
again to see whether the philosophy then adopted meets the requirement of
a nation a quarter of a century later.
This is new. It is good that it is new. It is good that
it is going to be discussed. WV ith one of the points so long ago adopted', Sir,
I believe there can be absolutely no question, and with that all here would
agree, and that is enshrined in the words.. " the development to the fullest
extent of a national spirit in Australia". It has been growing. I am su* re
it will grow, and I am certainly going to do all that is within my power, as
a leader of the Liberal Party to see that this national spirit is fostered and
is developed and that everybody in Australia now, or in thirty years' ti me
wnen we will be twenty-eight million people, will feel some kind of fire in
the heart when they say, " I am an Australian" first, foremost and all the
time. Then the next point which will be the subject of discussion
is this phrase... " the maintenance unimpaired of a Federal system of
government with appropriate divisions of power". We will need to examine
what is meant by " unimpaired" because quite clearly it doesn't mean
" unchanged'" or else we would not, as a Liberal Party, have changed as
we have in such things as passing a referendum on aborigines and in other
ways. What we need to work out in our philosophy is not the question of
divisions of funds. This of course comes later. This of course is importart,
but this of course is different from what I am now talking about. / A 
-4
What we need is to consider let me put it rather not
in terms of what we need, but the kind of approach which I have in mind and
with which some may agree, others may notj but which it is time for this
Party to thoroughly examine.
In my view, Sir, it would be unthinkable for an
Australian Government not to have the overriding power over the maintenance
of the Australian economy as a whole. It would be unthinkable to have a
nation where an Australian Government could not assess the resources and
materials available throughout the nation and could not, if necessary, let
credit run so that all materials and all resources were used, and if necessary,
restrict credit so that cost inflation because of an over-demand on materials
and resources availabledid not occur. I don't really * think this is a subject
of dispute, but it is the starting point from which I begin.
I think that it is necessary for an Australian Government
to be able to effec t the division of resources in the nation betweL:. 1 the public
and the private sector according to its requirements of private development
or of public development, and I know of no other way in which this can be
done but by an Australian Government.
I think that it is necessary, if these tenets I have put
forward are accepted, that the major fields of taxation in Australia should
be, as they are now under the Constitution, the responsibility of an
Australian Government, both as to their use and as to the rates of taxation apphed
within them. It would seem to me to be silly, if to meet some particular
economic situation for the good of the nation, the Treasurer for example,
lowered the rate of income tax in order to enable more to be available to be
spent by the private sector and private people, and burdens to be taken
off those who are now so heavily burdened, the middle range, and were to
do this for economic reasons, and those taxes were to be arranged again
by some other source. These are all matters o f overall economic management.
These are all matters which now, under the Constitution, are the responsibility
of an Australian Government. There are, of course, other fields in which much
discussion can take place. I will deal with only one of them. I would ike
the conference to feel, as I hope they do feel, that what I am saying to jhem
is what I feel is for the good of Australia as a whole and a necessity if:
Australia is to progress in the way it should. They are not just light or
random thoughts. There is a need for an Australian Government to be ' able
to move to a field of special assistance somewhere in Australia if that field
of special assistance is going to be of benefit to this nation, and it cannot,
without an Australian Government, be exp loited.
if, for example, there is to be a requirement for cheap
power to be provided somewhere in Queensland and it is known that if
that cheap power is provided then there will be twenty other industries
established to use it and a port will grow into a city as a result, but it
will cost $ 200 million, then there would be a requirement for an Australian
Government to be able to assist in that way. If there is to be a requirement
for a pipeline to bring natural gas from somewhere in Australia to Adelaide
and it cannot be achieved without assistance from a national government, then
a national government needs to be able to have the right and the capacity to
assist in that way. 
I don't think I need to expand this list, but I would ask the
conference to put this question in their minds. But for the use of grants
such as Section 96, Sir, do you believe that we would now have a uniform
system of rail gauges throughout Australia? You answer it in your own
minds. I don't believe we would. ^ o there is a need, too, for this kind of
assistance, and this kind of capacity for an Australian Government.
Let me refer to another matter, another aspect of the same
matter because these are all things that this Party must look at and malke
up its mind about and they are important and they need not be the subject
of snap judgments. I think that there is a demand from the people of
Australia as a whole, and I think it is a just and a proper and a necessary
demand that after general purpose grants have been provided to State
Governments as they have been and will be in increasing amounts, there is
a need on behalf of an Australian Government that certain responsibilities
to the nation are met. There is a need, for example, to see that the
facilities for the education of a child are roughly the same, no matter in
what part of Australia that child may be born and grow up. There is a
need and a requirement to see that the facilities for the care of the ill are
roughly the same in Australia, no matter where it may be that a citizen
falls ill. These, if they are demands and I believe they are and
if they are proper demands and I think they are are again matters in which
an Australian Government must concern itself.
If it is true and I believe it is true, that in the world of
today we must grow, not only economically but technologically, if it is true
we must develop our own technology and train people in methods of operation
and methods of building and methods of application of time, if this is
true, then it is a national requirement that proper technical and technclogical
education is applied throughout the whole of Australia. If that is a national
requirement, then no national government can sit baclk and wash its hands
of that responsibility and say, " Oh, but general purpose grants have been
made and there is nothing further for us to do, even if this requirement
isn't met. So I am glad that amongst the other new things that I have
mentioned and the other problems which we face and the other calls upon
us which prevent us from being able, because of a shortage of manpower and
material to do all we want to do, that this other matter is to be a subject of
discussion. I have sought merely tonight, because I thought it was my
duty, to give an insight into some of my thinking to those of you who are here.
I don't believe it would be true or right or proper to describe that thinking
as the thinking of a centralist or a unificationist. It is the thinking of somebody
who believsthat national requirements do exist, there is a responsibility on a
national government to see they are met, but that after that, then the
general grants made and made in increasing quantities are used and
administered by those governments nearest to the people.
So it will be an interesting discussion, a necessary discussion,
a new approach. I think in any case that on the record of what we have done
we ought to be able to solve the problems still before us With you, I
look forward to that day I spoke of when we are not twelve but twenty-eight
million and growing more rapidly to forty million and becoming a great
material power, a power with a social conscience, applying those principles
we are now working out and will begin to apply again in the next Budget, and
giving to our people the feeling not only of material greatness but a capacity
and an opportunity to develop themselves and their own individuality which
after all was one of the reasons, if not the most important reason for the
foundation of this Liberal Party. I think, Sir, we will be able to achieve these
things together. 



TT. I
CLOSING SESSION OF INTERNATIONAL UNION K69CJ~%
OF BUILDING SOCIETIES CONGRESS
SYDNEY, N. S. W. OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Members of Overseas and Australian
Governments and Delegates from many countries:-
For a week now, you have been devoting yourselves to
discussing the questions of how to build houses, how to provide good
and healthy accommodation and how to harness savings and use the
thrifty instincts of individuals in order to see that these ends are
attained. Your gathering here in such numbers, the roll calls of your
distinguished-delegations, the professional and technical nature of your
discussions all bear great witness to your understanding and dedication
to the issues before you. And yet in a sense perhaps, your work has
only begun with these discussions.
Throughout history until very recent times, men have
lived for the most part in small communities, in small towns or
villages and what would now be regarded as small cities or indeed
have wandered with their flocks and herds. It is in this modern age
that we have been presented with a new situation, or at least with a
situation whi * ch is accelerating in difficulty and in opportunity, because
man has to a large extent now become a city dweller.
As public health measures have advanced and as
technological progress has been used, it has become possible to
manufacture more and more goods, world population has risen and
is rising it looks like doubling again within a single generation and
with this, the movement towards larger and larger communities will
continue. Thus I think all of us are faced with a problem of modern
times and modern society, and that is to make cities for men rather
than to fit men into inadequate cities. This is an enormous problem,
calling for very great resources and allied inextricably to your interests
of providing housing, if we are to get a proper end result.
Let us examine the problem. I am a country man myself
and I know the pleasure and the joys of open spaces. Somehow we have
to preserve these, and yet at the same time, plan for those who will
necessarily have to live in the more populous parts of the towns and cities.
You people who are building seeking to build the living
areas in these cities have a particular interest, I think, in seeing that
your efforts in housing are not nullified, that the people in your healthy
new houses are not choked by smog, that the people living in your houses
can move freely and quickly from place to place, that they are not deafened
nor have their nerves set on edge by a cacophony of noise. These are as
allied to your aims as are the provisions of houses or dwelling places of
any kind themselves. */ 2 
3-
You will need to help with the housing of the needy, as
well as considering the prosperous, and this may and probably will,
involve special partnerships with governments. And there is beyond
your immediate task of mobilising financial resources to permit
families to purchase the homes they would like, the need for the
planning and development of the new communities.
Here in Australia, Sir, the challenge of the future is
strong, strong indeed, because we have a population growing steadily
by natural increase and by continuing intake of migrants. We are
twelve million strong now and if all goes well, we will by the turn of
the century be twenty-eight million. The turn of the century is not
long in the life of a nation. It is but the blinking of an eye before we
will come to the turn of the century. Nor is it long for a planner to
be able to study, foresee and seek to overcome, or at least seek to
show how these problems can be overcome if the resources can be
acquired, nor is it long for the planner to have to do this.
This means that the demand for adequate housing will
be insistent, will continue to make calls on the resources of governments
and of private enterprise, particularly in the fields where the organisations
you represent are active, and particularly in the fields I have touched
on, of seeking to create a proper environment.
I am sure, Sir, you have been told and the conference
has been told that in Australia over seventy per cent of all householders
own their own homes or are paying them off. We, the Government,
encourage this, as you do. And it is also an encouragement, though
much more remains to be done in our country in this field, towards
slum reclamation in attempts to wipe out unhappy legacies of the past.
And it encourages flat construction to serve the preferences of those
who wish to live in that type of dwelling.
Here in Australia, by co-operation and State Governments,
with private enterprise in this field of housing, we try and we aspire to
house our people, to house them at reasonable costs in dwellings of their
own choice and in the locality where they want to live. That is something
of fundamental importance because the standard of a home environment
could well be a critical factor in one's standard of life, and by that I
don't mean that the best people live in the biggest houses. What I mean
is that the householder who likes what he lives in is likely to make the
best citizen, if he likes what he lives in and he likes what is around the
house in which he lives.
Today, forty per cent of we Australians are under
twenty-one, so in truth we are a young country, but we aim to be
mature and to be forward-looking in the way we try to house our people.
In this we regard it as important that old Australians and new Australians
have here the same opportunities to acquire homes of their own or to live
in other dwellings of their choice, and in this aim, Sir, your organisation
plays a helpful and significant part.
I think our record is a creditable one, but it is not a
record which means that by any means full solutions have been found.
It does mean that advances have been made towards these solutions.
*/ 4 
-4-
Now, Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, your presence
here today and the fact that you have honoured us by having your
Congress in Australia is most pleasing to all Australians and most
pleasing to myself as Prime Minister. I know the Australian delegates
have found much of value in this conference. The opportunity to talk
with their experienced colleagues from the older, industrialised
countries has been valuable to them, and I am sure Australia will
gain a lot as a result. I think, too, that the delegates from Asia, Africa and
South America have perhaps learnt much, have perhaps thought much
as to the application of means towards the ends we all seek, and in
particulartowards the fostering of savings and loan movements in their
own countries. You have covered a great deal of important ground in
your deliberations and in examining proposals for a world housing
bank, a world personnel bank, among many other things.
By such assemblies as these, you help to expose the
housing problems of a world society which is expanding rapidly under
enormous population pressures. And more than that, you are contributing
to the search for the solution to the problem of how man can happily,
healthily and with a sense of satisfaction live in the new vast communities
which must grow. You have had much success. I extend my congratulations
to you for what you have done, for what you aspire to do, and for the
spirit which lies behind all of your activities. 


68/ 164CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATIONUNVEILING OF FOUNDATION STONECANBERRA, A. C. T. 28 OCTOBER 1968Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonMr; Chairman, Mr. Minister,-Leader of the Opposition, DistinguishedGuests, Ladies and Gentlemen:I am delighted to be asked to unveil the plaque and I haveno doubt that in due time I'll be told precisely what string to pull in orderto do it. This is one of the most satisfying tasks that I couldimagine myself undertaking, because the unveiling of this plaque is anindication that we are really moving in building the first CanberraCollege of Advanced Education and that College represents a significantnew approach to tertiary education.If I may say so, the occasion is of special significance tome, and satisfaction to me, because I remember not so long ago carryingout a function which was called turning the first sod on the site. This:involved, not as you might imagine using a spade, but using some vastmechanical contraption which took a sod weighing some four cubic yar ds,if I remember rightly, and which at all times I felt was liable to getcompletely out of control. But I remember that well and if I may say so,Sir, the flies were just as bad on that occasion as they are today.I don't claim any proprietary rights in this college. Itfalls within the jurisdiction of my colleague the Minister for Educationand Science, and all the hard work and planning has been done by theInterim Council of the college under your leadership. But it is a symbol.It's the beginning of new things in the A. C. T. and the beginning of newthings throughout the whole of the nation.It is worth restating, I think, on this occasion what it isthat we are starting here. We're starting an institution, one of many,;which has flowed from the acceptance of those reports to which youreferred, Mr. Chairman. Those reports suggested that we shouldtailor our tertiary education system to meet the demands of an exciting,changing age and to meet the requirements of the tide of the future whichhas caught us up and which is going to require of us new schools and newapproaches to education. I think most of us here would be familiar with the reportsof the various committees the Mextin Committee, the Wark Committeeand the Burton Committee and we will know some of the special functionswhich these colleges have to carry out. But let us be fair about one thingright from the start, * and let us make it clear right from the start, to allthose interested in education throughout Australia. These colleges willnot be second level universities. / 2
-2Collectively they will provide an alternative system butnot an inferior system to university education. I will repeat that analternative system but not an inferior system to university education.Each college of the many that will grow or have grown throughout thenation will have its own standards, quality and its own levels of efficiency.Each will be a tertiary institution with a strong vocational bias, as yousaid, offering courses leading to professional excellence in selecteddisciplines. And the colleges will aim to provide scholarship, not onlyfor the sake of scholarship, which was the genesis of university education,but to meet specific needs of industry and of human endeavour in specificspecialised areas. This is where the college courses will differ from thecourses at our universities not all the courses of our universities butvery many of them. The first building here is, as you said, to be a multi-purposebuilding and if all goes well, the students will be here at the beginning of1970. 1 was glad, Sir, that you mentioned that the request of the InterimCouncil of the college that it be allowed to plan for the inclusion of teachereducation has been accepted, at least in principle. When firm proposals,which I think have not yet been made, are received, they will be studiedby us with great care and interest, and I hope and believe with the sameresults as have led to the plans for the college itself.At any rate, a school of teacher education within theCanberra College will add to the pool of trained teachers within Australia,for use within Australia or the Territories, and indeed provide teachersfor local schools. Liberal Studies is one of the first courses which thiscollege will offer. And I want to stress this, because a deliberateinfusion of the liberal arts into a system which is essentially vocationaland which many people seem to think will be extremely technical, is offirst importance. This infusion is designed to ensure that human values arenot lost in a world of machines or the classics abandoned for calculuSand computers. I don't see at all why humanists and technologists haveto be different people or take different approaches to the problems oftheir lives or of the nation. What we aim to produce here, of course,is a new " end product" a liberally-educated technologist, or, if I mayput it another way, without upsetting my distinguished colleague, atechnologically-educated liberal.I believe, Sir, we must develop these colleges in a waywhich will give us plenty of flexibility; adapt the system to the changesnow bearing down upon us changes in environment, in social attitudes,in the application of science and technology changes which have agreater intensity about them now than we have experienced at any pasttime in the history of this country.If we are to reach for the stars, then we must reach forthem with trained minds and skilled hands. / 3
3-One more thing, Sir, I would say. This college now isbeing built in open country, yet within measurable time, within a shorttime, there will be around it the new town of Belconnen. And I hope thatthis college will stand in that town as one example of an AustralianGovernment's active interest and continuing interest in education. Thiscollege is being built to meet a demand in the Capital Territory, butthat demand is reflected across the whole of this continent.No doubt, the college will develop its own tzaditions asthe years go by. You can't merely vest tradition in new things. Youcan't confer tradition like a diploma or a degree, or whatever it is youdecide to confer. You have to let it grow from the quality of its coursesand the capacity of its staff and students.But I am certain that if the beginnings of this college arebuilt upon in the future with the same devotion, with the same skill, ashas been used in the past, that the tradition this college will develop willbe second to none of any tertiary institution in Australia.Sir, here, and again in colleges like it throughout Australia,we are going to see people being educated not merely for the 20th but forthe 21st century, which we are rapidly approaching. And I believe thatwhat may happen in that 21st century will largely be shaped by the productsof these colleges, of universities acting jointly to provide that which thisnation needs a liberal education, scholarship for its own sake, a searchingmind, a capacity to understand new things, a capacity to apply technologyand an insistence that technology so applied be applied for the good of alland not for destructioh, So this is an important occasion; this is for ' me a satisfyingoccasion and for all those who have given their work and their minds andtheir time, I trust that it too is a highly satisfactory occasion.


53RD CONGRESS OF THE R. S. L.CANBERRA, A. C. T. 28 OCTOBER 1968Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonYour Excellency, Sir. Arthur Lee, Mr. Whitlam, Ministers, Members,Service Chiefs of Staff, and Ladies and Gentlemen:-My task is merely to say a few supporting words afterthe Governor-General has opened this Conference. And I will keepthem brief, as I know you would wish them to be kept brief.it is for me a great distinction to be able to stand todayand talk to the representatives of an organisation which has, since itwas formed, had three major objectives at least in my mind threemajor objectives. The first, to see that those who were maimed by war,and the dependents of thos e who were maimed or did not return at allfrom war, were looked after by the nation. The second, to try toensure that the defences of this country were, insofar as our resourcespermitted, kept at a level which would help us to retain what in the pastmembers of this organisation have so dearly fought to retain. And thethird, to see that that which was retained in two world ware is usedproperly in peace for the benefit of the nation.In neither of the great wars fought did we win anythingnew, nor did we seek to. What we did was to retain something old andsomething precious, the right to live in freedom and to develop ourselvesaccording to our people's will. We might not have retained that in myview we would not have retained that but for the sacrifices twice made.And it is therefore a most significant objective of this organisation tosee that the foundation upon which, and upon which alone a great nationcan be built, the foundation of freedom and participation in decisions....to see that that foundation is used to build an enduring structure. Theseare three great objectives.As to the first two, the Governor-General has alreadyindicated the difficulties of getting a quart out of a pint pot. But, I amsure, that insofar as this organisation is concerned, they will neverstop squeezing if I can change the metaphor and regard it as a tube oftoothpaste never cease squeezing the tube to endeavour to get from itthe utmost possible. One thing of which His Excellency spoke was the numberof items on your agenda. One of them will not need to take up much ofyour time the item concerned with the extension of tuberculosisbenefits to those who have fought in special areas or in Vietnam. Thelegislation was amended last week in order to extend these benefits tothese people. As to defence, I know that everyone present is concernedwith the changed situation which faces our nation as a result of the decisionof the British to withdraw from our near north. I know that everyone hererealises that meeting a changed situation and a new challenge requiresdecisions which cannot be lightly arrived at and ought not to be too quicklyrushed into. And that is all I propose to say on that matter. / 2
-2-But it may be appropriate, Sir, to conclude by announcinghere something which I believe has a significance for the organisationand for the nation itself. This November there is an anniversary, andthat is the anniversary of the ending of that great war fought some halfa century ago. We have been asked by the French Government tocontribute from Australia a contingent of troops who will representthis nation, together with a contingent from New Zealand. They willmarch through the streets of the city of Paris and give visible evidenceof the sacrifices made by this nation for a country 10, 000 miles away....but for a cause which is just as significant whether it is 10, 000 ormiles away. And so there will be on this 50th celebration representativesof the Australian Army and the New Zealand Army providing to thepeople of Europe an indication, a reminder of that continuing concernof this nation for the maintenance of freedom, which cost so dearly atthat time and which will be commemorated by this march. I hope thatour decision to send this contingent meets with the approval of thisgathering and indeed I am sure it does.BACKGROUND POINTS ON PARIS CONTINGENT:This will comprise about 150 men representing thethree services. A party of 84 soldiers and airmen will leave byair on 6 November. The Naval contingent of some 40 officers andmen will be made up of R. A. N. personnel serving in Britain.


PRESENTATION OF A GOLD COIN COMMEMORATING THE DEDICATION OF THE ANZAC MEMORIAL AND FOREST IN ISRAEL
MELBOURNE, VIC. 29 OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton.
Mr. President, Your Excellency:
I understand that at some later stage in these proceedings there will be a presentation of a memento, and I wish now to take this opportunity of saying how much I value the opportunity to appear before you and how honoured I am that the Government of Israel has made this occasion possible. I would like, Mr. ' President, through you,. and also Your S Excellency, through you, to express to the Government of Israel my own deep gtatitude and appreciation.
W The Anzac Memorial Forest must, in a sense, be unique.There it is, part of a programme of transforming unproductive land toproductive land, and yet at the same time a memorial to the 17, 000Australians who were in Palestine as it then was in the First WorldWar and to the 70, 000 who were there in the Second World War.Australians who on both occasions rode, if they were Light Horsemen,knee to knee with citizens of Australia of Jewish extraction and werehelped by those of Jewish extraction in that country a memorial toshared efforts, to shared dangers, to shared hardships so long ago.I have not seen this forest, but I can in my mind imagineit a vast stretch of eucalypts, bearing witness to those things whichwere together done, and reminding us of battles long ago. This mustserve to draw closer and closer the ties between our two countries whichare I think already as close as the ties between any two countries I know.There is in some ways a remarkable parallel between theState of Israel and the nation of Australia. Both have got to develop andhave developed in a harsh environment where nature is not kind, wherethere is no smiling way of developing, of growing, of building, but wherewhat has to be attained has to be attained only by great effort and bywresting from ; that harsh environment the requirements for growth.Both of us are, in the councils of the world, comparativelynew, comparatively small, and yet I think both of us are, by applyingscientific knowledge, by applying technology, showing what can be donein arid country, showing what can be done if effort is put in. And bothof us require, and Israel particularly has required over the years,assistance from outside in the form of capital to enable the building ofindustrial muscles, the provision of a better life for its citizens to go ahead.
-2ICertainly the area of your land is smaller than the areaof ours. Probably, I think, the amount of good land that we have isperhaps greater than the amount in Israel, but having said that, stillthere are these shared problems, still there are these requirementsfor overcoming them, and that is something else we have in common.That is not all. Though we in Australia and though youAustralians have not ever had to bear the direct impact of total itar ianfs m,yet those of your faith have seen what can happen when people are preparedto give away their freedom, when people are prepared to allow an allpowerfuldictator to decide their fates and their lives. You know it,perhaps at first hand, perhaps from stories from relatives, or friends,certainly you know it, and while we have not had to experience it, yetwe know it too. There is, I think, again a shared determination by theState of Israel and by the nation of Australia to see that there will neverdevelop in our countries that kind of totalitarianism, and to seek to do asmuch as within our compass lies to see that it does not develop any further,that it does not spread any further. We have seen what happens toindividuals when one accepts the doctrine which you and we do not acceptthat the citizen exists to serve the state and not the state to serve the0 citizen. We have seen what can happen when religious bigotry orpolitical bigotry, or racial bigotry is allowed to run riot, and that canonly run riot if totalitarianism is in existence. That again is somethingI believe we have in common.Of course you have difficulties in Israel, Sir, that we don'thave. We do not have to plough our land with a rifle within arm's reach,we do not have to go to bed at night and bar and lock the doors or be carefulthat the lights don't so shine that a sniper may take advantage of it. We canuse ploughshares alone. In Israel it must be ploughshares and arms. Butwe have as a nation, I believe, a feeling and a knowledge of what this mightbe like. We have an admiration for what has been achieved on thedevelopmental and the economic and the defensive front in Israel. Wehave this shared determination of which I have previcu sly spoken.Now, Sir, may I add this. I believe that we in Australiahave reason to be grateful to the Jewish community of Australians becausethey have helped in my view to foster the knowledge of Israel in Australiaand draw closer the bonds between Israel and Australia, leading to thatkind of genuinely friendly feeling which I believe exists between our twocountries. The rebirth of Israel after 2, 000 years though it was not-easyhas been, because of heffsofte Jesh _ 6mmrnity in this and othercountries, something in which we can take some joy as well as those ofJewfish extraction. so / 3
3-We look forward as a government and as a people to thetime when true peace will be restored in that area in which Israel lies.I haven't heard many people saying " Let us sit down and talk. Let ussit down and discuss" though I know, Sir, your own government wantsthis to happen. When it does and when the foundations of true peace arelaid and when no longer is there a need for a rifle or a grenade to bewithin the reach of somebody ploughing a field in Israel, then how muchbetter it will be for the human race as a whole, how much brighter andeasier the'future will be for a country like Israel so close in affinity, inits difficulties, in its desires, in its aims to Australia.For these reasons, Sir, for the admiration we have, forthe problems that we share in common, for the aspirations and idealswhich I think are the same between Australians and Israelis, I am doublyhonoured that today you have asked me to come here and talk to you. Toyou, Sir, the representative of the Government of Israel, and to all ofyou, who are not Israelis, but Australians of the Jewish faith, I thank youfor the opportunity and express my gratitude to you.7T



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 87/ 1968
N. S. W. BUSHFIRES: COMMONWEALTH AID
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I was distressed to hear of the shocking bushfires
around Sydney and on the south coast of New South Wales.
I would like the relatives of those who have lost their
lives in the fires to know that they have the deepest sympathy of the
Commonwealth Government and, I am sure, of all Australians. Our
sympathy is also extended to those people who have lost their homes
and other material possessions in the fires.
I understand that the New South Wales Government
has set aside $ 50, 030 for relief.
I have today sent a telegram to the Premier of New
South Wales telling him that the Commonwealth Government stands
ready to assist his Government on a for basis for the relief of
personal hardship and distress suffered by those people affected by
the fires.
CANBERRA October 1968 A 



FCR PRESS: P. M. No. 88/ 1968
VIETNAM BOMRING HALT
Comment bythe Prime Minister, M. 2_. Lhn Gorton
As you have heard, President Johnson has announced
that all air, naval, and artillery activity on or within the territory
of North Vietnam will be stopped at 8. 00 a. m. Friday morning,
Washington time. ( That is 11 o'clock EST tonight).
We have been consulted by the Government of the
United States, and kept fully informed of developments leading up
to this announcement. It has been the attitude of the Australian Government
that a suspension of bombing in North Vietnam would be justified only
if in response some corresponding reduction in North Vietnamese
military activity was occurring or could be expected to occur.
The Americans have sharad with us the information
which has led them to conclude that they can be co. nfidentc there will
be such a response. We believe there are good grounds for their
judgment and sincerely hope it will be proved right by future events.
A further cxpected result is that representatives of
the Government of North Vietnam intend to enter into serious and
direct talks with the Government of the United States, and the
Government of the Republic of Vietnam, on the substance of a
peaceful settlement. As these results occur we believe that they hold out
real hopes of future progress towards a just peace. We will not be
seeking to participate in these talks at this stage.
CANBERRA I November 1968 



OPENING OF JOHN McEWEN HOUSE
CANBERRA, A. CT.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton 4 NOVEMBER 1968
Mr Chairman, Mr Moss, John McEwen and Ladies and Gentlemen
present: My task this afternoon is, I am told, to open the building
officially, and I was told that I would be presented with a gold key
when I arrived so that I could do it, but Mr Moss being a rather
canny type of man, as I know from old, hasn't yet given it to me.
I am putting him on warning that I will need it I don't mean to
keep; I just mean to open the building.
It is a compliment to me to be asked on this occasion
to open this door, and it is a compliment for two reasons. Firstly,
because this building is named after a man who has given to the
national Parliament thirty-four years of service, a longer time than
any sitting member except one has spent in the Federal Parliament.
During that time, he has filled many important posts,
becoming Deputy Leader of the Country Party in, I think, 1943, and
Leadet in 1958, and who during the time he has filled those posts,
has become known, I believe to all Australians of whatever political
colour they may be, as one of the outstanding negotiators overseas
for Australian products and the sale of Australian products and the
arranging of agreements with other countries, all to the benefit
of the producers of Australia.
He has been Prime Minister. I think perhaps the only
significant post he hasn't filled is that of External Affairs, and I
am not at all sure that at some stage he might not have acted there.
( Mr McEwen " I was Minister") You were Minister. All, right
that's a full hand,
He also has, during that period of time, become known
to those of us closer to him not only as a highly successful farmer
and practical farmer, but as a first-class colleague and a man to be
trusted as a colleague, and as a great Australian.
And so this house is named after him and in his honour.
This is the first reason why I regard it as such a compliment to me
to open it today. But there are other reasons. For some eighteen years
now, the Liberal not Conservative but Liberal and Country Party
coalition has given to Australia, I believe, enlightened government
and government which has enabled progress, such as has not been
seen in this nation before, to take place, a government which has
taken account of the needs and aspirations of the individual citizens
who make up the country. 
-2
Now it is not to be-supposed that-in that-period of eighteen
years or in any other period of years there will not, from time to time,
arise problems on which, in a coalition government, part of the
government may have one view and part of the government may have
another. This may inevitably occur in coalition governments, but given
good will, given a discussion of these matters not on a caucus basis, but
on a basis of individuals sitting around a table and expressing their
judgmnents, th en these difficulties can be overcome.
This. is unusual, I think, and it is a tribute to John McEwen, to
the previous leaders of the Country Party, to the previous leaders of the
Liberal Party that this has operated in this way and that both leaders and
both parties have put what they believed to be the good of their country before
their immediate aims on such occasions as any disagreement might arise.
This is a way a joint government works, must wort-and will continue to
work, given such men as have led our party and as have led the Country
Party. After all, as I have just pointed out, there are a number of
matters we have got in common. Mr Anthony said how the Country Party
was dedicated to fighting for producers, not only producers of butter or
wool or wheat, but also producers of machinery or oil or things from
factories. Well that makes two parties dedicated to those ends, and with
both of us on their side, they ought to get along all right! We have got
that in common.* If the past is a prelude to the future, and I believe it is, then
as a Liberal Prime Minister, it is good for me, and pleasing to me, to
stand here to open this building, symbolising such a long and such a
successful and such a progressive partnership and indicating that for the
future what I believe will happen will happen . that that partnership
will go on in the same way to the benefit of this nation of Australia.
That does not mean that we both won't from time to time be contesting
various seats against each other, but at least we will be contesting them
with the same ultimate objective in mind and seeking to attain ultimately
the same goal. That is the cement that h~ as bound us together and will
continue to bind us together while we have such men as Sir Artrhur Fadden
or John McEwen or Sir Robert Menzies or Mr Holt leading the sections of
this coalition government which, starting as two sections, has become a
whole, and I believe a whole for the good of this nation. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
VIETNAM
Ministerial Statement
,[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates,' 5 November 1968.]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-In September 1967 the President
of the United States in a speech at
San Antonio, Texas, publicly offered to halt
all bombing of North Vietnam as soon as
the North Vietnamese indicated that such a
halt would lead promptly to serious and
productive discussions on the substance of
a peaceful settlement in South Vietnam.
That offer was not accepted by Hanoi.
theS uPbrseesqiudeennttl y, o rodne r3e dIs t aM acrecshs atoifo nt hios fy etahre,
bombing over the major portion of North
Vietnam-that part where 90% of the
population lives and works-in the hope
that that gesture and that renunciation of
military advantage would lead the North
Vietnamese Government to enter into those
substantive negotiations designed to secure
a just and enduring peace-a peace which
his Government and the Government of
Australia had for some time been advoicating.
Bombardment was continued in the area
of North Vietnam to the north of the
demilitarised zone where troops and supplies
for the invasion of South Vietnam were
concentrated before flowing south. The
President said then:
I cannot in conscience stop all bombing as
long as to do so would immediately and directly
endanger the lives of our men and our allies.
24975/ 68 In the result, the North Vietnamese
made no reciprocal gesture towards lessening
the intensity of the fighting in South
Vietnam; nor were they prepared to enter
into substantive peace talks designed to
discuss the terms on which peace could be
attained. They refused to enter into peace
talks proper. They did however agree to
have discussions on the question of whether
there was any basis on which proper peace
talks could begin. The talks were held in
Paris, and have been continuing since
May 1968.
As a result of developments during those
talks, the President recently formed the
judgment that he
began to get confirmation of the essential
understanding that we had been seeking with the
North Vietnamese on the critical issues between us.
Those issues were 1. That he should have
reason to believe that the other side intended
seriously to join in de-escalating the war;
2. That he should have grounds for believing
that further reduction in bombing would
not lead to an increase in American
casualties; 3. That the right of the legitimate
elected government of South Vietnam to
take its place in serious peace negotiations
should be secured; and 4. That serious
negotiations on the substance of a peaceful
settlement should begin. In return for these
requirements being met, the President was
prepared to cease bombing altogether and
E961 AON 9 
to agree to representatives of the National
Liberation Front being present on the North
Vietnamese side of the negotiating table.
I should however emphasise that this is
no formal agreement by the North Vietnamese
on de-escalation of the war but only
a judgment on evidence available to the
United States that this response will in fact
take place. For his part, the President has
made it clear, and I quote:
that such talks cannot continue if they . takc
military advantage of them. We cannot have
productive talks in an atmosphere where the cities
are being shelled and where the demilitarised zone
is being abused.
After President Johnson had announced
the cessation of bombing and the results he
expected to flow from it, I made the following
statement on behalf of the Australian
Government: As you have heard, President Johnson has
announced that all air, naval and artillery activity
on or within the territory of North Vietnam will
be stopped at 8 a. m. Friday morning, Washington
time-lI p. m. tonight our time.
We have been consulted by the Government of
the United States and kept fully informed of
developments leading up to this announcement.
It has been the attitude of the Australian
Government that a suspension of bombing in
North Vietnam would be justified only if in
response some corresponding reduction in North
Vietnamese military activity was occurring or could
be expected to occur.
The Americans have shared with us the information
which has led them to conclude that they can
be confident there will be such a response. We
believe there are good grounds for their judgment
and sincerely hope it will be proved right by future
events. A further expected result is that representatives
of the Government of North Vietnam intend to
enter into serious and direct talks with the
Government of the United States and the Government
of the Republic of Vietnam on the substance
of a peaceful settlement.
As these results occur we believe that they hold
out real hopes of future progress towards a just
peace. We will not be seeking to participate in
these talks at this stage.
That is the present position. Just as the
Australian Government in the past has consistently
favoured genuine negotiation, so
have we consistently supported President
Johnson in his refusal to accept the advice
offered from some quarters-that he
should order the bombing stopped unconditionally;
that is, without any grounds for
belief that the safety of Allied troops would
not be impaired and without any grounds
for belief that such action would lead to substantive peace talks. In taking this stand,
I believe events have proved us right.
Cessation of the bombing and the admission
of National Liberation Front representation
as components of -the North Vietnamese
negotiating team urged by some to
be conceded without the reciprocal understandings
which the President believes he
now has would have been concessions made
without any advance towards a peaceful
settlement. Cessation of bombing and the
participation of the National Liberation
Front on the North Vietnamese side of the
negotiating table on the understanding that
de-escalation and serious peace talks will
follow are concessions which do hold out
the hope of an advance towards a peaceful
solution and in those circumstances we
welcome them with hope.
The first course suggested, if taken, would
have lowered our shield while the enemy's
sword point was still levelled. The course
now chosen lowers our shield, but only after
the negotiations have led to good grounds
for expecting that the enemy's sword point
will be blunted and only after agreement to
hold substantive discussions on peace have
been achieved.
I do not propose in any way to canvass
the course which the negotiations may take
or the problems which may arise. In a situation
of this delicacy, on which so much may
depend, I believe it would be positively
harmful for anyone in this House to do this.
But I should, I think, tell the House that
my Government has advised -the Govern-
, ment of South Vietnam that while we
understand the reservations which it now
has, we feel that its interests would ' best be
served by its representatives attending the
talks in Paris at the earliest possible date.
They would attend as the representatives
of the true and legitimate Government of
South Vietnam. This is, in our view, a
Significant fact because until now the
Government of North Vietnam has refused
any contacts or dealings with the South
Vietnamese Government.
In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I would say
this. No-one can foretell how long -these
negotiations will continue and it is possible
that there will continue to be hard fighting
while the negotiations progress. We hope
not, but it is possible that this may occur.
The seeds of peace have now sprouted but 
the plant has still to grow before we can
be sure that the people of South Vietnam
will be able to decide their destiny in peace
and by peaceful means. What is now
occurring is in accord with the pledge of
the Allied countries at the Manila Summit
Conference that:
We are now prepared to pursue any avenue
which could lead to a secure and just peace
whether through discussion and negotiation or
through reciprocal actions by both sides to reduce
the violence.
Mr Speaker, neither the United States nor
ourselves went to Vietnam to conquer-but
only to prevent conquest of that country by
North Vietnam. We sought to show that
such military conquest was not possible.
It may be-I say no more than that it may
be-that the North Vietnamese have come to realise this, and that the negotiations to
be held may produce the cessation of
fighting and may produce the durable and
lasting peace and the right of choice of the
majority of people of South Vietnam, which
we have sought from the beginning and
for so long. If so, this is a consummation
devoutly to be hoped for and I know that
all Australians will join with the Government
in seeking to do all possible to ensure
that the talks attain the results so sought. In
the meantime, we should not have too
sanguine expectations of too early a settlement-
and we shall need to keep our
resolution -unimpaired.
Mr Speaker, I present the following
paper: Vietnam, Ministerial Statement, 5th November
1968.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 89,. 1968
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
Message from the Prime Minister, Mr john Gorton
The Prime Minister today instructed the Australian
Ambassador in Washington to convey the following message to Mr
Richard Nixon " PLEASE ACCEPT THE CONGRATULATIONS AND
BEST WISHES OF THE GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA.
YOU CAN COUNT ON OUR UNDERSTANDING AND OUR
GOODWILL AS YOU UNDERTAKE THE HEAVY RESPONSIBILITIES
THAT LIE AHEAD. I LOOK FORWARD TO THE CONTINUATION OF THE
CLOSE CO-OPERATION AND WARM FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN
OUR TWO COUNTRIES. SINCERELY, JOHN GORTON"
CANBERRA, 7 November 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 90/ 1968
TASMANIAN DROUGHT RELIEF
Following is the text of a telegram sent by the Prime
Minister this evening to the Premier of Tasmania ( Mr. E. E. Reece):-
" YOUR LETTER OF 22 OCTOBER RE SEASONAL CONDITIONS
TASMANIAN EAST COAST. WE ARE PREPARED TO ACCEPT
THAT THE CONDITIONS, IF REQUIRING RELIEF LOANS OF
$ 1 MILLION FOR DROUGHT AFFECTED FARMERS, WOULD
CALL FOR COMMONWEALTH ASSISTANCE. YOU WILL
UNDERSTA ND THAT COMMONWEALTH WOULD NOT BE
EXPECTED TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE IF SUBSTANTIAL
RELIEF EXPENDITURES ARE NOT INVOLVED. IF YOU
DECIDE TO PROCEED WITH A SCHEME OF RELIEF LOANS
ON TERMS NO MORE LIBERAL THAN THOSE ADOPTED UNDER
THE DROUGHT ASSISTANCE ARRANGEMENTS INSTITUTED
BY THE OTHER STATES, THF, COMMONWEALTH WOULD
THEN BE PREPARED TO MAKE AVAILABLE FINANCE ON
THE FOLLOWING CONUYTIONS. ANY COMMONWEALTH
CONTRIBUTION WOULD TAKE THE FORM OF INTEREST-FREE
ADVANCES REPAYABLE OVER EIGHT YEARS. TO PRESERVE
CONSISTENCY WITH THE RELIEF LOANS PROVIDED BY OTHER
STATES, THE RELIEF LOANS WOULD NEED TO BE KEPT
WITHIN THE FOLLOWING PATTERN
THEY WOULD BE AVAILABLE ONLY TO DROUGHT
AFFECTED FARMERS WHO CANNOT OBTAIN
CREDIT THROUGH NORMAL COMMERCIAL CHANNELS.
INTEREST WOULD BE CHARGED AT A MINIMUM
OF 3 PER CENT PER ANNUM.
OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS WCULD BE
SIMILAR TO THOSE WHICH HAVE OBTAINED IN
STATES SUCH AS NEW SOUTH WALES AND
QUEENSLAND.
THE GRANTS COMMISSION WOULD NOT BE ASKED TO
MAKE AN ADVERSE " MODIFICATION" IN RESPECT OF INTEREST
" LOSSES" AND ADMINISTRATION COSTS WHICH WOULD BE
INVOLVED IN A NEW SCHEME ALONG THE LINES MENTIONED.
THE UNSPENT FUNDS TC WHICH I HAVE REFERRED ARE THE
BALANCE OF $ 288, 000 HELD BY YOUR STATE UNDER THE LOAN
( FARMERS' DEBT ADJUSTMENT) ACT.
AS YOU WILL BE AWARE THESE BALANCES MAY ONLY BE USED
BY THE STATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH PURPOSES SPECIFIED
UNDER THE COMMONWEALTH ACT. THE COMMONWEALTH
EXPECTS YOU TO USE THIS $ 288, 000 AND WOULD CONSIDER ANY
REQUEST BY YOU TO FACILITATE THIS.
COMMONWEALTH ASSISTANCE WOULD BE ON A FOR BASIS
FOR YOUR TOTAL EXPENDITURE. J. G. GORTON."
CANBERRA 7 November 1968 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 91 1968
CONTROL OF CORAL SEA ISLANDS
The Governments of Australia and the United
Kingdom today exchanged letters in which the British Government
recognised Australian control over a number of small islands in the
Coral Sea off the East Coast of Australia.
The islands concerned are
Bird Islet, West Islet and other islands forming part of
Wreck Reef.
Cato Island
Herald Beacon Islet and other islands forming part of Mellish
Reef
Observatory Cay and other islands forming part of Frederick
Reef
Observatory Cay and other islands forming part of Kenn Reef
And the island known as Pocklington Reef.
These are all small uninhabited islands lying between
latitudes 10 degrees South and the Tropic of Capricorn and between
longitudes 154 degrees and 158 degrees East.
Australia has exercised control over these islands for
a number of years and the Exchange of Letters merely confirms that
the Queen's Sovereignty over the islands is exercised by the Aust! alian
Government and not the British Government.
CANBERRA 8 November 1968 



68/ 171
GREENSBOROUGH LIBERAL PARTY BRANCH LUNCHEON
BUNDOORA, Victoria NOVEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Chairman, Mr Jarman, newly-selected candidate for this electorate
and Ladies and Gentlemen: The real purpose of my coming here today was to have
an opportunity to meet as many of you individually as possible. It was not
to make a long and involved speech, particularly since most of you are
standing up, and long and involved speeches under those circumstances are
not always received with the greatest bonhomie.
But there are some things that I would like to say to
you sketchily as they must be said at this time and in these circumstancesjust
roughing out some of the beliefs I think you have " 4nd I know we have as
to how this country should be run and as to what is possJL.'.-1 for this country
to attain if it is properly run.
I want to take you back not all of you because we have
so many young Liberals here who at the time were not old enough to be
involved but those of you who remember, I want to take you back to the
time when this Liberal Party first became the Government of Australia
under Sir Robert Menzies. The nation for some time had been suffering controls
of various kinds which appeared to be imposed for no other reason than a
liking for having controls. The nation had been informed that if we attained
the stage where four or five per cent of unemployment was reached, then
that was the optimum that any nation could expect to have, and that was to
all intents and purposes full employment.
We had suffered under an approach which basically,
philosophically held the view that the individual really existed mainly for
the purpose of serving the state, rather than, as is the proper approach,
the state existed to serve the individual. We believe the state should gi e
the individual the greatest possible chance of developing his own personality,
of taking his own risks, of reaping the rewards if his judgment is sound, or
of accepting the consequences if his judgment is bad tc. d the risks turn out
to have been badly based. So we turned our backs on restrictive philosophies and
on the idea that controls were the answer and that such things as price
control, which in effect meant profit control, should be introduced. We had
seen and experienced that profit control meant that if somebody had some
new idea, some new approach and they produced something better than had
previously been produced at a cheaper price but at a greater profit, then a
control would be introduced to see that the benefit from that did not flow to
the man who had those ideas. This we felt and you felt stopped the growth
of a great nation. And so you got together. People came out and asked you
to get together. You got together here and throughout Australia, and you
changed that approach. You changed that type of government, and as a result
over the nearly two decades since then, the growth of this country has been
unparalleled and the opportunities for individuals in this country have never
been greater. / 2 
-2
That is the basis on which Sir Robert Menzies built, on
which Harold Holt built, and on which, given the opportunity, 1, and the team
behind me, will continue to build.
Today, perhaps, the tasks and the problems of applying
this kind of philosophy are different and more pressing than they have been
before in our history, for we live indeed in times of great and basic change.
Up until some very few years ago, we in Australia took little heed of what
was required for the defence of our own country. We lived under the
protection of Britain and the British Navy and then we lived under the added
protection of the United States alliance.
When wars broke out, as they did in 1914-18 or 1939 or
in Korea, we were not found wanting. We sent our contingents, we made our
sacrifices, but in the years between we did little and had no need to do much
in this field. That has changed, with the United Kingdom pulling back from
East of Suez, with no definition with any finite approach as to under what
circumstances and how they might return from West of Suez, with whatever
judgment and assessment one cares to make as to the particular involvement
the United States might have in the future in Asia.
With these things, we have entered a new period in
Australia's history, a time of change, a need to contribute constantly to
our own defence, more than I personally like to contribute because I have
always in my mind the knowledge of what could be done with what must be put
into this defence expenditure. But I have also in my mind, and your
Government and its supporters have in their mind that in this time of change
we must keep up the enormous expansion of resources for our own defence
as an insurance policy, and if we are with some measure of safety to own
what we have and progress in the way that is possible. I
There are great problems and difficulties here. It is
a time of change and that is the first great sign of it I would put before you.
But then we have a better and a happier one in a way,
a time of change in the developmental tempo of this country.
Up until about five or six years ago, development was
going on, yes. It was going on gradually, fairly quietly, and suddenly like
Spring, we busted out all over oil was found in Bass Strait, Hamersley
was developed, manganese was mined in the North, and new industries in
woodchips were developed, and hundreds of millions and thousands of
millions of capital for development was required. This has reached a rate
of growth, a geometrical progression, which again is a sign of a time of
change. It shows, should it be maintained, as I am sure it will be, tha;
we will, in thirty years and thirty years is not very long not be a nation
of twelve million, but be a nation of twenty-eight million. We will be a
nation with a greater industrial potential with the door to the future open
and the future to which that door is open being almost illimitable.
As we accept this time of change and as we take in all
the people we can and as we take in all the capital we need and we need
it we must take that in having regard to our own interests as well. We
must seek to see that in development there is some reservation to Australians
who are prepared to take the initial risk of equity capital in development,
seek to see that if capital is raised inside this country, as distinct from
being brought from outside, then those who contribute that capital in this
country in some way or another should get the benefit of that part of the
ownership to which their capital entitles them. d 
-3
This again is a new era of change, but a happy one, a
good one, one that we can look forward to with pride. It does, of course,
bring in its train problems, and you all know what the problems are becailse
what we need here and throughout Australia are more schools, more technical
schools, better roads, better communications you name it, we need it.
But these are problems of growth, these are problems arising from growth
and not from stagnation. This in itself, although at the moment it is difficult
because the manpower we have and the resources we have are fully committed,
at least it is a symptom of optimism, and the problems we must face are
problems raised through our burgeoning growth and not problems through
stagnation. You mentioned one other indication of change, I think,
Mr. Jarman. There is, I believe, growing up in this nation now, and there
will be fostered in this nation now a more conscious approach to seeking to
see that those who are sick, that those who are ill, that, those who are old,
that those who have had little chance to provide for themselves are given by
the community at least a minimum frugal standard of living when they suffer
from the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. And I believe it is desired
that this be done without a broad hand -out by the government from your pockets
to all concerned, but rather that it is steered to the akeas wlere the need is
greatest to provide the standard required. This is a sign of a change in
attitude. I won't go on. Those things mentioned are just some of
the new problems that we in this country, with your backing, have got to face
and have got to overcome. May I conclude by saying this that over and
above our pride in living in Greensborough, or our pride in living in Melbourne
or our pride in living in Victoria, the nation requires that aid of us feel a
pride in being Australians contributing to the development of a nation, no
matter in what part of the nation that development takes place. Because
wherever it takes place, all of us benefit, all of us grow, all of us can
feel we are giving something towards the future, something towards a better
country for our children, who, wherever they go in the world, will say with
pride and fire in their heart: " I am an Australian.
And if we do that, as I think we will, and at the same
time see to it that not only the material advancement I have spokeni of occurs,
not only that the development and defence needs are met, but also, over and
above everything that the individual in this nation is given the opportunity to
develop his own resources to the utmost, then we will have before us a
shining future. That is why I am so glad to meet today so many people who
will be contributing to it.
Thank you. 



OPENING OF THE MA[ T CONROY MEMORIAL POOL 68/ 172
AT MARYMEAD CHILDREN'S CENTlRE
NARRABUNDAH, A. C. T. 16 NOVEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mrs. Conroy, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
In a very few short moments, I will be opening and naming
this Matt Conroy Wading Pool. I am glad to have been asked to do it for two
reasons. One is a personal reason; and that is that Matt Conroy and his
family lived just across the street from us when we first came to live in
Canberra, and were the first neighbours that we ever got to know in Narrabundah.
During the years that we knew each other, I think the friendship
between our families and between Matt Conroy and myself grew constantly.
Certainly my admiration for him as a man grew constantly. He was all those
things which Mr. Graham has said he was.
He was in addition somebody who got happiness out of each day
of life and put effort into everything he did, whether it was his work as a
public servant, whether it was the time he spent in sporting activities.... I
think he finished up being a pretty good bowler, but he began as a very good
rugby player and as a very good cricketer and as a very good all round sport;
whether it was the time he put into those club activities, those sporting
activities, the endeavours to attain better academic qualifications in order
the better to be able to do his work in the public service, he gave unsparingly
and enjoyed each moment of his life. That is the personal reason why I am
glad to be here and why I am so glad to have this opportunity of saying something
at the opening of the pool dedicated to his memory.
Another reason, of course, and it is perhaps in a sense much
the same sort of reason, is that he was a member of the Lions Club which
constructed this pool, another indication of service to the community. He
belonged to it, I think, for at least four years, and at the time of his death
was Vice-President of it. He gave, as in other fields, during those four
years, unstinted effort in the civic activities of the Lions.
These are by no means negligible. I cannot, of course, call to
mind all the activities in which they engage. This is one example, this pool
from which the children who stay for a short or a long time at Marymead will
continue to get pleasure.
There is a great long list of other civic activities that the Lions
Club has engaged in the provision of equipment to the Red Cross for Meals on
Wheels, the raising of $ 55, 000 in the branch which first started here, quite
irrespective of the individual work which each member of the Lions Club has
put in, for the betterment of the community in which they live, for assistance
to those who needed assistance in that community, and always with a certain
emphasis towards trying to assist the children in the community.
So both because of my own feeling towards him and because of
the work he gave to the Club, which has built this pool and has named it after
him, I have.... I will not say pleasure.... I have satisfaction in being able to
perform this duty this afternoon and to pay this tribute.
I think there is very little more to say on an occasion such as this.
A man's works speak for him. The recognition of his comrades speaks for him.
And the pleasure that future generations will get from this and other activities
will continue to speak for him and his associates in the Lions Club. And so I
open this Pool and name it The Matt Conroy Wading Pool. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY 4\ X
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
GORTON GOVERNMENT
Want of Confidence Motion
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates,' 19 November 1968]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
[ 8.25]-l had thought that, when a motion
of no confidence was presented by the
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam).
there might have been some significant and
reasoned argument on some major point of
attack on the Government, that some matter
of national importance might have been
developed, debated and pressed home. This
did not happen. In fact, nothing even
remotely resembling it happened. Instead,
the Leader of the Opposition scarcely even
mentioned defence, although that was one
of the terms of his motion. He put no views
to the House on what our defence strategy
should be now that Britain is withdrawing
from east of Suez or what the composition
of our forces should be. He did not even
mention the war in Vietnam or indeed any
matters of major national importance in
this field.
Mr Barnard-When will you give us a
statement on it?
Mr GORTON-All the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, who is now interjecting,
did was to make a completely untrue statement
that never before had a motion of this
kind been moved without the Prime
Minister of the day immediately replying.
25657/ 68 The Leader of the Opposition, instead of
developing some matter of major national
importance, spent his time fluttering disjointedly
from twig tn twig, pausing to
mouth a few words on such matters of
national importance as the completion of a
few miles of railway here, the need for
legislation on sedentary fish-I wonder
whether he proposes to fight the net election
on the issue of sedentary fi; and
something to do with the Snowy Mountains
Authority planning the Eastern Suburbs
Railway. He dealt, if dealt is the proper
word-at least he mentioned tI em in
passing-on my count with fifteen subjects
in 45 minutes and dealt with none of them
in a significant way at all. In his peregrination
from twig to twig he managed to make
a number of inaccurate and misleading
statements, as is not altogether unusual. He
claimed, for example, that no orders for
defence equipment had been placed since
1965. My colleague the Minister for
Defence ( Mr Fairhall) demonstrated that
that statement is not true. The Leader of
the Opposition claimed that he and the
House had been given no previous knowledge
that the runway at Amberley for the
F1Il aircraft would need to be lengthened
for training pilots. 
Mr Barnard-When are we getting the
Fill? Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member for Bass has already spoken in this
debate and will refrain from interjecting.
Mr GORTON-Let me go back, Mr
Speaker, so that the interruption does not
destroy the argument. The Leader of the
Opposition claimed that he and the House
had been given no previous knowledge that
the runway at Amberley would need to be
lengthened for training pilots in handling
the Fill with all up weights. Hansard of
2nd May, which was quoted by the Minister
for Defence, shows that that statement is
untrue. The Leader of the Opposition had
the naivety or the ignorance to suggest that
the Fill aircraft would have their range of
operations reduced because the distance
between Amberley and the north coast of
Australia would have to be deducted from
ithe striking range of the aircraft.
He completely ignored the fact, if he knew
it to be a fact-and he should have known
it because he was at one stage connected
with an air force-that Amberley is the
training centre and that Darwin is the centre
from which operations take place. It is
therefore not only ludicrous but misleading
to suggest that this range must be deducted
in this instance. Mr Speaker, I am sorry if a
catalogue of the misleading statements of the
Leader of the Opposition goads the Opposi-
. tion into interjections of the kind that are
being made, but it cannot deny the accuracy
of what I am saying, nor can this brouhaha
prevent what I am saying from being put on
record. Dr J. F. Cairns-But it is appropriate.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable
member for Yarra is out of his seat and will
cease interjecting.
Mr GORTON-To continue the catalogue,
the Leader of the Opposition had the
hardihood to claim, quite falsely, that in the
year gone by nothing has been done for the
sick, the poor and the old. What has been
done in this year, or at least a part of what
has been done in this year is this: Pensions
have been raised to a greater level than was
required by the rise in the cost of living.
Mr Barnard-What utter nonsense!
Mr SPEAKER-I have already requested
the Deputy Leader of the Opposition not to
interject. I suggest that he refrain from
doing so. Mr Barnard-What utter nonsense!
Mr SPEAKER-I must also inform the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition that when
the Leader of the Opposition was speaking
he had the respect of the House.
Mr GORTON-I trust that after this
catalogue he will lose the respect of the
House. Indeed, I think he is beginning to
lose it already. I was dealing with the misleading
statement made by the honourable
member who has the respect of the House
that nothing has been done in the last year
for the sick, the poor and the old. This is
the beginning of the catalogue of what has
been done this year: Pensions have been
raised, I repeat, to a greater level than was
required by the rise in the cost of living;
assistance has been provided to families
without breadwinners; an insured hospital
patient will be covered for the full amount
insured however long his stay in hospital;
supplementary benefits have been provided
to patients in approved nursing homes however
long the patients may stay in the
hospitals; there has been the initiation of a
scheme to develop home care and related
services; and we have increased the subsidy
payable for approved home nursing services.
Will the Leader of the Opposition rise in
his place now and say that in this year
nothing has been done, as he said previously,
for the sick, the poor and the old? The
honourable member must know-indeed, he
has no excuse for not knowing-that these
things were done. They were part of the
Budget discussions; they were part of the
Estimates; they were part of the discussions
in this House. Yet he has the temerity to
get up in this place and say that they did
not happen and this from the man who used
to talk about credibility.
The Leader of the Opposition even had
the effrontery, as part of his case of no
confidence, to say that the Government had
refused to bring on debates on Tariff Board
reports and the Government's oil price
policy. This is what he told us as part of
the attack on the Government, when he
knows, or ought to know, that the arrangements
made between the two sides of this
House were that we should finish with the
Bills before the House before the debates on
these statements were brought on. If he
does not know that, he should have known
it. If he does know it, he should not have
presented it to this House in the way he did.
It is not part of my purpose--
Mr Barnard-These arrangements were
not made, and the Prime Minister knows it.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I warn the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition.
Mr GORTON--He is slightly upset, I
think. It is not really part of my purpose to
follow the Leader of the Opposition down
every manhole into which he may choose to
disappear. Those who heard him could
judge the effectiveness of his case for a
motion of no confidence, and I believe that
all who heard him will acknowledge, either
privately or publicly, that this is the most
ineffective case that has been made in the
history of this Parliament, or probably of
any other, on a motion of no confidence in
the government.
But, Sir, I do want to discuss two matters
that he mentioned in passing. He attached
not as much significance to them as I do,
but I want to dilate on them a little. One of
these matters concerns the defence preparations
and the other concerns the Government's
oil price policy as announced in the
House. On defence the Leader of the Opposition
said that ' the paper on the long term
strategy, the basis of the Australian defence
policy, had been in our hands for 12 weeks'.
So it has. That is the first accurate statement
that I have been able to find him make
in the whole of his speech. The paper is
concerned with various assessments of our
strategic approach right into the 1980s, and
an examination of the various circumstances
in that period and what the future might turn
out to hold in that period. Is it seriously
argued, even by him, that 12 weeks is going
to make a significant difference in an
examination in that long term, in that long
distance, in a matter of such complexity,
when there are so many unknowns, so many
imponderables-in some cases imponderables
which are not yet clear but which
may, and which probably will, become
clearer over the coming year? But in the
short term, the period up until the end of
1971, by which time the British will have
withdrawn from Malaysia and Singapore,.
we decided in September in principle that
we would retain in the Malaysia-Singapore
area two squadrons of Mirage aircraft, two
naval ships and an Anzac battalion, and that we would participate in arrangements for
the conduct of the jungle warfare school in
Malaysia. These countries know, and have known,
of this decision in principle. 1 say ' in principle'
because -before that decision is made
with finality we need to know, as any
government would need to know, what
assistance and support will be forthcoming
from the countries in that area themselves.
What arrangements will be made to man
the radar to control the squadrons we will
have there? What infra-structure will be
provided in support of our ground troops,
and where and in what barrack complex
can they be most economically housed?
These matters have been the subject of discussion
between this Government and the
Governments of Malaysia and Singapore.
These -are indeed matters which should have
been discussed, and have been d-iscussed, in
regard to that period to the end of 1971.
There has been no lack of thought, no lack
of discussion and no lack of willingness to
decide for this period.
But if the Leader of the Opposition is
suggesting, as I think he is, from what he
said, that precise longer term decisions
reaching far into the future should be taken
with finality now, taken in circumstances
which in some cases are different from
those which have ever prevailed before and,
in other cases, may be different from those
which have ever prevailed before, taken
before those imponderables to which I h-ave
refeired and which now exist are resolved
with greater clarity, as I believe they will be
shortly, I think he is advocating a completely
irresponsible course for the Government
of this country to take. I believe,
indeed, that he is seeking to play politics
with national survival, if this is what he is
suggesting, -and we will have none of it. The
plain facts are that our defence forces are
expanding. Much new equipment is still to
be delivered. Manpower is being expanded
to man that increasing quantity of equipment.
We have lost in this field no ground
at all. Indeed, the Leader of the Opposition
has not even attempted to present a
reasoned argument to suggest that we have.
The second matter I want to deal with
are the allegations made by the Leader of
the Opposition on the Government's oil
pricing policy. He suggested in the House 
this afternoon that there is some secret
agreement in existence, and others have
suggested that there has been generous
treatment of Australian oil producers. There
have never been, and there are, no secret
agreements, and there has been in my
belief no over-generous treatment of Australian
oil producers. The arrangements
made for the oil price policy have been
publicly announced in this House and I
have no reluctance at all in making available
the agreement of which I spoke to
this House. I ask leave of the House to
lay on the table papers relating to the Government's
oil policy.
Mr SPEAKER-There being no objection,
leave is granted.
Mr GORTON-I lay on the table the
following papers:
Aide-M6moire.
Letter dated 14 November 1968 from Comptroller-
General of Customs.
1 do that with some satisfaction, because it
was suggested-more than suggested-by
-the Leader of the Opposition in his speech
that something was being held back; that
either there was ignorance on my part or
I was deliberately holding something back.
I asked him to substantiate it then. He
would not substantiate it then. Those papers
substantiate the reverse now.
Mr Connor-May we have a look at
them? Mr GORTON-Of course you can.
Now. It has always been the Government's
declared policy that Australian crude oil,
when discovered
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourabie
member for East Sydney is interjecting.
There are -too many interjections. I have
already asked honourable members to cooperate
in this matter. This is a censure
motion and is regarded by both sides as
being an extremely serious matter. As I
have pointed out, the Leader of the Opposition
was heard in almost complete silence
this afternoon. I think the same courtesy
should be extended to the Prime Minister.
Mr GORTON-It has always been the
Government's declared policy that Australian
crude oil, when discovered, should
be used in Australia and not left in the
ground while overseas oil is imported to be
used in overseas owned refineries in Australia. I should have thought that the
reasons for this were obvious. We want
oil to be discovered in Australia and there
is little incentive for this unless those who
search for oil know that if they do discover
it the Australian market will be available
to them. We need to conserve our overseas
exchange and the way to do that is not to
have Australian oil in the ground while
overseas exchange is used to import oil.
That is the starting point of our policy. If
it is to be challenged by members of the
Opposition-if they. do not agree with that
star! ing point-let us hear from them that
they do challenge it. Let us hear from the
next speaker, who, I understand, is to speak
on oil, that he disagrees with that basic
policy. This is the starting point of our
policy. We do want Australian oil to be used
to the fullest possible extent to meet the
requirements of the Australian market.
It was announced in September 1965
that all Australian oil producers-all Australian
oil producers-would be given 67c
Australian a barrel as an added incentive
to search for oil and that this payment
would apply up to September 1970. This
has been done. In the case of small producers
such as Moonie and Barrow Island
all the additional cost per gallon of product
together with freights from those oil fields
concerned have been absorbed into the
present Australian price structure without
any undue increase of price to consumers
or effect on the economy. But the dis: overy
of Very large quantities of oil in the Bass
Strait fields on which 67c Australian per
barrel was due to be paid would have
added quite considerably to the price per
gallon of product to the consumer and
would have had an effect on the economy.
Yet the commitment from the Government.
publicly given, was that this oil, in
common with all other Australian oil,
should receive the 67c per barrel payment,
and it would have been quite wrong for the
Government to have broken its word anti
retreated from this commitment by unilateral
decision merely because one producer
had discovered very large quantities
of oil. It was therefore necessary to see
whether by agreement the projected rise in
the price of petroleum products could be
minimised and the 67c per barrel which the
Government was committed to pay could
be reduced or abolished. 
In the result, this was done by free
negotiation and agreement. The producers
in the Bass Strait oil fields agreed to forgo
altogether not only the 67c per barrel incentive
payment but a further. 5c per barrel
as well. This of course meant a reduction of
slightly over 2c per gallon in the price
refineries would have otherwise had to pay
for the oil, and a consequent significant
saving to consumers of petroleum products.
Do the members of the Opposition object to
that? If so, let us hear about it when they
speak. For its part the Government restated
its policy that Australian oil must be used
to the greatest extent possible on the Australian
market-and that means to the
greatest extent possible. We also stated that
for a period of 5 years after September
1970 the price paid by refineries for Australian
oil would be the posted price of
overseas oil as at 10th October, less the
discounts allowed as at 10th October, plus
overseas freight and wharfage, and that the
producers would bear the average cost of
freighting crude oil from the customs port
nearest the point of delivery by the most
efficient and economical means possible.
Here it is important to note two things.
Firstly, the Government did not agree to
any finite price. The questions of fact of
what was the posted price at that time, of
what were the discounts allowed at that
time, of what were the overseas freight
rates, of what was to be the average cost of
freighting oil around the Australian coast,
were left for decision by a conference of the
industry and all interested Government
departments and, in the event of disagreement
as to fact, by an independent
arbitrator. This means that after September
1970 for a period of 5 years the price of
oil to the refineries should be no higher
than the price they are now paying except
for any increase in the case of some
refineries due to freight costs around the
Australian coast. In other words, the cost of
petroleum products as a result of the crude
oil component should be stabilised for
years after that date.
It may be that prices of overseas oil or
freights on overseas oil will fall during this
period. It may also be that in certain circumstances,
particularly considering conditions
in the Middle East, such prices may
rise. But the price of Australian oil will be constant and at what it is now. Indeed, if it
were not so it would -be open to overseas
oil companies to reduce their well head
price to one which would seriously disadvantage
the Australian producers-not
one producer but all Australian producers.
This policy will ensure that Australian oil
is used. It will ensure the mere minimum
of increase in cost to the consumer. It will
provide producers and those who are searching
for oil with a built-in incentive. If the
Opposition objects -to any of those things,
if the Leader of the Opposition wishes to
pursue his argument-and this is something
concerned with a matter of no confidencelet
them say so. Let them say so-they have
not done it so far-on a number of matters
which the Leader of the Opposition raised.
On the question of defence, do they object
to the statement made by me tonight, on
behalf of the Government, of our proposals
up to the end of 1971? Perhaps they do,
because the Leader of the Opposition is on
record as seeing no threat in that area-as
seeing no danger whatever from subversion
fostered by Communist China. He regards
this as a false and fallible theory and something
which cannot be tenable for a
moment. Mr Barnard-We reject your domino
theory. Mr SPEAKER-Order! I have already
warned the Deputy Leader of the Opposition.
I shall not warn him again.
Mr GORTON-The Deputy Leader of
the Opposition is very quick to spring to
the defence of his Leader. I anticipated that
that there might be some lack of memory
on the part of the Leader of the Opposition
himself, but since it is a lack of understanding
on the part of his Deputy I will
quote what the Leader of the Opposition
had to say on this matter. He referred to a
disastrously superficial theory-
Mr Uren-When is the Minister for
External Affairs going to enter into this
debate? Mr SPEAKER-Order! If the honourable
member for Reid interjects again, I will deal
. with him.
Mr GORTON-In dealing with the question
of subversion or of the threat of Communist
China, the Leader of the Opposition
said that it was a disastrously superficial 
theory and that it was a fragile and fallacious
theory. Indeed, if this is what he still
believes, it would be as well for the House
and for the country if he said so, because
this must be one matter to be taken into
consideration if he formulates an alternative
defence policy, which he has not yet done.
Let us hear what he thinks, and what members
of the Opposition think, about another
matter he raised-that is, the protection of
a great Australian company, the MLC,
from being taken over by unknown and
undisclosed overseas sources. Does he object
to this? He mentioned it in a speech directed
to the motion of no confidence in the
Government. He did not say whether he
agreed or disagreed. Indeed, it would be
interesting to know.
Let us consider the question of tariffs.
Another member of the Opposition-who,
I notice, during the whole of his speech did
not mention the Leader of the Opposition
by name--spoke on the question of tariffs
at some length and attacked the Government
on its approach. Mr Speaker, this is
the Government's position on tariff policy
as stated in this House, and on the position
of the Tariff Board:
The Government has considered this report in
the context of our established and well tried
tariff policies. There has been no change in these
policies. The Government is committed to ensuring
the growth of a strong manufacturing industry
which is in fact at the very foundation of the
Government's population building policies.
The development of manufacturing industry
is encouraged in many ways, and most notably
by means of the Tariff. The Government has
always been prepared adequately to protect, and
will continue adequately to protect, economic and
efficient industries. The Government will also
afford adequate protection to industries of high
importance from the standpoint of our strategic
or very vital national interests.
Tariff policy has been and remains the responsibility
of the Government, both in general and in
relation to every single decision. It will, ot
course-I would hope that this would be true under
any government--
continue to be the Board's role to advise--
Without instruction on how it is to adviseand
it will continue to be the Government's role.
in determining levels of protection, to decide
whether or not it will follow the advice given.
These have been our policies and they have served
us well. We have no intention of changing them.
In case it should be thought that that statement
of policy, as it has been suggested,
might have led to a lack of confidence in this Government by the business community,
I point out that I have received
today two telegrams from the Associated
Chambers of Manufactures. These are the
people who were supposed-according to
the honourable member for Yarra ( Dr
J. F. Cairns)-to have been so upset. Let
us see whether, in fact, what the honourable
member for Yarra said was happening is
happening. The telegram reads:
This telegram confirms firmest and most sincere
expression of loyalty and support from the Federal
President and Members of the Associated
Chambers of Manufactures of Australia. Australian
industry recognises your Government has
diligently pursued important aims of economic
growth and national and social development.
Would honourable members have expected
that telegram, h. aving listened to the speech
of the honourable member for Yarra? Anybody
who listened to him would not have
done so. Would honourable members have
expected that to support what the Leader
of the Opposition put forward-that the
business community was distressed at the
way in which this Government was acting?
Mr James-Gee, you are a good bloke.
Mr SPEAKER--Order! The honourable
member for Hunter will cease interjecting.
Mr GORTON-The terms of the motion
are that the Government has failed to make
decisions on matters concerning defence.
That has been demonstrated to be untrue.
A further term is that the Government has
failed to make decisions on development.
That received so little credence, even from
members of the Opposition, that it has
scarcely even been mentioned by any
speaker on the Opposition side. A further
term is that the Government has failed to
make decisions on social welfare in the last
year. That has been demonstrated to be
completely untrue. A further term is that
the Government has refused to debate such
matters in the Parliament. Anyone
who reads Hansard will be able to see with
their own eyes that that is untrue.
Some reference was made during the
speech of the Leader of the Opposition to
young Lochinvar. If I remember correctly
the ballad goes on: ' Through all the wide
Border his steed was the best.' If we are
to apply this to those who sit on this side
of the House then I would gladly accept it
as a reasonable description of those who 
support me in this place. But what a weak
and puling attack--
Mr James-Dear John.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I can recognise
the voice of the honourable member for
Hunter almost anywhere, and I do not
appreciate his musical efforts in the House.
If he offends again, I will deal with him.
Mr GORTON-I do not appreciate his
writing me a ' Dear John' letter; it is not at
all appropriate. What a weak and puling
attack this has turned out to be in the way
it has been presented and, indeed, in the way in which it has been spoken to by
members of the Opposition. It is a broken
winded, broken mouthed, broken down old
crock of a motion put by a rider worthy
of that kind of steed. If it has served its
purpose, if it has served any purpose, I am
convinced that it has not served the
purpose of leading anyone to lose any confidence
in what the Government has done
and is doing, but rather it may well have
served the purpose of showing up in stark
relief what little confidence can be placed in
an Opposition and a Leader of an Opposition
who can present such a motion and
support it in such a way.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MURRAY, at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 92/ 1968
MESSAGE FROM MR. NIXON
The Prime Minister has received the following message
from the President-elect, Mr. Nixon:-
Dear Mr. Prime Minister,
I am deeply grateful for your message
from the Government and people of Australia. It will
be a source of strength in the days ahead to know that
the United States has a firm friend in the Pacific, sharing
our aspirations for peace and prosperity. The bonds
between our countries are already strong. My
Administration will make every effort to continde
them. Sincerely yours, A.
Richard M. Nixon. e
CANBERRA 21 November 1968 



FOR PRESS! P. M. No. 93/ 1968
NEW SOUTH WALES BUSHFIRES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I wish to express on behalf of myself and the
Commonwealth Government sincerest sympathy to those who
have suffered in the New South Wales bushfires.
We have already announced our preparedness
to contribute $ 50, 000 on a dollar for dollar basis with New South
Wales for the relief of personal hardship and distress suffered
by those people affected by the fires.
But the Premier of New South Wales has now told
me that his Government has extended its bushfire relief scheme
to cover the whole of New South Wales. I have assured him that
the Commonwealth Government will extend its previous offer and
will match State contributions to the scheme for relief of personal
hardship and distress resulting from the fires throughout the State.
CANBERRA November 1968 



PARIS TALKS PROCEED
Comment in the House of Representatives by the
Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I welcome the fact that as a result of discussions
between the United States and the Republic of Vietnam, the way
is now open for talks to proceed in Paris.
As I informed the House on 5 November, Australia
had already advised the South Vietnam Government that we felt
their interests would be best served by their representatives
attending the talks in Paris. I am therefore glad that as the outcome
of talks between the United States and the Government of the Republic
of Vietnam an understanding has been reached that clears the way
for the Government of the Republic of Vietnam to take part.
The Australian Government has always regarded it
as essential that the position of the Republic of Vietnam should be
safeguarded both in the conduct of hostilities and in any moves to
bring those hostilities to an end.
For the information of the House, I present copies of
the statements issued in Saigon and Washington a few hours ago.
CANBERRA 26 November 1968 



69/ 174
SALARIES BILL 1968
Second Reading Speech by the Prime Minister,
the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton 27 NOVEMBER 1968
I move that the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill arises from the Government's decision to
increase the salaries of $ 15, 000 and $ 17500 for Permanent Heads
of Departments of State and certain Statutory offices and to provide
for the payment of annual allowances additional to these salaries.
The new salaries will be $ 19, 500 and $ 22, 750 and the annual
allowanceswill be 1, 000 and 500 respectively, with effect from
1 December 1968. The Bill provides the new salaries and allowances
for the holders of the Statutory offices included in the First
Schedule to the Bill and, by an amendment to Section 30 of the
Public Service Act 1922-1967, for the payment of allowances to
Permanent Heads. The existing salaries of these senior officers date
from 1 November 1964. During this period there have been many
changes in other salaries in the Commonwealth Service, including
the substantial increase of December 1966 in the Second Division.
The margin between the Permanent Head's salary of $ 15, 300 and
the highest Second Division salary has been reduced to only $ 272,
There have also been substantial increases in other comparable
salaries. The annual allowances are for the expenses of office
in which these senior officials are necessarily involved but which,
by their nature, cannot be met by direct re-imbursement. Similar
allowances are paid to senior officers in the New South Wales Public
Service and in related Government employment and, of course, in
many positions in private enterprise.
In reaching its decision, the Government has taken
account of the constantly increasing demands placed upon the
Permanent Heads of the Departments of State and statutory off ice
holders and their very heavy responsibilities in the affairs of our
country. I commend the Bill to the House. 



FCR PRESS: P. M. No. 94/ I968
NEW SOUTH WALES BUSHFHIES
Statement _ by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gortoin
This afternoon the Premier of New South Wales
advised me that his Government had contributed a further $ 50, 000 to the
joint Commonwealth/ State scheme for the relief of personal harc~ hp and
distress in the New Scuth Wales bushfiresi In accordance with what I said
in the House yesterday, the Commonwealth readily agreed it would itself
match this contribution with an additional $ 50, 000 to the relief scheme.
As is usual in disasters of this nature, the armed
services have assisted with all means at their disposal to alleviate the
effects of the fires. For more than the last week troops, at the request
of the Bushf ire Control Organisation, have maintained a permanent roundthe
clock watch in the threatened areas. When the crisis struck yesterday,
the Air Force made 350 men available to the bushfire control and police
in the Glenbrook area. These ground parties were backed up with water
tankers, fire beaters and knapsack spray equipment. The Air Force
received no requests for aircraft to assist but it has had a C130 aircraft
patrolling the Newcastle and Sydney districts on fire spotting duties. This
aircraft fed back to ground control the intelligence about the fires gained
from the air. Mr Willis, the Chief Secretary of New South Wales,
was in touch with me today after an inspection of the disaster area. He
asked whether the Atmy could provide six fire tankers and crews to be
held at standby alert, two bulldozers with crews, a mobile canteen, a
generating set arnd two arc lights for night work. I readily agreed with
this request and the equipment and personnel are now on their way to the
area. CA NBERRA
29 November 1968 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 96, 1968
OVERSEAS TAK( EOVERS OF AUSTRALIAN
COMPANIES
joint Press S3tatement by the Prime Minister and the-
Treasurer
The Government has given consideration to some of the
problems raised as a consequence of attempts by overseas interests to take over
control of Australian companies by market purchases of shaz ( perhaps
in the name of nominees), " first-come first-served" offers for the purchase
of shares, and other such measures designed to avoid the need for
discussion with the company concerned.
The general view strongly held by the Government is that
the shareholders of an Australian company should have the right to amend
the company's Articles of Association for the purpose of ensuring that
control of the company, exercised through the voting power of the shareholders,
remains in Australian hands.
Under the present listing requirements of the Australian
Associated Stock Exchanges, a company is not admitted to the Stock Exchange
lists unless the company's Articles provide for equal voting rights for all
shares of the one class.
The Prime Minister and the Treasurer today discussed tole
matter with Mr C. T. Looker, President of the Australian Associated
Stock Exchanges and informed him of the Government's views. Mr Looker
has undertaken to discuss with members of the Australian Associated Stock
Exchanges an amendment of the provision mentioned.
The provision in question relates only to the voting rights
attaching to a company's shares. The Gvrmn's concern is with control
of Australian companies and with the ability of shareholders of Australian
companies to decide for themselves whether their Articles should contain
provisions restricting the voting rights of shares acquired by overseas
residents. The proposal discussed with Mr Looker will not, if adopted by
the Australian Associated Stock Exchanges, operate to impose restrictions
on overseas ownership of shares in Australian companies or in any way,
inhibit the free transferability of such shares.
CANBERRA December 1968 



ACCEPTANCE OF THE SIR HUBERT MURRAY PAPERS
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, ON
BEHALF OF THE INATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Canberra, A. C. T._ 6 DECEMEF 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Sir Grenfell, Mrs Pinney, Dr West and Members of the National Library
Council This seems to be fundamentally, at any rate ostensibly, a
strictly family occasion, as it were, and I feel very privileged indeed to be
able to share in it and to accept on behalf of the Council these historical
letters which you have so generously donated.
It is appropriate, I think, that on such a day you, Sir, as the
eminent biographer of Sir Hubert Murray should be with us, and perhaps
even more appropriate that you should be with us on this occasion in this
place as the son-in-law of Harold White who adds to the flavour of this
gathering. Mr Harold White's acquisitive instincts, of course, are quite
well known, as far as the Library is concerned, but I am not sure whether
in this case he was the chief hunter after the letters which are before us or
whether indeed they were freely offered, as I believe they were, by Mrs
Pinney and by Dr West.
Sir, you have described Sir Hubert Murray as a great pro-consul
as indeed he was a great colonialist, It is not a word which tends to be
in fashion nowadays, to be a colonialist, but I think that looking back on the
times of which we are speaking, it has to be accepted that the colonial rule
which Sir Hubert carried out was of immense benefit to Papua at that time
and that it would have been impossible for that country to have developed to
the state where colonialism is no longer acceptable had it not been for the
guidance of this man.
He was a man of many parts. We hear cif him first or I hear
of him first when he was at school, from which, if I am not inr"' rrectly
informed, he was ejected for taking a punch at one of his masters a thing
for which I envy him very much because it was something I always wanted to
do when I was at school. I can only think that the master concerned was a very
lucky man indeed that he was missed because I gather that Sir Hubert went on
to become a heavyweight champion and able to ta~ ke on any iiumber of masters
should he so have wished.
He had, of course, a very distinguished and interesting career
in the field during the Boer War, and you have indicated to me that there were
some most interesting letters here letters from the field written at that time.
Hie also took over the running of Papua, the bringing of Papua towards its full
stature at a time of enormous challenge. So he was a man who contribued
greatly to that country and we must hope and I believe by contributing to
that country gave the opportunity for those further contributions which will be
a contribution to Australia iin the years ahead and the relations between Australia
and Papua. 2 J 
-2-
You mentioned, Sir, a time when he died in Samarai and
when there was a mourning festival held, and I would like to quote in
part from what was said at that time. This is a quote of what was said
by a village councillor on this occa3ion
" But who is like him in Papua? There is none. There will
never be one like him. He came among us and saw our lives.
Sometimes when he was younger, he hunted and fished with us.
He knew us in all our ways. Sometimes when his work was done,
Ihe met us on the roads as we came home from our gardens and he
greeted us. Now we have lost him, for he is dead. We shall not
know his friendly ways He was the best of men; our
children and their children will talk of him. He promised us all
' I will not leave you. I will die in Papua' His words were the words
of a true man for his body lies in our ground.
Now the record of the work he did lies in the National
Library of Australia. With that history and with that feeling among the
people for what he did when he was alive, may I renew the protestations
of the gratitude we feel that these records of his work lie in the national
archives for all time.
Thank you, Mrs Pinney 



EMBARGO 6 p. m. PM 97/ 1968
9/ 12/ 68 COVE BAUXITE/ ALUMINA PROJECT
STATEMENT BY PRIME MINISTER
M JG-GRTON
The Government has given approval in principle
for a proposal to enable the doubling of the previously
planned size of the Gove bauxite/ alumina project.
It has also agreed that Australian participation
in the enlarged project will initially be 30% which
represents an Australian investment, in terms of money,
nearly twice as large as that previously contemplated.
The original proposal was for the construction
of an alumina plant with a capacity of half a million tons
a year at a cost, including ancillary services, of $ 100
million. Under the terms of the agreement between the
Commonwealth and Nabalco Pty. Ltd., announced on
September 1965 50% of the capital of Nabalco was to be held
by Australian interests and 50% by Swiss Aluminium Ltd.
The agreement provided, however, that Australian
interests were not bound to supply 50% of the capital unless
a profit of 7-1/ 2% per year on the whole of the equity capital
of the Company could be seen to be available for a period
of twenty years. If this profit could not be seen to be anticipated
the Australian interests could withdraw in which case Swiss
Aluminium Ltd was committed to go ahead alone and if
Australian capital was not available had the right to
go ahead alone. Subsequently a comprehensive feasibility
study showed that the economics of an alumina plant with
a capacity of half a million tons a year were such that
continued Australian participation was out of the question
because of the low return on capital which was expected.
The prospective return on capital of an alumina
plant with a capacity of one million tons per annum, which
is now proposed, costing $ 300 million was also not nearly
high enough to assure continued participation by Australian
capital. -/ 2 
-2-
However, Swiss Aluminium Ltd. knew that the
Government placed great importance on Australian
participation in this venture and willingly co-operated
in helping to overcome the difficulty presented to the
Australian interests concerned because of the higher
capital investment required, and the lower profitability
disclosed by the feasibility study.
In the result it is proposed that Australian
interests will provide 30% of the capital required for
a joint venture. Under the terms of the arrangement Australian
interests will own their share of the alumina produced.
Swiss Aluminium Limited will buy this alumina for twenty
years at prices which have been agreed, should the
Australian interests require this, but the Australian
interests can make their own arrangements for sale of
the alumina elsewhere should they wish to do so.
Further, Swiss Aluminium Ltd. have agreed that
the Australian interests have the right to export up to
million tons of bauxite over a 20 year period, the profits
from the sale of which are to go exclusively to the
Australian interests concerned.
In the future either the Swiss, or the Australian
venturers may undertake an expansion of the plant to
give it a capacity of more than one million tons per year
and should that occur the other venturer has the right
to subscribe 50% of the additional funds required and to
take 50% of the additional production.
In accordance with the terms of the original
agreement the perimeter areas will now be included in
the joint venturers' lease.
The Swiss Company has been told that should future
circumstances permit a return to the original concept of
overall Australian participation on terms fair to all
concerned the Government would look to the Swiss Company
to co-operate in bringing this about.
Under the approved arrangements the joint venturers
will continue to be responsible for the construction of
all associated facilities other than those needed for
direct Government purposes such as the police station,
court house, school, hospital, Government offices, and
accommodation for Government employees. Special attention
has been given to measures designed to ensure that the
interests of the Aboriginal people in the area are given
full weight, and to enable them to take the fullest advantage 3/. 
-3-
of the opportunities opened to them by the development.
When the plant reaches full production upwards of $ 850,000
a year will be payable to the Aborigines Benefit Trust
Fund from royalties. In all the circumstances the Government believes
the national interest has been served by acceptance of
these proposals. The alumina plant will be one of the largest in the
world. A township of more than 4,000 people will be constructed
in the sparsely populated North, and a framework has been
provided in which Australian interests have a substantial
share in a very large undertaking and also retain good prospects
for future expansion of the percentage of that Australian interest.
Canberra 9 December 1968. 



7MBARGO: NOT FOR PU3LICATION F3FOR 7 P. M. S. T.)
" OR PR ESS: PM. NO. 90/' c61
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR TH3 ARTS: GRANTS FOR 19Q-69
Statement bv the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I have received from the Chairman ol the Australian Council for the
\ rts the Counc-il's recommendations for grants to be made by the Commonwealth
Government in support of the performing arts in the current finan-ial year
This is the first year of the Council's existence and it has gi-en
considerable thought to the proper function for Commonwealth support for the
arts in relation to other forms of support. The Commonwealth contribution
is only one among many. The arts belong to the whole communit", and
support for them should come from many sources from State Governments,
from local councils, from public organizations and private individuals. It is
therefore to be hoped that the lead given by the Commonwealth in sponsoring
the arts will encourage support at all levels throughout the Australian
community. In this respect it is heartening to percei; e a growing interest
by man" States in artistic matters. Solendid buildings are being erected in
man" State capi-als and considerable help is beinx given to provide conditions
in which the arts can flourish and Australians can take due pride in their
increasing achievermentc in this field.
The Council is of the opinion that its main concern as a vederal hod"
should be to establish and develop high national standards which will benefit
activity in the arts throughout Australia and stimulate interest abroad in
Australia's cultural achievements Its concern with qualit'r is fundamental
To this end the Coun-il has adopted a princile widJely accepted b7 similar
bodies in other countries, that high standards can best be achieved bi a
concentration of availiable funds rather than by a thin spread over a wide ar?
Much of the Council's work in these earl" stages is exploratory in
nature. It has establishend working comrnmittoes to seek expert opinion on its
various areas of interest with a view to formulating in . he near future long
range policies for Go ' ernment support for the arts in ustralia The
Government understands that a report will shortly be forthcoming from the
Council on the work of its film committee which has begun enquiries into
means by which film making for television rma be supported
The Council has received requests for assistance in manr at. egories
other than the theatre arts to which its grants for this vear have been restricted
It will begin enquiries as soon as possible into the need for assistance in some
of these other fields and will advise the Government of its c-nclusions
In announcing the Council's recommendations for 196 / 69 may I
express the Government's pleasure at being associatad with activities in th.-
arts which contribute so significanily to the enrichment of Australia's national
life and to her reputation in other coun ries.
The grants for 190/ 69 are as follows: 
G. ANTS RECOMMENDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN COUNC-L FOR
THE ARTS FCA THE YEAR 1968/ 69
1. Professional Training Institutions
The National Institute of Dramatic Art 26,000
The Australian Ballet School 28,500
A training scheme Lor theatre administrators 5,033
2. National Touring Companies
a) Tihe Australian Ballet 253,00
D, ' The Australian Opera 193,000
The Elizabetiian Trust Orchestra 167, + 3j
d, The Marionette Theatre of Australia 30, 003
3. Regional and State Organia tions
A Direct Financial Assistance
In N. S. W.
The Old Tote Theatre Company 49, 003
In Victoria
Melbourne The-. tre Company 73, 300
B.. llet Victoria b, 030
In South Austrlia
jouth Australian Tleatre Company 19, DJJ
In Cueensland
C ueensiand Thetce Company ior a visit by
tne Old Tote Taeatre Company
A Cueensland Schools Tour ( by the Old Tote
Thea. tre Company) 5, 303
In the i. C. T.
CanberrE. a Tineatre Trust for a visit by the Old
Tote Tneatre Comp... ny, 1,3
Tie Canberra . epertory Society 3, 203
In Western Australia
Tne National Theatre at the Playhouse l, 300
The Western Australian Opera Company 12, 033j
West Australian Ballet Company ,3003
In Tasmania
N.-tional T.-eatre and Fine Arts Society 23, 539
B Assistance for speci; l projects.
A fund to support speci l projects such as the
commissioning o" new works, productions oi
Australian plays, a pool of professional directors,
performers nd othe: experts connected vwitl tile
performing az: ts, and youth ctivities in twis field. 163, J33 
4. Federal Co-ordinating and Entrepreneurial
Or ; anizations Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust for administration,
production division, and entrepreneurial activities
T.-e Federal body of the Arts Councils of Australia
for administration and support for national tours34, Y.
Studies and Reports
U. N. S. O. Sexinar on Public Support for the
Performin Arts. 6, -33
6. International Visits from Australia
The VIctorian Universities "-oir, to the International
Universities Choral Festival in New York.
The New Sydney dWoodwind uirintet to the Festival of
Performinr Arts in Manil?.
The University of Adelaide Cuintet, tour of
A: nerica. 5, 7, 303
7. Festivals Canberra Spring Music Festival
Adelaide Festival of Arts
Festival of Pert
Moonoa Festival
Second Australian Universities Irts Festival
Z. Aboriginal Activities in the Performin; Arts 7, 033
1, UX3
15, 00&amp;
6, 33
1,000
li, ; Sc
Payments to these or ; ani. ations will be made through the Australian
Elizabethan Theatre Trust for this financial year.
CANBERRA 11December 19. Le 



68/ 1177
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION EMBARGOED UN~ TIL
8.30 p. m. 14~/ 12/ 68
FOUR C ORNERS INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINISTER.
THE RIGHT HON. J. G6 G'ORTON
Reporters: John Temple
Michael Willosoe
John Penlington
TEMPLE: Good evening. This last edition of Four
Corners for 1968 is coming from Canberra. An interview with the
Prime Minister, the Right Hon. J. G. Gorton, looking back on his
first year of office. With me are John Penlington and Michael
Will see, Prime Minister, since you camo to office
there have been some quite dramatic changes in the strategic
situation in the area Britain's accelerated withdrawal from
east of Suez, America's scale down in Vietnam and apparent
reluctance to become too involved in future in Asia,~ As a result
of these, how much more vulnerable is Australia?
PRIM4E MINISTER:* Well, I don't think Australia is any more
vulnerable at all, if you're talking in the terms of an invasion
or a likely incursion across the borders of Australia by some
hostile power. I believe without question that the A. N. Z. U.. S.
Treaty covers Australia and New Zealand and we have ourselves
increased our own capacity to defend ourselves. So if that is
the sense in which one is talking I believe we are no more
vulnerable at all. But nevertheless, it would be true to say
that Britain's accelerated withdrawal and the debate going on
in the United States as to the extent of involvement and the kind
of involvement that country should have in South-East Asia, would
have created conditions there less stable than before these things
happened. QUJESTION: Could I ask you what Australia is going to
do in this less stable situation? At your press conference 
2-
this week the general assumption seems to be that Australia will
continue to have a role in regional defence including troopq
stationed abroad. Is this a fair assumption?
PRIME MINISTER: What I said at the press conference was
that the Government had taken what I regard as significant decisions
enabling the military advisers of the Government and Defence
Department to plan the sort of advice that they will give us. We
have told them the capabilities we would like our forces to be able
to fulfil. They can then advise on the composition of the forces
to fulfil those capabilities and the kind of arms which would be
provided and do their planning in that way. That is one thing
and the decisions needed to be taken on that. That should be
distinguished from taking at this stage decisions not as to
composition of the forces but as to disposition of the forces.
Not as to capability of the forces but as to the deployment of
the forces at some time in the future. They are two different
things. QUETION: Prime Minister, ltd like to ask why it has
taken Cabinet so long to reach this latest decision?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, as you said, or as you said, sir,
we were confronted with a comparatively new situation in,
particularly, the aroa to our own near north. We knew, of
course, that Britain was intending to withdraw but the quite
significant acceleration of her withdrawal presented problems
which came before us sooner than * they would otherwise have been
thought to be coming before us. And this required a good deal
of study and a good deal of advice and a good deal of discussion
by the Defence Committee before advice came to Canberra.
QUESTION: Now, your critics have attacked you
because of the delay but has the Australian Government suffered
or made any losses because of this delay? 
3-
PRIME MINISTER: I 4ontt believe they have. You see, we
have engaged in Five Power talks as you know in the area directly
to our north as to what is to happen up until the time that the
British withdrawal is completed. Those talks have been going on
and those countries know our views and their own views and I've
already announced that in principle we propose to keep in that
area forces subject to a few details being cleaned up.
QUESTION: Are you aware of any strains in Australian-
Malaysian or Australian-Singapore relations as a result of the
delay? PRIME MINISTER: I'm not aware of any.
QUESTION: We have heard reports of certainly the
Singapore Government pressing your Government for a decision.
Have such measures been taken?
PRIME MINISTER: I know of no such strains or no such
pressing coming from Lee Kuan Yew to myself.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, you said this week that
it wasn't a choice between Fortress Australia and sticking all
our troops in Asia. But didntt you start the speculation about
Fortress Australia and add to it by some of your statements
through the year?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know when I can be quoted as
having used the words Fortress Australia but with that rider
let's accept what you've said. What I have been saying is that
in this new situation there are a great number of possibilities,
when we know when this acceleration was going to take place,
there were a great number of alternate possibilities and all of
them needed to be looked at. But Pbrtress Australia is not I
think a phrase I've used, and the connotation of it is not one
that I would support. The connotation of Fortress Australia is
the idea that everybody goes back into Australia, turns their 
back on everything outside Australia, draws a line around it and
says, we're inside this line and we're not interested at all what
happens outside it, we just stay here in a fortress. This is a
proposition, in fact, that has been put forward by some opposition
spokesmen, but that is not at all the same thing as, for example,
and I'm speaking of possibilities again, the role that Britain
took, say, during the Napoleonicli~ ars when she was in a sense
fortress-ridden but occupied on the Continent.
QUESTION: These are extremes. I think you put it
this week as" blc and white!.
PRI14E MINISTER: Yes.
QUESTION: But I think a lot of commentators have
taken it as meaning an accent on one or the other and I come back
to this point that you were the person who started saying that
we have to reconsider this forward defence concept and I think
you wore even quoted as using the term ' Foortress Australia' at
the Government Partied meeting.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't think I've ever used the
term in any public meeting and I won't comment on what happens
inside Party meetings. So there are a number of possibilities
to be examined. I think you're not quite right to say the
commentators have on the whole put an accent on one or the other.
Some of them have. But I think some of them have tended to say
it's either all one thing or all the other thing. And that I
think was quite wrong.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, do you think in fact that
taking the defence situation at the beginning of the year and now
as best we can read it; would you agree there's no major policy
change? PRIME MINISTER: Are you talking of defence situations
from the point of view of the hardware that's supplied to the
forces? 
QUESTION: No, I think basically deployment
philosophy. PRIME MVINISTER: Well, the deployment of the f orces up until
1971, subject to what I've said in Parliament in announcing it,
is clearly a continuation of what we did before. A continuation
up until the end of 1971 so in that sense there would be no need
to change.
QUESTION: Prime Minister,, you've said just recently
that we have to face the fact that we've entered a new era and that
we must build up our defences. Does that mean that we can
reasonably expect that conscription will be maintained?
PRIME MINISTER: I think if we are to keep regular forces
of the size that we should keep it will be necessary to have a
form of national service in order to keep them up to that level.
QUESTION: Now, another comment of yours earlier this
year that may have given us a clue as to what you were feeling
about that, you said that you'd like Australia to have " a
citizen army ready to go at a moment's notice as the Israelis
were -abl~ e to go at a moment's notice into action". Now, what
did you have in mind that would be different to the sort of
citizen army that we have at present?
PRIME MINISTER: I think what one had in mind was a better
citizen army, a better equipped citizen army, a better trained
citizen army, C. MF., than we have had at present. We have
throughout our military history, in fact up until recently when
we had greater regular forces, we have been dependent on a
citizen army and calling it together in times of emergency and
then training it for some time before it can go into action. One
of the possibilities again and one of the things that needs to
be examined is a bettering and a better-equipping and a bettertraining
of the citizen army so that we don't have to have that
long delay should it ever be needed. 
6
QUESTION: And a bigger C. 14. F.?
PRIME MINISTER: I'd like to wait for the direct military
advice of our military advisers on this before I answer that.
QUESTION: Is it probable that conscription or at least
some form of national service would be enlarged perhaps to the
point of making it universal?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think that we would need to enlarge
it to the point of making it universal. We did once, you know,
make it universal for -a six mronthis period of training, and I
think the armed forces got very little out of it and it did
disrupt a whole lot of civilian activity and development of
Australia. What is needod is a period of time for a national
serviceman to serve which will enable him, first of all, to be
properly trained and then for the armed forces to get the advantage
of that training for the rest of the time during which he is
serving. Now, if that wore to be applied universally, I think it
would be bad for the other requirements that Australia has for
its young men to build Australia.
QUESTION: Could we turn quickly now, sir, to Vietnam.
In June this year, at the National Press Club in fact here in
Canberra, you said that the military objective of obtaining
political freedom for the South Vietnamese poo~ le could be
attained. Do you still believe that?
PRIME MINISTER:-Well, I suppose that would depend on the
outcome of the negotiations going on now in Paris. If the
outcome of those negotiations is that the South Vietnamese
people do get political freedom then I think it should be clear
that that political freedom has been achieved only because there
was military opposition to aggression.
QUESTION: You've also said that the only way the
war could be lost was diplomatically. Do you see dangers 
7
therefore in attempts to reach a diplomatic solution?
PRIME MINISTER: I see no danger in attempts to reach a
diplomatic solution at all.
QUESTION: The United States has taken some dramatic
steps over Vietnam specifically during your term of office, hasn't
it? The bombing halt for a start, and then the start of the
Paris talks, and looking back over the things that have happened
in the twelve months, is the Australian Government completely
satisfied with American policies?
PRIME MINISTER: American policies in relation to the bombing
halt and the bringing about of talks in Paris?
go Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: We have endorsed what tho United States
Government has done on both occasions. Tho first occasion was an
attempt to show good faith and to bring people to a negotiating
table and to seek to de-escalate the actual war as President
Johnson said. This had no great success with North Vietnam.
But the second decision was based on the Americans' belief that
should that second decision be taken then proper peace talks would
begin because there had been no proper* peace talks until that
stage. All the talks were concerned with whether bombing should
stop on North Vietnam. Their belief that proper peace talks
would take place and that they had good reason to beliove that
the scale of fighting would drop during the period of those
peace talks, and they having that belief and certainly the talks
having begun, we can only do as I indicated in the House myself,
hope that they'll reach a successful conclusion.
QUESTION: You have indicated some discontent on both
those occasions though, haven't you, Prime Minister? 
-8
PRIME MINISTER: I think what I have done is to indicate
that it is not certain by any means that a peaceful solution will
be attained at the negotiation table merely because. people are
sitting down at a negotiating table. One hopes there will. There
is no certainty that it will. I mean, as I think you used at the
time, injected a note of caution rather than a note of discontent.
QUESTION: Did you go along with the American policy
of putting pressure on the South Vietnamese Government to attend
the peace talks?
SPRIME MINISTER: Why, we ourselves approached the South
Vietnamese and gave them our advice that we thought it was in their
interest to go and that this of course was also announced in the
House. QUESTION: Now, Prime Minister, weld like, if we may,
0-4Ltoto turn to domestic issues. And one of the most sensitive is the
question of foreign ownership of Australian resources. It's an
(. I2.6area in which youtve personally intervened on a number of
occasions. Why has it been necossary for you to intervene?
UPRIME MINISTER: Well, the only occasion on which I intervened
directly was in the case of the M. L. C. and one was able to
do that because the M. L. C. was incorporated in the Australian
Capital Territory, and one had a constitutional power to do it.
On the other occasion of which you're thinking, I believe, that
is the occasion when we asked the Stock Exchanges to continue
trading in Australian company shares even though the shareholders
of those companies may have sought to protect themselves against
being taken over. That we believed was necessary and when I
say we, the Government believed it was necessary. To prevent
the sort of market raids which have been going on, on good
efficient well-established companies or which was anticipated
might take place on such companies. 
9r
QUESTION: I think the critics have warned, Prime
Minister, that you may frighten off foreign capital. Have you
had any indications from foreign investors that they could be
nervous? PRIME~ MINISTER:, Well, certainly the capital inflow up until
this stage from abroad has given no indication of dropping off and
there are obvious reasons for that. But I think that what we
need to have in our minds in discussing this are two things:
first development capital, capital coming into Australia in order
to develop some new industry, some now mine, in order to build.
This we want and I see no indicat~ ion of nervousness. We would
wish to have some Australian participation in such new development.
We would not want debenture capital to be raised inside
Australia for some overseas company development in Australia.
That is one aspect. On the other aspect, that of taking over
established Australian companies, there are, as I said yesterday,
ins tanzces when this could be of advantage but there are also
instances when it could be of considerable disadvantage, and we
wish at this stage to try and stop it. Or try and help people
stop it.
QUESTION: You don't see any nervousness here for
development capital; apparently Charles Court, the Liberal
Minister in W. A. for Industrial Dovelopment, does. He said
this week that your intervention had embarrassed the W. A.
Government and had caused doubts In the minds of overseas
investors. PRIME MINISTER: Ican only state my own belief and that is
that overseas investors will come to Australia if they see a
stable government, which they do see, and if they see a proper
opportunity to profit on the funds which they are willing to
invest in Australia. And those are the two things I think they
make their judgement on. 
a. 10
QUESTION: Prime Minister, do you want more power-to
control or curb foreign investment?
PRIME MINISTER: To control or curb it. I think that it
would be good if the Attorney-Generals' Committee could reach
agreement on uniform legislation so that nominees who bought up
more than a certain percentage of a company should have to disclose
who in fact the beneficiaries were, I think that would be
a good step and I suppose that would fall within the category
ofgreater power to curb takeovers. I think it would beif we
could work it out with the States, good to have a selective way
of protecting Australian companies from being taken over and
their assets dissipated and things of that kind. Yes, I think
that would be good.
QUESTION: And you seem to be looking for more
power? PRIME MINISTER: If that's the Interpretation you put on
what I've just said yes.
QUESTION: Do you accept the interpretation?
PRIME MINISTER:* Well,. I think I must because if you make
nominees, if you want the power to make nominees disclose who
the beneficiaries are, then you're asking for more power yes.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, can I take you on to
another sensitive domestic issue this year the financial
relationship of the States with the Commonwealth. You've been
accused in this dispute of being a centralist it's an
accusation that you've repeatedly denied. Just how much
financial power do you want your Commonwealth Government to
have? PRIME MINISTER:, Well, can I go back to the genesis of this
debate, on this matter, and that was a suggestion of mine 
11
p repeated in variou, place that it was time I thought the Liberal
Party examined the conocept of Federalism which as a dogma it
accepted some twenty-five Tears ago. Examined it and see
whether they still thought it was exactly the way it should be.
What I think is essential is that the central government should
be able to control the general economy of Australia. That if
there is too much pressure on available resources then the
central government take financial measures in order to reduce the
demand on those resources, that if there is not enough pressure,
if there are resources and men lying unemployed, then the central
government should be able to take financial action of one kind or
another in order to see that those unused resources were used.
SThis must be a function of the central government and I think that
leads one on to the conclusion that if this is accepted then a
central government must have as in fact it has had full control
of the major sectors of taxation. Not only fiscal control but
full control of the major sectors of taxation. And I wanted
those two propositions to be thoroughly examined and for people
to decide whether yes that really was the fact.
QUESTION: Do you think you've convinood the Premiers
U of that yet though?
FFUIMIENISTER: Well, what is going to happen about that
is that the Liberal Party is going to examine the whole question
which at least I believo must be good. But it's not only that.
I think there is also a need for a central government to see that
if there is a national need, that that national need is met all
throughout Australia. If I can give an example of that; if it
was agreed, I think it was generally agreed, that Australia needed
technicians and needed technologists for its future development,
and therefore needed better technical schools and better equipment
for the training of people going through them, if itta
agreed that there was that need then it was reasonable for the
central government to say this is a national need, we will provide 
12
Section 96 grants to see that this is met and that it is met in
the same way in Queensland as it is uiet in Western Australia or
New South Wales.
QUESTION: Are there any particular activities
perfformned by the States now which you think as the years go by
will move more into areas off Federal control? Financial control?
PRIME MINISTER: I think that's a bit too speculative a
question and...
QUESTION: Well, take education for one which is
something in which your Federal Government and previous
Federal governments have given dollops of money'to the States.
Do you think this is an area where the Commonwealth is going to
take over more control of how the money is spent?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe that that is likely to
happen and I'm not sure, In fact I think I would not like it to
happen. But it may well be in the future, some time in the
future, responsibility for providing finance for education, for
providing finance for a technical school or ai secondary school
or a primar-y school or teacher training or whatever it has, may
come to be more off a Federal matter I don't see it in my time
but it may well be. But if it did come to that then one would
certainly not want to see, the finance having beon provided,
some central government saying what sort off syllabus would be
taught in a school and what number off teachers and where the
schools would be built or any of these matter which the States
could do much better.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, can we look now more closely
at you, at tho Gorton style. Earlier this year you said that you
did not see yourself as Prime Minister as a Chairman of Committee.
You said that if a Prime Minister believes strongly enough that
something ought to be done then It* must be done, this was
as far as Cabinet was concerned. Have you stuck to this? 
* 13
PRIME MINISTER: I think that is still what a Prime M4nister
should do. But, mind you, it would only be in the most extreme
ca8s that it would be necessary for a Prime Minister to put into
action that particular attitude. In nine hundred and ninety-nine
cases out of a thousand it would be a matter as it should be of
discussion and decision by Cabinet but there could be some
occasions when the Prime Minister should say thais is something I
believe in very strongly, that it's got to be done, or you get
someone else.
QUESTION: Has such an occasion arisen this year?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Has this philosophy caused any strains or
lost you any friends in Cabinet or Government?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believo it has at all. In fact I
think that I really do believe that our Cabinet is working as
happy a team as I've ever seen one work.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, on this theme of your more
individualistic approach, your critics seem to imply that they
want a Prime Minister who stops, looks and listens before acting,
but they accuse you of sometimos stopping and looking but not
listening suffIiciently. Not taking all the advice. What's
your reaction?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, my reaction, I think I can best
express this way, that not only a Prime Minister but any Minister
running a department should get advice, listen to it, analyse it,
argue about it if they're not in agreement with it, and if having
done that the Minister or the Prime Minister believes that the
advice should not be taken then I think the advice should not be
taken because the decision must always rest with the Minister,
the Cabinet or a Prime Minister. 
QUESTION: Yes, but the accusation is th~ t you don't
listen to all this advice.
PRIME MINISTER:* Well, I donft think thatte an accurate
accusation. It may be put fforward by some people, I don't know,
who really mean I don't take all this advice which is quite a
different thing.
QUESTION: I think in the case off the Esso-B. H. P. oil
agreement, it appears you didn't take Dr. Frankel's advice and he
was... PRIME MINISTER: Wall, Dr. Frankel was employed by the
Department off National Development to make reports to the Department
off National Development. The Department off National Development
was on the Intordepartmental Committee which made recommendations
to the Government, and they, the Interdepartmental Committee, had
made recoim'ondations and indicated that there was some need for
decisions on these recommendations apparently long beffore they
expected to receive Dr. Frankel's advice.
QUESTION: In the same area but with a diffferent twist,
these same critics sometimes think you're too hasty. Do you also
reject that criticism?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't believe I have been too hasty, I
can't think off anything I've been too hasty on.
QUESTION: Could I suggest for one, early in the
year you suggested you would place a ceiling on our commitment
off troops in Vietnam. You certainly watered this downm later.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don' t think so. We have kopt . a
ceiling on the troops in Vietnam.
QUESTION: Yes, but you decline to reaffirm that
wish. 
PRIME MINISTER: I decline to reaffirm it indefinitely that
we enter the future under all sorts of unknown circuxuatancea but
in fact that statement was made and that statement has been
adhered to. Arid if I may say so that statement was expressing a
view which had been reached by a previous government to mine and
which was known abroad anyway.
QUESTION: Well, what some people may call hasty others
may call decisivenessargway. Do you see this, certainly this
speed of reaction as part of John Gorton or just something you see
a Prime Minister should do?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think that there's any real
advantage in speed of reaction as such, just for speed of reaction.
There may bo occasions arising when speed is necessary but it's
not a virtue in itself. Indeed, on the matter of entering overseas
shipping which. I think is one of the most exciting things
Australia's done in the course of this year, there were long
discussions before the decision was finally taken by Cabinet, long
discussion by Mr. McEwen, by his officials, by myself with Mr.
McEwen, On the oil pricing there was long discussion in
Cabinet, interdepartmental coimmittees.. and so on,
QUESTION: Could I just chip in. When you talk about
Cabinet taking that decision on shipping; was it true in fact
that a London newspaper gave a report of that deal the same day
you put it before Cabinet?
PRIME MINISTER: A London newspaper correspondent gave some
of the aspects of the deal. But the deal, you k. now, was not put
before Cabinet as'this is a deal which has been concluded". It
was put before Cabinet as" Ithis is a proposition which the
shipping companies will agree to if you will agree to. Do you
accept the proposition?"
QUESTION: Prime Minister, you've said several times
this year that you hope for a new sense of nationalism in Australia?
Do you see any-signs of it? 
* P * 16
PRIME MINISTER: I think people can only make their own
minds up on that and form their own judgments and their own
interpretations. I believe myself, rightly or wrongly, that there
is a growing feeling of cohesion and nationalism and pride in
Australia amongst Australians. I ' think there is. I hope there is.
I think there should be.
QUESTION: Sir, one of the things that seems implicit
S in some of things you h,, Ive said about nationalism i 3 that it
depends heavily on how much money we get for our enormous natural
~ resources, in some sense we are going to buy a national destiny.
That's not what you mean perhaps is it?
PRIM~ E MINISTER: That's not what I really mean at all, but
nevertheless it must be true, that if we are to develop as quickly
as we want to develop theni we need to get proper development capital
from abroad and as that develo~ ment occurs and particularly if there
is Australian participation in that development, then we will be
stronger and have more opportunities to do the things we want to do
which are not just material things inside Australia.
. QUEST IO : Well, what about the trappings of
. nationalism, Sir? You have alre. 2dy said you fancy Waltzing Matilda
as the National Anthem. You didn't say this?
P. RIME MINISTER: N o. I said we had a National Anthem and
it was God Save the Queen, and that in a monarchy such as Australia is
aL quite satisfactory National Anthem. But I did say I thought
Waltzing Matilda was a ' National Song. And my personal opinion was
it ought to be a ! Xational Song and I would be very happy to see.
it played on such occasions, for example our atheletes winning
something at the Olympic Games or something of that kind, but when
the Governor-General comes or when there is any significant matter
of that kind, then I think we have a National Anthem. But yet
O I 6 SK/( 7 7 
1( 17
17
some people do not like Waltzing Matilda, but I do.
QUESTION: PRIME MII-TIST. ER:
QUESTION: have one of' our own? And the flag?
The flag I am quite ha-ppy. 1 with.
You would not want to follow Canada and
PRIME MINISTER: My own belief' is that our flag stands for
so much that I would not like to see it change.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, you have made a relatively
Sbig jump, well from a relatively junior Minister to Prime Minister.
Ihiv you have had twelve months there, have you enjoyed thi~ s year
of power?
O PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I have enjoyed it. It has been
extremely wearing~ very tiring; but subject to occasionally getting
slightly exhausted, yes I have enjoyed tt I am not sure there has
ever been another period when quite so many new things have
* happened; either from abroad. or instigated within Australia perhaps
by ourselves.
. QUESTION: Prime Minister, if you had to single out
one particular achievement this year, that you would take the
greatest pride in, which one would it be?
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: Can I single out two?
All right.
PRIME MINISTER: Well the one I would put down as the
beginnings of' the entry of' Australia into carrying our own produce
in our own ships. We are leasing a couple of' the ships but in fact
we are manning them and controlling them. This I think is the
beginming-of something which I believe will grow and will be great
for Australia. 
,18-
-QUE ST ION: Can I just butt in there? Isn'tt that
just a little bit adrift from normal Liberal philosophy to move
into an area of what some might see as socialism like that?
PRIME ]~ ISTEP: W'ell I think it depends on how you
interpret normal Liberal philosophy because after all, for a long,
long time the Liberals have been supporting a two airline policy,
twhich involves the running of airlines in competition and this
involves the running of ships in competition. I have never heard
* a Liberal urging that railways for example should be returned to
private enterprise, so no, I don't think it is.
The other thing that I am rather happy
about is that we have lifted the fear, I believe, from people who
might contract a long continued illness and who previously, even
though they were insured, would only be insured for a short period
of time but now will be insured for as long ~ as the illness continues.
Those are two things, there are a number of others that I am happy
Labout, but you only rationed me to two.
QUDSTION: Prime Minister, thank you very much indeed
Sfor giving us your time. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 99/ 1968
DEFENCE ARRANGEMENTS UP TO 1971
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Cabinet today concluded its discussion on the detailed
arrangements for implementation of the previously announced " in
principle" decision to maintain Naval, Army and Air Forces in
Malaysia/ Singapore until the end of 1971.
We are now conveying firm details of the proposed
arrangements to New Zealand, and to Singapore and Malaysia who,
of course, as the States concerned will have their own arrangements
to consider consequential on our message.
CANBERRA 18 December 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 100/ 1968
COMMONWEALTH ASSISTANCE FOR KILLARNEY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
On the night of Friday, 23 November 1968, the
township and district of Killarney in South East Queensland was
struck by a violent cyclonic storm which left a trail of damage
and destruction throughout the area.
As is usual in disasters of this type, the Commonwealth
stood ready to assist upon the request of the State Government.
Recently the Premier asked the Commonwealth
for assistance on a for basis with the State for the relief of
personal hardship and distress resulting from the disaster and
I have today replied to the Premier agreeing with his request.
Officials of our respective Governments will work
out the details of the Commonwealth assistance.
CANBERRA December 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 101/ 1968
PRIME MINISTER'S CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO FORCES
The Prime Minister has sent the following message to
members of the Australian forces serving In Australia and overseas:-
" On behalf of the people of Australia, I
send to all Australian servicemen and women my best
wishes for Christmas and the New Year.
Wherever you may be serving, each one
of you is making a contribution to the security of Australia
and to the stability of our part of the world.
In particular, our thoughts are with those
of you whose duties will prevent you spending Christmas
with your families. At no time in our history, outside
the period of the Great World Wars, have we had so many
Australians serving overseas. Some of you are in the
front lines, facing danger, hardship and discomfort.
Others are on active service in areas where your presence
helps protect the peace of friendly nations.
But at home or abroad, you are all serving
Australia well, and are doing a job of which you can be
proud. It is a pride shared by your families and by the
nation. In these challenging days of change on the
international scene, our Defence Forces are playing
and will continue to play a vital role for Australia's
well-being. Thank you. Good luck and Happy Christmas
to you all."
CANBERRA 23 December 1968 



EMBARGO: NOT TO BE CABLED, BROADCAST OR. TE-LECAST
BEFORE 7.903 P. M. E. S. T. MONDAY 30 DECEMBER 1968
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 102/ 1968
VISIT7 BY THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES THE DUKE
AND DUCHESS OF KENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister announced in Canberra this evening
that the following statement had been issued from the Buckinghamshire
residence of Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of Kent:-
" It was announced from Coppins that The
Duke and Duchess of Kent have accepted with very much
pleasure an invitation from the Australian Government
to visit the Territory of Papua and New Guinea in August
1969, when The Duke will open the Third South Pacific
Games at Port Moresby on 14 August.
" Their Royal Highnesses have acccpted
also with much pleasure an invitation subsequently to
visit Darwin, which will be celebrating the centenary
of its establishment, the Northern Territory, South and
West Australia. ", The Duke and Duchess are expected to4
begin their visit in Canberra from where they will travel
to Port Moresby for the Games.
The Prime Minister warmly welcomed the announcement
of the proposed visit to Australia by Their Royal Highnesses. He said
that he was delighted at the prospect of The Duke and Duchess of Kent
making their first visit to Australia. He recalled the deep affection the
Australian people had shown for the late Princess Marina, The Duke of
Kent's mother, when she visited Australia in 1964 and their sadness at
the time of the death of Prince Edward's father on Active Service in 1942
shortly before he was to have taken up the appointment of Governor-General
of Australia. Mr. Gorton said that while precise dates for the visit had
yet to be decided, consultations will take place to prepare an itinerary
and the details will be announced as soon as possible.
CANBERRA December 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 104/ 1968
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Following is the text of letters exchanged by the Premier
of New South Wales ( Mr. Askin) and the Prime Minister:-
Mr. Askin's Letter ( dated 19 December)
Dear Mr. Gorton, The State Premiers met yesterday in Adelaide
to consider further the matters which they discussed in Sydney
in October last and which have since been the subject of
correspondence between us.
With regard to the impact of recent wage changes
on State finances, you did suggest that our Treasury officers
should meet to establish the facts. In point of fact our respective
Under Treasurers have met, and it seems to us that the information
they have collated and which forms the basis of the statement
which I am submitting with this letter, is quite straightforward
and that there is no real necessity for Treasury discussions.
The submission attached is on behalf of all the
Premiers and shows that the impact of the National Wage Case
on State finances for the present financial year will total
$ 23 million. After allowing for the assessed effect of these
increases on the tax reimbursement grant for this year, the
net burden which the States must meet is roundly $ 14 million.
As against this we have also been given figures to show that
after meeting its own costs and allowing for the increase in
the tax reimbursement grant under present formula arrangements)
Commonwealth revenue will show a substantial net gain this year
as a result of this wage decision.
The attached statement also shows the costs in
which the States have been involved in respect of their recurrent
expenditure because of other award changes since the June
Conference, and with the national wage case costs the figures
aggregate $ 48 million for this year alone.
At the unanimous request of all Premiers and
with a sense of great urgency, I now ask that you meet us to
discuss the information which I am now submitting and to
consider how our problems can be met. / 2 
-2
While naturally we would prefer these discussions
to be with you personally, if it should be that your commitments
preclude you from doing this we would be prepared to talk with
the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer.
What I have said does not cover the major issue
of Commonwealth-State financial relationships generally. We
also desire to discuss this problem with you as soon as it can
be arranged. Yours faithfully,
R. W. ASKIN
Premier and Treasurer.
Prime Minister's Letter ( dated 27 December)
Dear Mr. Askin, I am writing to acknowledge the receipt on
23 December of your letter of 19 December. I note that you
have attached to it information collated by the Under Treasurers
of each State and that it seems to you that there should be no
real necessity for discussions between our Treasury officials
and those of the individual States. I have referred the information
you supplied to my colleague, the Treasurer, as clearly we must
have it examined by our own Treasury officers. I assume that.
if they are unable to agree with your figures you would not, speaking
for New South Wales, object to their communicating and discussing
with your Treasury officers any queries they may have?
It is my intention to propose a Premiers' conference
in the New Year to discuss the financial arrangements, as from
1 July 1969, concerning roads. This could also provide the
opportunity you request for you and your colleagues to discuss
with us the problems, and the submitted information, mentioned
in paragraph 5 of your letter. Having regard to my commitments
arising from the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference, I
suggest that we meet in Canberra on Thursday, 13 March, continuing
as necessary on Friday, 14 March. Our new Parliamentary sittings
are to begin on 25 February and the dates I mention will be the first
recess in those sittings. Yours sincerely,
J. G. GORTON.
CA NBERRA
31 December 1968 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 1-33/ 1968
NEW YEAR MESSAGE TO THE NATION
From the Prime Minister, Mr. JohnGorton
This is the first time I have had the privilege, as Prime
Minister# of wishing you all a happy, prosperous and successful New.
Year. This the last year of the sixties can be all these things for us,
but at the same time, it will be a " crossroads" year for Australia.
Our environment, our resources, out~ high standards of
living and our many other advantages can give us the good things of life;
but 1969 will confront us with many changes and many challenges on the
international scene! What will be the outcome of the Paris talks on
Vietnam what will be the United States' attitude to Asia and the Pacific
under its new Admir. stration. what is to be the basis for defence and
stability in our part of the world after Britain completes her withdrawal?
Tjhese are imponderables that face us in 1969. You can
rest assured that your Government will be making policies and deciding
priorities based on an honest assessment of what we believe is best for
Australia. At home we must press on with the urgent task of national
development so that we grow stronger and more self-reliant as each month
goes by. We must continue to people our continant, to save and invest
our money and attract the capital we still need to finance our growth.
We must continue to diversify our industries and increase
our exports. We must nourish our world markets of long standing and
develop new ones, particularly in South East Asia where the future holds
a bright promise for the emerging nations and for Australia.
We must carry on the work we began last year of giving
increased help to the aged and the chronically ill and those citizens who
are still in need so that 1969 will hold better things for them and bring a
new dignity to their lives.
We have done reasonably well in the year past, but let us
not be satisfied. There is much to do and I am heartened by the fact
that we tackle the future with a burgeoning belief in our nationalism and a
growing faith in ourselves as Australians.
A Happy New Year to you all. I will be doing my best to see
that it is.
CANBERRA 31 December 1968 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 1,/ 1969
NEW YEAR MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT JOHNSON
The Prime Minister, Mr john Gorton, has received
the following New Year message from President johnson
" Dear Mr Prime Minister
Your first year in office has been a year of
fruitful collaboration between us. I have en joyed our.
association, and your visit to this country last May will long
be remembered. I am confident that under your leadership
Australia will continue to work out its destiny as one of the
great free nations of Asia and the Pacific, as that arena
becomes increasingly a co-operative community. Mrs Johnson
joins me in sending you and Mrs Gorton our warm personal
regards and best wishes for the New Year.
Sincerely, Lyondon B. Johnson"
CANBERRA,
1 January 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 211969
AUSTRALIAN FORCES IN MALAYSIA-SINGAPORE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
On 19 November, I announced in Parliament that Australia
had decided in principle to maintain forces in Malaysia and Singapore
until the end of 1971,
Since then technical consideration of the detailed
implementation of this " in principle" decision has continued. This
having been concluded, Australia and New Zealand have now indicated
to Malaysia and Singapore their firm willingness to maintain Naval, Air
and Army Forces in the area.
It is planned that two Australian squadrons of Mirage
aircraft will be based at Butterworth with a detachment in Singapore
and that an Australian Naval element will continue to be stationed in
Singapore. At an appropriate stage during the British withdrawal from
Terendak, the Australian and New Zealand Army contingents will move
to Singapore, with a detachment stationed at Butterworth.
A full statement on these matters will be made when
Parliament resumes. In the meantime any reports on the disposition of forces
after the end of 1971 are pure speculation; this is a matter which
remains under discussion between Governments.
CANBERRA, 3 January 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 3/ 1969
OVERSEAS TAKEOVERS CF AUSTRALIAN COMPANIES
joint Statement by the Prime Minister and the Treasurer
In a discussion we had with Mr. C. T. Looker, President
of the Australian Associated Stock Exchanges, on 5 December last, we
informed him of the view held by the Government that the shareholders
of an Australian company should have a right to amend its Articles of
Association for the purpose of ensuring that control of the company,
exercised through the voting powers of the shareholders, remains in
Australian hands. In effect, we considered that the directors and
shareholders of Australian companies should be placed in a position from
which they could, if necessary, protect the company from outside
manoeuvres in the market or elsewhere to gain control of the company.
Mr. Looker undertook to discuss with members of the
Associated Stock Exchanges the question of amiending the provisions of
the present listing requirements of the Australian Stock Exchanges under
which a company is not admitted to the Stock Exchange unless the Company' s
Articles provide for equal voting rights for all shareholders of one class.
Mr. Looker has now informed us of the outcome of the
discussions between himself and his colleagues.
They have put to us strongly their view that the most
satisfactory form of protection for Australian companies against various
undesirable types of take-over operations is to be sought by amending
in certain respects those sections of the uniform Companies Acts which
relate to the take-over codes. At the invitation of the Attorney -Genera I
they will themselves makle detailed submissions on this matter to the
Eggleston Committee which will advise the Standing Committee of
Commonwealth and State Attorneys General.
The Stock Exchanges will accede to the Government's
request for the revision of the listing requirements to permit the quotation
of shares of the one class having different voting rights. They would have
preferred the postponement of this action until decisions had been taken on
amendments of the uniform Companies Act but they appreciated that it. could
take considerable time to make the necessary legislative changes in
Commonwealth and State laws.
In agreeing to this revision the Exchanges emphasised that
such action must not impair the free transferability of shares. The question
of who owns shares as distinct from the exercises of voting rights is not
involved. They also feel that the revised listing requirements should
ensure that an alteration to a Company's Articles to permit of qualified
voting rights should be subject to approval being given by a simple majority
in value of the shareholders of the company. The present approval of
per cent of the shareholders present and voting at a meeting does not,
in their view, necessarily represent a majority decision of all shareholders.
The Stock Exchanges will be making a submission along these lines to the
Eggleston Committee. The Government appreciates the approach of the Australian
Associated Stock Exchanges to a problem which it feels is both urgent and
important.
CANBERRA 5 January 196 9 



PRIME MINISTER'S
REMARKS TO PRESS ON DEPARTURE FOR LONDON
MASCOT AIRPORT, SYDNEY JANUARY 1969
PRIME MINISTER: Well, gentlemen, I don't think I have any statements
to make to you. As you know, I am going over to a Commonwealth
Prime Ministers' Conference. The last one was held, I think, two
years ago. No doubt, you have got some questions you would like to
ask me, and if I can, I will try and answer them. So fire ahead.
Q. Will you be putting forward any proposals for a Singapore-based
mobile defence force in either formal or informal discussions with
the other Commonwealth leaders?
PM: This is not on the agenda at all.
Q. What are your views on such a proposal?
PM: Well they are not views that would be appropriate to a
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference, and they are not
views on which, at this stage, I am going to express an opinion.
Let us get on to the Conference.
Q I would like to ask you a question concerning something which
will take place after you have left the publication of this book
" The Power Struggle" by Alan Reid. It concerns the voting at the
party meeting which elected you as Party Lead~ er and therefore
Prime Minister. The figures published at the time and since
widely circulated indicated that you had a very impressive margin
over Mr Hasluck of 51-30 votes. Alan Reid suggests that the margin
was in fact much closer 43 to you and 38 to Mr Hasluck. Which
set of figures is nearer the truth?
PM: I haven't the slightest idea. I wasn't a scrutineer. I would
imagine that only the scrutineers would know.
Q Mr Reid's sources are usually fairly reliable, and assuming
that his figures are anywhere near the truth, Mr Alan Barnes,
commenting on the book suggested that the nearness of the figures
has in fact influenced the style of your Prime Ministership in the
past twelve months, that you have been seeking popular support to
make up for, possibly, divided party support. What is your comment?
PM: I wouldn't be prepared to assume that Mr Reid's or anybody
es's assessments of things that are only known to the scrutineers
were correct. I don't know.
Q Sir, can you tell us what is the reaction of the Malaysian
Government to the decision to move Anzac troops to Singapore? 2 
2-
PM: Well, you saw the statement made by the Tunku who quite
happily accepted the proposals that we put to himi
Q Was there any time, Sir, when they opposed the idea?
PM: I don't know of any time when they opposed the idea. I think
they might have liked to have teen able to keep Terendak running
as it could be run as a viable base, but I wouldn't say they opposed
the idea. You have seen the statement made by the Tunku on this
matter.
PM: And after the move to Singapore, Sir, will the Malaysians be
able to call on these troops at any time they may need them.
Q These tro',-ps are stationed in the area and as you know,
Singapore and Malaya are acting together in defence matters and
our forces are there to assist both these countries in their joint
defence efforts.
Q Mr Gorton, what matters do you hope to see introduced into the
Conference?
PM: What matters do I hope to see introduced into the conference....
well, I find it a li ttle difficult question to answer. I would answer
it in this way: I would hope no one matter dominates the conference
and that it is able to deal with the quite large number of subjects that
are put down on the agenda, and doesn't spend all its time on just one
subject. I think that is about all I could say on that matter.
Q Sir, how big an issue do you expect Rhodesia to be?
PM: This will depend entirely on what the people at the conference
wish to mak'
it to be a subject which dominates the whole of the meeting, and we
wouldn't wish it to be either. There are a number of other subjects
which could be of considerable value to discuss.
Mr Holt came back from the last Prime Ministers' Conference
somewhat dubious about the value of the conferences continuing
in the same way as on that occasion. In what . ram e of mind are
you going to this conference hopeful or are you going over in a
somewhat........
PM; I am going over in the frame of mind of someone who has never
been to one before and who will be most interested to see how it
operates and what subjects are discussed and what consensuses
or consensi of opinion are arrived at on those subjects. . j3 
-3-
Q. Sir, will you while you are there be pushing anything on the
Nigerian situation? Will Australia be taking an active role in
bringing this forward and . pressing the Nigerian Government
into somne sort of action?
PM: We won't be taking an active role or an initiative in this.
It is a matter which, as I understand it, the British Government,
and indeed we ourselves, would very much like to see brought to
a conclusion so that the killing ceased. But I believe and I can
only say that I believe that the British Government thinks that
the organisation of African unity, the African States which have been
concerning themselves in this matter, are perhaps the best tool
if I can use this word with which to bring about this desired result,
and we would, I think, agree with the British Government on their
approach to this matter. But we would certainly like to see the
killing cease but not be taking our own initiative.
Q: Sir, if I could ask one more question on the conference. Does
Australia favour any increase in the role of the Secretariat to the
Conference?
PM: An increase in the role of the Secretariat? In what particular
way do you mean?
Q: In perhaps strengthening ties between Commonwealth countries?
PM: Well, I think the Sccretariat is occupied now as as Secretariat
in conveying views and messages between the various Commonwealth
countries. We would not wish to see it have any power to do anything
other than that.
Mr Gorton, do you think the remarks in Dame Zara Holt's
book will have any effect on the attitudes of the Africans towards you?
PM: L can't imagine why thcy should. These are remark'As which are
published by a private citizen at second or third hand and I find
it difficult to think that the y would influence the attitude of anybody
towards me.
Q: Mr Gorton, just to return briefly to the question of ' The Power
Struggle", if I may, do you agree that the role played by Lord Casey
in this matter has been a more active one than has be-en the role of
the Governor-General in the past? Do you think that is a change
that has come to stay?
PM: Well I really came here to answer questions about the Commonwealth
Prime Ministers' Conference and not to make comments on
the actions of any Governor-General.
If 
-4-
Q: The dinner you are having with the British Prime
Minister, Sir, is that likely to include any Defence
proposals along the lines of Malaysia and Singapore?
PM: Well, I will be having a dinner with the British Prime
Minister, and I have no doubt that quite a number of
subjects could be brought up for discussion. I will be
having a private dinner with Mr Trudeau. I have no doubt
that any number of subjects will be brought up for discussion.
But there is no agenda for either dinner.
Thank you, gentlemen. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 2/ 1969
VICTORIAN BUSHFIRES
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen
I was most distressed to hear of the shocking bushfires
which have today occurred in Victoria.
I am sure that all Australians will join with me and
the Commonwealth Government in expressing their deepest sympathy
to the relatives of those people who have lost their lives in the fires.
Our sympathy also goes out to those who have been injured and who
have lost homes and material possessions as a result of the disaster.
As is usual in cases of this nature the defence forces
are prepared to give the authorities who have control of the fire fighting
operations the most assistance that is possible. The Commonwealth
Government also stands ready to assist the Victorian Government on a
for basis for the relief of personal hardship and distress suffered
by those people affected by the fires.
CANBERRA 8 January 1969 



VISIT TO THE U. K. 1969
EXTRACTS FROM SPEECH MADE BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, TO THE
COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE
13 JANUARY 1969
Australia attaches great importance to the work of
UNCTAD and we think it is bringing about a greater awareness of the
problems of developing countries. Although there was, I know, a
widespread feeling of disappointment among the developing countries
that the concrete results from the second UNCTAD conference last year
were not greater, resolutions on tariff preferences, commodity problems,
increased aid and improved aid terms, all pointed in the right direction.
In 1966, Australia introduced a system of tariff preferences
for exports of developing countries, which we have since enlarged. We
believe that this system is the most effective way for us to help developing
countries increase their exports of manufactured and semi-manufactured
goods. Trade is, in the last analysis, more important than aid.
Whilst our hopes for really acceptable conditions of access to markets
for agricultural products in the major industrial countries were not
realised in the Kennedy Round, there were some credits, we now have a
new international grains arrangement and a new international sugar
agreement. Australia has always stressed the need for international
commodity agreements in certain products and the arrangements for
wheat and sugar, together with those that already exist for tin and coffee,
are signposts for the future and show that if producers and consumers
are both willing, we can get results.
We were greatly pleased at the inclusion in the sugar
agreement of the special provisions for developing countries the
" hardship fund" for sugar and the preferential allocation of short falls.
We also supported the Food Aid Convention for wheat. Let me emphasise
here we support in the strongest way the remarks of the distinguished
representative from Jamaica. We would urge those countries which have
not yet done so to take the necessary steps to accept the international
sugar agreement. On the broader front in the international monetary
field I believe we can expect further action to see how the system
might be improved and I hope that the International Monetary Fund
will play a central role in any review. There is, I believe, a continuing
need for a multi-lateral approach to international financial and economic
problems. In the past year or so we have had no less than three crises
in the international monetary field...., the sterling devaluation, the gold
/ 2 
crisis and the recent run out of French francs into deutschmarks. But
despite these crises some progress has been made by the two reserve
currency countries towards a balance of payments equilibrium, which,
if it is attained, must help all around this table.
We all know how severe were the measures imposed on
the British people in the last two years and I understand Britain now expects
to move faster towards first, a balance of payments equilibrium and
then, a surplus which is necessary to meet debt obligations. I am sure
we all wish our British colleagues every success in their efforts for they
are as important to Britain as they are important to all d us.
The new Special Drawing Rights scheme will support the
present structure of reserve assets. The scheme, as you know, is
non-discriminatory and open to all members of the fund. We, in
Australia, earnestly hope that other members of the Commonwealth who
have not already joined will do so soon.
I have previously stated that Australia which in one sense
is a developed country, and in another equally valid sense a developing
and underdeveloped country is playing a part in international aid which
is by no means inconsiderable. It will continue to play that part. We
cannot, however, agree to support the proposition to contribute to a
multi-lateral fund within the Commonwealth and under the control of the
Secretariat. We shall continue to provide our aid under existing multilateral
arrangements and bi-laterally for proposals discussed and agreed
between ourselves and the country concerned either within or without
the Commonwealth. 



VISIT TO THE U. K. 1969
PRESS STATEMENT ISSUED BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, ON PROPOSED FIVE-POWER TALKS.
14 JANUARY 1969
The Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. John Gorton, said
today that he had arranged for a meeting on Friday with Mr. Healey,
Mr. Holyoake, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew and Tunku Abdul Rahman.
They would discuss the place anddate for the next Five
Power meeting to be held later this year. Friday's meeting, which will
be held at the Australian Prime Minister's suite at the Savoy Hotel, is
not expected to last more than 30 minutes.
Mr. Gorton emphasised that the meeting would not deal
with substantive policy matters. Its major purpose taking advantage
of the presence of the Prime Ministers in London was to settle the
venue and timing of the next Five Power meeting. 



I I VISIT TO THE U. K. 1969
AUSTRALIA CLUB ADDRESS
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN FUIN
AT THE DORCHESTER HOTEL, LONDON
17 JANUARY 1969
Your Royal Highness, the other Lords who were mentioned by the
Toastmaster, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
May I first express the great pleasure and the great lifting
in the heart I feel at being in this room with such a distinguished company,
who have come together, as I believe, to demonstrate affection and support
for the country which I lead.
It is indeed a demonstration to warm the heart of any
Australian. But though I come from half a world away, yet I do not stand
here completely as a stranger. As you, Mr. Minister, have said, some
formative years were spent in this country during the course of my edu~ cation
at a college called Brasenose which was then, not noted for learning in any
way at all. But nevertheless judging from the alumni if I may use a word
borrowed from my American wife it does seem to have thrown up a large
number of people leading in a large number of fields, in spite of the fact
that so much of their time was spent either rowing or playing hockey or
engaging in some other enjoyable and agreeable activity.
I was much struck, talking of this kind of agreeable activity,
by the typical British understatement you made, Mr. Minister, when you
said you had thought of Australians as people who just played cricket. I
seem to remember in the course of the years that they played it reasonably
well. Brasenose was not my only early life experience in the United Kingdom.
With a typical politician's desire to make the best of both worlds I engaged
in labouring activities. Indeed the present Lord Tweedsmuir and I shipped
as deckhands on a trawler out of hull and worked our way around the Farao
Islands and back, although at that stage, Sir, it was not absolutely essential
for us to have a union ticket. But we did learn much of this country in that
time, and indeed, to know more perhaps because of that study of history in
which I was engaged at this great university.
It became clear to me, as it must to anyone who studies
history, that it is the British people over the centuries who have internally
and externally engaged in struggle aimed always at seeking to destroy
arbitrary power wherever it may raise its head; who have sought to give
to the individuals who alone are the riches of any country the right fully
to participate in the decisions that their country makes. And from the time
of Cromwell or before, through the Napoleonic wars, through the wars when
at any time absolute and arbitrary power sought to conquer Europe ( which
then was the significant world) it was Britain who stood as the bulwark against
that idea, and this we cart never forget. Nor can we forget, as Australians,
that for nearly two hundred years, we lived in that faraway country completely
under the protection of the British Navy. We had no need to defend ourselves
/ 2 
except occasionally when we raised trained bands because it was thought
that Russia might invade us at the time of the Crimean War or something
of that kind history has a habit of repeating itself. And yet the trust,
the faith, the protection, was in the British people and the British Navy.
When the calls came in South Africa, or in the First World War or in the
Second, then naturally we repaid, or sought to repay, that which had been
so generously given to us. And on the whole, I think one can say the books
are reasonably fairly balanced.
We will, I think, as you suggested, Mr. Minister, take more
part in the region in which we live, provide more in the way of defence for
the stability of the regions in which we live. Indeed we have little choice,
but this is not unreasonable and this is not something at which 1, at any
rate, intend to cavill. For we do still revere and we do still uphold those
same institutions of parliamentary democracy, that same reverence for
the rule of law which this country has brought into the world, which you
helped us for so long to retain and which I know should they be threatened
in our own country from some source outside, we could look to you and the
British people to assist us to retain.
So you spoke of the development of Australia, of the
excitement of Australia, of the future of Australia. I would like for a little
while myself to say some words on what I see as a brash, a growing, an
exciting, and exhilarating country; perhaps one of the most exciting and
exhilarating countries in the world, just getting off the launching pad in a
way. Thirty years ago we had a population of 7 million: today we have a
population of 12 million in thirty years we will have a population of 28
million. And thirty years in the life of a nation is but the blinking of an
eyelid and then having attained the population we will go on as I believe to
60, 70 million and be a real power in the world. It will be a power I
hope that will always be exercised for good and always be exercised in
conjunction with the British Government of the United Kingdom itself.
There has been an " explosion" in Australia just recently
and I am going to weary you with some statistics to indicate the extent of
this " explosion". Not so many years ago we were thought to be poor in
natural resources and to be growers of wool, growers of cattle, growers
of cricketers, growers of people who sometimes unjustly criticise the
United Kingdom, but not richly endowed in those dry, arid, inland areas
which make up so much of our continent. Yet now our known oil fields will
be producing about 70 per cent of our own requirements for crude petroleum
by 1970 just two years on. Only a fraction of what is there to be discovered
is I am sure, as yet, discovered.
We have at the same time discovered supplies of natural gas
for industry in our great cities, and this will be available in those cities
Melbourne, Brisbane probably by the end of this year. Cur iron ore
mountains seem to be illimitable and made of a grade unmatched elsewhe-re.
By 1973 vwe will be exporting 35 million tons of iron ore every year and by
that stage or ' 71 or ' 72 these minerals, nickel as well, will be producing
one billion dollars a year of export income for our country. / 3 
3-
We have more than a third of the world's known deposits of
bauxite, to make alumina and aluminium and the output will rise from about
a million tons which is the present output to 10 million tons in 1972.
Production of coal for export will double. Nickel discoveries, in which I
think quite a number of people in the United Kingdom have done reasolpably
well, will add to this future which lies so close within our grasp. Phosphate,
copper, other minerals have been discovered and will follow.
This is no credit to us. I do not tell this to this distinguished
company in the suggestion that it is something that resounds to Australian
individual's own credit; I say it because I want to indicate that there is ill
my belief an illimitable future, that there will be a doubling in our economy
every thirteen years, and that those who are interested should get in on
the ground floor, as some already have, to take full advantage of the
opportunities which are there in such great abundance. Not opportunities
merely for Australia. Because if it is true that this economic development
is possible and I am sure it is and if it is true that this economic
development in its turn w~ ill enable the influx of population which we so
require and I'm sure that too is true then this vision of a nation in
twenty, thirty years will be of advantage not just to us, but to us and to
that England which will be tied to us forever in general approaches to the
world's require ments and the world's problems.
I did read in one of the distinguished papers of this country
this morning, a leading article suggesting that we regarded the United
Kingdom as a quarry for taking people and population. Well, I suppose
in a sense we do. But it will be to both of our advantages, and indeed it
will be different from what was originally said when the settlers first
came to Australia, because we will be able to say with full truth " True
patriots they, for be it understood, they left their country of our country's
good." But what we I must pause here all the things which I
have said will take place. The speed with which they take place will
naturally depend upon the amount of capital flowing in to enable such
development. And this is the more true because on current account, on
what we sell to other countries and what we buy f~ om other countries, we
don't do so well. The United States places difficulties in the way of us
selling meat and wool and other products, and there are murmurings of
some entry into some kind of association by Great Britain which might cut
down on the prospects of selling our own primary products. And so the
current account does need to be balanced by inflow of capital. Inflow of
capital, which will go to a country as stable as any country in the world,
and be able to be invested in enterprises which will return to those who so
invest an interest as great, I think, as they could receive anywhere.
We want this, and we want it urgently. But we want it, in some respects,
on our own terms. e. / 4 
-4-
Up until very recently it has seemed to me that the postpre
of Australia in seeking overseas capital has been the posture of a puppy
lying on its back with all legs in the air and its stomach exposed, and
saying, " Please, please, please, give us capital. Tickle my tummy on
any conditions", and this is being re-examined for those who seek and
wish to take the risks and the advantages that are offered, by bringing in
capital for new development, then we are delighted, and we are receptive
for that capital. But we do say and I go no further than to say that we do
say that we would be happy if in such cases when some new great
development were to take place, and capital from here were to come to
help it, and there was an opportunity I say only an opportunity offered
for some equity participation by Australians in that new development.
Should they care not to take it up, that is their business, that is their loss.
Should they wish to take it up at some later stage, after the risks have
been taken and have been successfully overcome, then they must expect
to take it up at a premium, because somebody else has taken the risks.
But initially, it would please us if in such cases an opportunity were given
to get in on the ground floor.
We do not look with complete and utter favour on overseas
corporations, having started development in our own country, having
brought capital from abroad to make that development possible, then seeking
to raise debenture capital inside our own country in order to keep the process
rolling. Well this is not overseas capital, this does not bring in with it a
capacity for us to bring in more migrants. This does not bring the machinery
or whatever it may be that true overseas capital provides. But being
reasonable people, we are amenable to any suggestions that, should such
a situation arise and should debenture capital be sought to be raised within
Australia for purposes of some overseas company, we would look at-. that
with sympathy, as long as it was coupled with the offer of equity to,.
Australian shareholders at the same time.
You may have heard perhaps I gather you have from reading
the newspapers some queries in some minds as to our attitude towardis
portfolio investment, as distinct from development investment. We are
delighted to have portfolio investment, particularly if Mr. Smith, or Mr.
Brown or Mr. Jones, wishing to take a flutter in Great Western, or in
B. H. P. or some other of our great companies, wishes to buy two hundred
shares, three hundred shares, five hundred shares this is marvellous.
We like it. Wie trust no impediment will ever be put in its way. And we
realise that in the case of companies already established, that there are
instances in which such Australian companies could with advantage to them
and to Australia, be taken over. If there are inefficient companies, companies
badly run, companies which need capital they cannot raise inside our country,
companies which need an infusion of technical management, then it could
well be of advantage to all that from abroad somebody who can provide the
required capital and management skill and technology should be enabled to
enter into and if necessary control and certainly have a very great influence
on such a company. But we do believe that there are other companies, well
run, well managed, sometimes under-valued on exchanges in relation to the
assets they have, who can be subject to market raids, to offers of first come, 
first served, to cert ' ain shareholders so that the whole company itself does
not have a chance, all the shareholders do not have a chance to examine
the offer that is made, and we do not have a chance to know who is buying
the company. There was a specific instance of that not so long ago and
we had to discover who was trying to buy one of our insurance companies,
who was buying it and whether we thought that such a company should in
such cases be taker. over.
These are under examination, these last two matters at the
moment. They will be worked out. But let there be no doubt in the minds
of anybody in this room, but that we need, wish, welcome, investment
capital, that there is stability of opportunity for those who have it to invest.
And speaking for myself, in spite of what I am told from some quarters,
I think that if we provide a stable government, and if we provide clear
evidence that there is going to be a darn good return on any capital that
is invested, then that capital is going to come to us and not be frightened
off because of the sort of things that I have just now been saying.
We do not want, in twenty or thirty years, to have Americans,
or French, or Swiss or British, owning the major companies in Australia,
for a variety of reasons I do not need now to go into. But I had promised
I would say sometling on this subject, tonight. I know it's dull. I know
it's dry. Now "' ye said it. But when all is said and done, Sir, to come
back to what you said at the beginning, all these things, really, are tools
with which to build the future. The tools with which to make one potentially
great nation realise that potential, so that it can in the future, in conjunction
with an already great nation, make a far greater contribution and effect
on the world, to the benefit of all of us.
And this is essential, I believe, if we are to keep in a world
swinging down the grooves of change, those things of which you spoke and
for which Britain stands. The avoidance of the knock on the door of the
secret police at midnight; the avoidance of the fear of one man to speak
his mind because he may be punished; the opportunity for a man to develop
his own capacity to the top of his bent. And it's a charge laid on all of us
to see that these things are kept. All of us English, Australians, New
Zealanders all those of common stock and of these beliefs. A charge
that was laid in 1939 and ' 45. And can I ask you, as you look at me, to try
not to see me, if I make this point, but instead to see behind me, regiment
on regiment of young men dead in ' 39 to ' 45, and try and hear them saying
burning in tanks and aeroplanes, drowning in submarines, shattered and
broken by high explosive shells we gave, for our full measure of devotion,
that these things of what you spoke, and of which I am speaking, might
continue. And they will continue the better while we stay together,
while we stay in conjunction, while we in Australia reach towards our destiny.
While we convert the vision splendid, of the sunlit plains extended, into a
reality which is now within our grasp. With our work, and your help, to
our common effort, and for the protection of those things, we both, as I am
sure, desire for our children.
Thank you. 



VISIT TO THE U. K. 1969
PRESS STATEMENT ISSUED BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, IN LONDON AFTER THE
FIVE-POWIER DEFENCE MEETING 17 JANUARY 1969
The Prime Ministers of Malaysia ( Tunku Abdul Rahman),
Singapore ( Mr. Lee Kuan Yew), New Zealand ( Mr. Keith Holyoake),
and Australia ( Mr. John Gorton) and the British Defence Minister ( Mr.
Denis Healey) held an informal meeting in London this morning. The
Australian Minister for External Affairs ( Mr. Paul Hasluck) also attended.
The Prime Ministers had decided to take this opportunity
of their presence together in London to discuss the time and place for a
Five-Power conference later in the year. Following the meeting, which
was held in the Australian Prime Minister's suite at the Savoy Hotel,
Mr. Gorton announced that it had been decided to hold the second
Five-Power conference in Canberra on 12 May. The first such conference
took place in Kuala Lumpur last June.
Mr. Gorton said that today's meeting was primarily
concerned with the arrangements for the new conference. There was no
substantive discussion of questions arising from Britain's withdrawal
from South East Asia. 



FOR PRESS, PM. No. 5/ 1969
MESSAGES TO THE U. S. PRESIDENT AND THE
PRESIDENT-ELECT
Following is the text of messages sent by the Acting Prime
Minister, Mr John McEwen to President Johnsou and the incoming President,
Mr Richard Nixon
To President Johnson AS YOU LEAVE THE GREAT OFFICE OF
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, I CONVEY TO YOU ON
BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE
AND OF MYSELF, OUR WARMEST GOOD WISHES FOR THE
FUTURE. YOUR FAR-SIGHTED CONCEtIION OF THE
INTERESTS OF YOUR COUNTRY AND YOUR DEVOTION ' O THE
CAUSE OF PEACE AND JUSTICE HAVE EARNED YOU AN
ENDURING PLACE IN HISTORY. YOUR CLOSE INTEREST IN,
AND THE PERSONAL VISITS YOU HAVE PAID TO, AUSTRAIJA HAVE
GIVEN YOU A SPECIAL PLACE IN THE HEARTS OF ALL
AUSTRALIANS. WITH EVERY WARM REGARD,
j. McE -en, Acting Prime Minister.
To President Nixon I OFFER THE SINCERE BEST WISHES OF THE
AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE ON YOUR ASS[ MPFION
OF THE GREAT AND EXACTING OFFICE OF PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. WE ARE CONFIDENT THAT
UNDER YOUR WISE LEADERSHIP THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
WILL CONTINUE TO PROSPER AND WORLD PEACE BE FOSTlERFD.
AUSTRALIANS AND AMERICANS HAVE A VERY WARM REGARD
FOR ONE ANOTHER. THE MANY VALUES AND INTERESTS
THAT THEY SHARE PROVIDE A FIRM BASIS FOR ESPECIALLY
CLOSE AND FRIENDLY RELATIONS BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES, WHICH I AM SURE WILL EXPAND AND DEEPEN
DURING THE PERIOD YOU HOLD OFFICE.
J. McEwen, Acting Prime Minister."
CANBERRA, 19 January 1969 



FCR PRESS: P. M. No. 61969 K
AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
From the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
This is the last Australia Day of the 60' s a decade marked
by historic changes and by the quickening of remarkable growth for Australia.
In a year's time, we will celebrate the 200th anniversary of
Captain Cook's discovery of the east coast of Australia. just eighteen years
after that famous voyage, the First Fleet arrived in New South Wales and a
nation was born. So much has been done since then, There is so much yet to do.
This is our National Day and I give special welcome to all
those new settlers who, in the past year, have come to join us and to those
new Australians of longer standing who have taken out citizenship. May
Australia Day be a landmark each year of your lives, on your journey into
a bright and happy future.
For us all, old and new Australians alike, this is a time when
we should acknowledge what the pioneers of this country have done.
We should remember their triumph over the dangers of the
unknown and their success in making a nation in a harsh and vast environment.
We should remember the inheritance we have drawn from the
older civilisations which have given us democracy and the rule of law, a
great love of life and liberty and a resolution to preserve peace when we
have it and fight for it when it is at risk.
At the same time, we should recognise Australia Day as an
inspiration for the future. I believe we are on the threshold of a tremendous
surge forward as a nation.
I believe that 30 years from now, by the year 2000, we could
have more than twice as many people as we have today living in a free and
prosperous country where need and poverty are things of the past.
I believe we can make an increasingly significant contribution
to peace and progress in South East Asia and the Pacific, and that our voice
will be heard with growing respect in the world councils.
But these things will not happen by the natural course of events.
They will flow only from the energy, the enthusiasm, the skills and the
loyalties of all Australians.
These are the qualities that have advanced us to where we
stand today, and which hold the key to a boundless future.
CANBERRA 24 January 1969 



PRESS, RADIO AND TELEVISION CONFERENCE GIVEN
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, ON
HIS RETURN HOME AFTER THE COMMONWEALTH
PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE, LONDON ,7r
On Board s. s. cdl" S deN. S. W.
PM. Good morning, gentlemen. It's nice to be back! Before
I start on asking you whatever-questions you have in mind, I have got
an announcement to make. That is that The Queen and the Duke of
Edinburgh, at the invitation of the Governments of Australia and New
Zealand, will visit New Zealand and Australia in March and April of
1970. In both countries, they will take part in the celebrations of the
bi-centenary of Captain Cook's voyage. Their visit to Australia will
be confined to the Eastern States to the A. C. T. New South Wales,
Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania. if it is any help to YOU, the last
visit, according to the note I have, was made in February and March
1963.
Q. Some of the papers have said that the Commonwealth
Conference, although to everyone's relief it didn't blow up into a fight,
no-one is taking much notice of whether it did anything else. Do YOU
think in view of Australia's increasing preoccupation with the South
Eastern Asian region that the Commonwealth Conference this time
achieved anything positive?
PM. I don't think it achieved anything positive if you mean
by that did they reach agreement on some plan or some prospect of
combined action or some unified approach to some problems in the
world. No, I don't think it did. What it did do was to provide a forum
where differences of approach, which are natural when there are 28
different countries gathered around a table, were able to be discussed
moderately, temperately, and I think with an increase in understanding
on all sides of the points of view, of the reasons for the points of view
of the people sitting around that table.
Q. Prime Minister, would you care to say how, and if,
your thinking on defence has been affected by your talks in London?
PM. I'll put your question around the other way: Would
I care to say if my thinking on defence has been affected, and if so,
how. The answer is no, I don't believe it has. That answers the
second part too.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, why did you fail to support the
suggestion that aid should be given to the lesser-developed
Commonwealth countries? a / 2 
-2
PM. I didn't fail to support any such suggestion. There
was a suggestion though I don't remember it being discussed at the
Conference in any detail that the Commonwealth should establish a
multi-lateral aid fund under the control of the Secretary-General of
the Commonwealth, Mr. Arnold Smith, and I failed to support that.
Indeed, I didn't notice anybody else supporting it either, because we
feel that we are contributin~ g already quite considerably through multilateral
United Nations funds and prefer to keep our assistance to the
Commonwealth on a bilateral basis.
Q. Prime Minister, what do you think was the highlight of
the Conference?
PM. Well, I don't know. I don't think I could pick out for
you any particular dramatic moment or any stage where crisis was
almost reached and avoided, which was what I would understand
" highlight" to mean. I don't think there was one. There were a
number of Interesting matters all the way through.
Q. Prime Minister, could you perhaps comment on your
relationship with the African leaders? Mr. Hasluck said on his return
that it was perhaps your smile that made things go so well....
PM. Well, franldy, calling on my memory, the smiles of
all the African leaders were far more beaming and they had far better
teeth than I did:' They were far more attractive. I liked a number
of them. Indeed, I didn't dislike any of them. I liked some more
than others as one always does, whether they are African or Asians
or Australians or English or whatever they might be. But we did,
I think, get on in what seemed to me to be a completely friendly way.
Q. Prime Minister, you appear to have struck up a special
friendship with Mr. Wilson. Would you care to say if you see any
tangible value in this relationship?
PM. If you mean can I see that there is going to be some
discernible difference in matters of trade or matters of defence or
matters of some other specific content, no I can't. But I think there
is tangible benefit, nevertheless, from a close relationship between
the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia and the Prime
Minister of Great Britain. There must be.
Q. Mr. Gorton, is there any prospect of the Canberra
Five-Power conference going to Prime Minister level?
PM. We haven't decided on that yet. We discussed it when
we were sitting around whether it would be on a Prime Ministers'
level or on a Defence Minister s'/ Foreign Ministers' level. It is
obvious, of course, as far as Great Britain is concerned, that Mr.
Wilson would not be coming out here for that conference. But as
far as Mr. Holyoake or the Tunku or Harry Lee 
3-
Q. Mr. Wilson wouldn't be coming? Apparenly -the Labor
Party are afraid that he might!
PM. Are they? Well, I wouldn't know about that. But the
question of whether the other four of us attend as Prime Ministers
or not is left for further discussion amongst us.
Q. What do y~ u expect to get out of this Five-Power thing?
PM. Well, as you know, there has been for a considerable
time working parties up in Malaya / Singapore since the last Five-Power
conference, working out this, working out matters of various kinds.
Indeed it was such a report from our own people in such a working party
that led us to the decision already announced to base our troops at
Singapore rather than remain in Terendak. By the time that the next
conference is held I think that these kinds of discussions, at working
level group by foreign service departments, by defence departments
will have enabled more details as to the working out of the general
arrangerrmnts
Q. Do you expect then from this conference to be able to
announce or decide what our role will be in the area?
PM. It will help towards that.
Q. You won't at that time be able to make a fresh...
PM. I didn't say that. But if it didn't result in one being
able to make a definite role statement, and a role is what I am talking
of.. if it didn't enable that, then it would certainly, I think, have
made a considerable advance towards the situation where that could
be.
Q. Will you be able to intimate to the other leaders
PM. I think there will have been a lot of discussions on this
before the meeting takes place, and when the meeting takes place, it
could greatly help to crystallise it. You know, it was agreed at the
last Five-Power conference that there would be another one held in the
first half of this year, but the actual date on which it was to be held was
not decided, nor was the place at which it was to be held decided.
Q. Both these facts having now been decided, and it being
Canberra, I would have thought the other Prime Ministers would expect
you to be far more positive about our role after 1971
PM. How do you know how positive I have been with other
Prime Ministers?
Q. You haven't discussed it with them?
PM. No, not yet! a / 4 
-4
Q. Prime Minister, would you care to elaborate on your
speech to the Australia Club on 17 January about fore~ ign investment
on your terms. Can, you give us some idea of what these terms will be?
PMK What I did was lay down general principles, in the
speech to which you are referring, which we would like to see carried
out. Those general principles being that we would wish to see tf I
can put it this way more selective controls on the takeover of
Australian companies, particularly by foreign companies, the sort of
controls that Great Britain has and so many other nations have themselves.
This is a matter being studied at the moment by the Eggleston Committee
and no doubt we will be getting reports from them, and in the meantime
the Treasury itself has been asked to make a study of the question too.
In relation to the raising of debenture capital inside Australia by
overseas firms, we have indicated that we would wish to see before
debenture capital was raised in that way that an opportunity for
participation in equity was given by those oversees firms. We have
also indi~ cated in a general way that when some new enterprise is started
with overseas capital, we would also like to see the opportunity for
equity participation offered to Australians. This is the subject of
study by the Treasury. The Treasurer informs me that the papers
concerning th is which would come to the Economic Committee of
Cabinet, are well advanced. Subsequently, of course, we would have
to see what it was we were able to do of our own power and what it
was that it would be necessary to be done by States Attorneys -General
and our own Attorney -General, acting in concert.
Q. You have spoken in terms of opportunity for equity
and the necessity for some equity. Have you in mind any size equity
per cent, 10 per cent even 1 per cent is the opportunity for some
equit.....
PM. Yes. I think we would need to have a far more definite
indication than some equity. I would prefer to see the Treasury's
papers and have full discussions on them before I would go any further
than that.
Q. At that time you might be able to make a statement?
PM. Possibly.
Q. While in London, did you meet again Taufa'ahau Tupou
of Tonga, and if so, did you discuss supporting Tongan moves to join
the Commonwealth?
PM. No, I didn't meet him.
Q. Prime Minister, just to return to that foreign
investment question again. These guidelines.. are they in fact
guidelines or just your thinking aloud on the subject? Is the Reserve
Bank obliged to follow your remarks relating to this? a 0 
PM. They will be more than thinking aloud. They will
be an indicLution, in more detail when the papers have been further
advanced, as to what it is that we would wish to see and what it is
that we could arrange to see did happen.
Q. The position at the moment in relation to the raising
of debenture . companies that have been well established here
such as the ESSO organisation have been allowed to raise debenture
funds. Do you intend to change this, or hope to change this?
PM. ESSO/ BHP were allowed to raise debenture funds, I
think not just for ESSO but for ESSO and BHP which is the Australian
component of that company. Also, of course, they have brought in a
great deal of proper overseas capital at the same time.
Q. If I could just switch across to defence for a moment,
Sir. In Kuala Lumpur, the Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia
indicated that Malaysia has firm ideas On what sort of a role Australia
should play if it wishes to retain troops in Malaysia. In his own words,
he expects Australia to get involved in intra-regional affairs. He was
talking specifically of Sabah. When you were in London and you were
speaking to the Tunku, did he spell this out to you or wasn't the subject
raised?
PM. The matter of the role of Australian troops in the area
will be a matter for decision by the Australian Government and subsequent
announcement by the Australian Government.
Q. Was Sabah discussed specifically between yourself and
the Tunku?
PM. I don't think I will add anything to what I have just said
to you.
Q. Is this the sort of thing that you might cover in your
promised statement to the House when Parliament resumes, Sir?
PM. One would want to indicate the kind of role envisaged,
not merely the disposition.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, did you gain anything from your
talks with Mr. Trudeau?
PM. Well, all I gained from talks with Mr. Trudeau was
an underlining as it were of what lie has already said publicly that he
felt himself that Canada should look more towards the Pacific and take
more interest in the Pacific than perhaps she had done in the past. There
was no opportunity for me to ask him to spell that out in more detail.
Now, you asked me about anything significant. I think perhaps that is
significant but not detailed and definite. / 6 
6-
Q. Sir,.-you just indicated that -you* wanted to talk about the
future role of our forces in your forthcoming Parliamentary statement.
This must be an advance on your decision in December, when you spoke
to us about this. Now what are the factors that have influenced you in
the interim? You talk now about a disposition as well as a composition.
PM. We have had further discussions, we have had further
advice and we will be having yet further discussions. I would hope by
then we could advauge, because after all, advance is the keynote of this
Government.
Q. Do you think your visit to Mr. Nixon will have any
bearing..... I mean will you be able to spell out anything in the Five-
Power talks before you talk to Mr. Nixon about America's role in Asia?
PM. Well, according to the sort of timetable one envisages,
the Five-Power talks would be in May and I would hope to have been
able to visit Mr. Nixon before May.
Q. Would you care to say when you will make your statement
to Parliament on defence?
PM. Oh, quite soon after Parliament meets. I wouldn't want
to give you a definite day but as soon as possible after Parliament meets.
Q. Mr. Gorton, when in Fiji did you discuss Fiji's
future relations with Australia and did you meet the Chief Minister?
PM. No, I didn't. I got off an aeroplane after having flown
for I don't know how long and boarded the ship and went to sleep.
Q. Prime Minister, I didn't quite catch the request over
here, but were you indicating that your talks with Mr. Nixon would have
a bearing on your attitude at the Five-Power talks?
PM. I was indicating that the timetable envisaged was such
that I would be likely to be speaking to Mr. Nixon before the Five-
Power talks took place.
Q. It follows therefore that his attitudes would influence
our attitudes at the Five-Power talks?
PM. Well, I can only refer to what I have just said, that I
would be hoping to see him before the Five-Power talks took place
in May.
Q. Prime Minister, I take it that you have heard of our
latest Parliamentary romance and your good wishes?
PM. I read something in the ship's bulletin about it. I
haven't heard in any detail if this is accurate. I gather it is accurate?
If so, one extends the best of good wishes to both parties.
Q. Did it come as a surprise to you?
PM. PWM. ell, I had no inkling of it. 
-7
Q. Mr. Gorton, the Malays have indicated they would like
to see an agreement emerging out of this latest conference, something
to replace the present Anglo-Malaysian defence agreement. Do you
think this is likely?
PM. I don't see the necessity for it, at any rate now. The
arrangements under which our troops are stationed in the country at
present would seem to me, and according to my advice, would cover
the stationing of our troops there. So it doesn't seem to me to be a
question which does arise.
Q. Have you been in consultation with President Nixon at all?
PM. No. He has been pretty busy. There was a possibility
which could have occurred of my coming back through Washington and
having a completely informal half an hour or three-quarters of an hour
with him on the day before his inauguration. This appeared to me to
offer no great prospects of advantage to either of us and considerale
disadvantage to him when he was getting ready for his inauguration the
next day.
Q. Sir, in view of the decision to do a study into a peaceful
nuclear explosion in the North-West, has the Government moved further
along towards signing the nuclear non-proliferation treaty?
Pm. Our situation on that remains exactly as it has been....
that we are in favour of it in principle, we want to make quite sure it is
effective and efficient and also a good deal more information on a
number of other aspects before we go any further.
Q. There was a reference in the communique from the
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference, Sir, to the Treaty.
Did we take part in any discussions on it?
Pm. No.
Mr. Eggleton. Perhaps one final question, gentlemen.
Q. Is there any suggestion, Sir, that our planes stationed
at Butterworth will move across to Sabah?
PM. No.
Thank you. 



FO0R PR ES S: P. M. N o. ' 7/ 19,49
TRADE V'I-FH NORTH VIP" TNAM6
Statement the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, today restated the
Government's long established policy that there sinould b. e no
trade either by way of exports or imports with North Vietnam.
The Government held firmly to the view that in presenc
circumstances, it would be most unfortunate and inappropriate for
persons to eangage in such trade for private gain while Australian
forces were fighting ill SOUth Vietnam.
The Attorney-General, Mr. 3owen, recently pointed out
that there were adequate powers under existing legislation to give
effect to the policy of recent years. It had, however, now been
decided to introduce new regulations under the Customs Act
specifically relating to North Vietnam and these regulations were
today approved jy the Executive Council.
* The new regulations will prohibit exports to, or imports from,
North Vietnam without the written permission of the Minister for
Customs and Excise. As there has been no commercial trade with
North Vietnam in recent years the new controls will have no adverse
effect on the Australian trading community. They will, however,
remove any doubts about Government policy and the adequacy of
measures to implement that policy.
C A N B R 11A
31 January 1969 



( o0jO
" ENCOUNTER"
TV INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, ON CHANNEL 7 NETWORK
Interviewer: Mr. Barry Jones 1 FEBRUARY 1969
The interview opens with Barry Jones'
playiXn back a segment of an interview recorded with
Mr. Grton shortly prior to his selection as Liberal
V/ Party Leader. On this old tape, Mr. Gorton comments:
" The candidates in this election are men of
ability and integrity and I think anybody could lead
Australia with distinction. I just happen to believe
convincingly enough that I think that I would like the
chance to do it. I suppose because I feel I could do
it better."
Q. Prime Minister, do you think you have done it better?
PM. I think that's a question that should be left to the opinion
of the Australian people rather than to myself to answer. I hope by now
they will have formed an opinion, and later on they will have an opportunity
of expressing their views on the question that you have just asked me.
Q. Do you remember just after President Kennedy came in,
one of his first reactions was to say the job was very much harder than
he had imagined. He thought in the Eisenhower years it would be a
comparatively easy job. When he came in, he found it was terribly
difficult. For somebody coming in from seventh in Cabinet ranking
into the No. 1 job, what sort of problems did you find?
PM. Well, I suppose the same sort of problems that anybody
that ever was in No. 1 job in the Cabinet would find. I never thought
the job was going to be easy or was easy, and I doubt whether it ever
would be easy because there is a constant string of problems coming
up for solution, a constant number of matters on which there are
arguments on one side and arguments on another, and on which you have
to make a balance between the different arguments and decide. Also,
I would add to that there is a much greater sense of responsibility
at least there is in my case for all the areas of government rather
than for concentrating one's attention on the particular portfolio that
one had being interested in the other areas but more interested in
one's specific portfolio. Now there is a more widespread feeling of
responsibility. o / 2 
Q. Coming in from outside, in a sense as a backbencher's
candidate against the establishment, you must have been something
like an Opposition Leader, coming in with a new slate, but coming in
Iwithout a mandate of your own.
PM. I don't know. I think I came in with a mandate that
was given to me by the members of the Liberal Party who elected
their leader.
Q. But it was an inherited mandate.
PM. Oh, I didn't take it that way at all. I took it as a
selection by them of somebody they thought would make a good leader
and that it was up to me to do what I felt was right and what I hoped
would meet with approbation.
Q. You didn't find difficulty in overcoming what is thought
of as a notorious resistance within Cabinet and within the Public Service.
PM. No, I think that's been very much overplayed. I don't
U think it is being played nearly as much now, but it was written up at
the start, and I think very very much overplayed. One journalist
would write it and then another pick it up, and after a while, it
seemed to remember " Alice in Wonderland" when the Red Queen
Ssaid, " What I tell you three times is true". Well, it seems to be the
didea that " what I write three times is true". I didn't ever discover
4k_, this great difficulty that was said to be there. I am sure if there was
any basis for it then, there is none for it now.
Q. Obviously, the tremendous work that Mr. Hewitt has
done would have eased any of the tension in the Prime Minister's
Department. But it was certainly understood at the time of Mr. Hewitt's
-appointment and with Sir John Bunting being put at the head of a separate
section, that there was widespread tension and criticism.
PM. You are now not talking about the Cabinet, you are
talking about the public service?
Q. I did mention the public service
PM. 1 Yes, but I was answering you in relation to Cabinet.
You are now specifically asking about the public service. I think that
has been written up, too, in a way that I think is without proper basis.
I have appointed in the course of time quite a number of heads of
Departments in the past; Mr. Landau for instance in the Navy
Department, ( the new Director-General of Works was in line, I didn't
actually appoint him, but he was in line for recommendation); Sir Hugh
Ennor in Education and Science; Walter Ives has taken over CSIRO
we worked terribly closely together. Of course I had worked with
Mr. Hewitt before, mainly when he was Chairman of the Universities
Commission but also when he was in the Defence Division of the
Treasury. I daresay there might well be some high-ranking public
servants who find their advice is now questioned, probed and not / 3 
1,
3-
necessarily taken., who may at first have thought this was not as good
as it had been before, but I don't think that is continuing. Anyway, I
f/ A~ t~ hink it is a necessary thing to do.
Prime Minister, I will take you on to the recent exercise
in London when you were one of 29 Prime Ministers at the Conference
in London. To what extent was it just an old boys' reunion at which you
reminisced about your problems but didn't actually achieve anything
tangible?
PM. Well, it wasn't an old boys' reunion as far as I was
concerned. It was the first time I had ever appeared there, and it
wasn't an old boys' reunion as far as several other countries were
concerned because it was the first time that they had ever appeared.
Nor, I think, did it have the flavour of old Carthusians or somebody
coming back to discuss their school days or anything of that kind.
Indeed, it was obvious as must happen when you have so many different
countries, there were many different points of view on almost everything
that was put up. What pleased me about it was that these points of
view were put moderately with firmness, with conviction but
moderately, and that having been put by some participant, that participant
was then ready to sit and listen to an opposing point of view also being
put that way. This, I think, from reports I've heard was a different
approach from what had previously occurred at these conferences,
I think a great advance.
SQ. But the two outstanding problems don't seem to be any
nearer resolut ion. Now in the case of Nigeria, I understand the
i ~ Nigerian / Biafran problem was not even raised at all.
PM. The Nigerian/ Biafran problem was not raised in the
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference proper, it being regarded
as an internal matter for Nigeria, the Nigerian Government being
recognised as the Government of Nigeria by the United Kingdom, and
indeed by ourselves. What was the other problem?
yourself? You didn't feel disposed to raise the Nigerian thing
I felt that this was a matter where one could be getting
into a situation where you could set a precedent for Commonwealth
Prime Ministers' Conferences, suggesting actions of some kind or
another in what were primarily internal matters.
This wasn't perhaps because you were anticipating New
Guinea being raised on a future occasion?
No, it wasn't.
The second problem, of course, was the problem of
Rhodesia. Now, Australia lined up with a minority in the straw vote,
one understands a. / 4
Q. PM. Q. PM. Q. 
PM., Well, there wasn't a vote, but if you mean that Australia
lined up with Great Britain, yes, Australia did. It would have been
surprising if it hadn't because before the conference took place, the
policy of the Australian Government, clearly expressed, was that we
felt that this matter was one for solution between the British Government
and the regime in Rhodesia; and if arrangements could be made between
the British Government and the regime in Rhodesia, then that was the
way in which the problem should be settled. This in fact was the view
of Great Britain and this in fact was the view that we supported. We
were, of course we, and the others who supported us in a minority
in expressing that view, but thank goodness these conferences don't
depend on votes or majorities or minorities. It was left unequivocally
that it is a matter between Great Britain and the regime in Rhodesia,
though Great Britain said she would consult the members of the
Commonwealth as events progressed.
Q. In the days before your elevation to the purple, you
were always thought of as being a great Rhodesia-liner, a great
Rhodesia front man. How did this impression get created?
PM. I haven't the slightest idea, have you?
Q. No, I haven't got the faintest idea. By the way, is this
the grin that endeared you so much with the African delegates?
PM. I wouldn't have any idea. Somebody asked me about
that when I arrived back in Australia and I pointed out that the African
delegates' grins were much much wider than mine and their teeth were
much better and they were really rather more attractive.
Q. Have you ever, even from childhood had any sort of
personal reaction to colour yourself?
PM. No, I don't think I have. Never. You like people. Let
me try and expand on that a little bit. From childhood, no I never have.
Later on, in later years, it has been a reaction in this way: Some
people seem to think you must like somebody an agree with his point
of view because he is a different colour from yours. I think that is
utterly and stupidly ridiculous. I think it doesn't matter whether they
are a different colour from yours. You agree with their point of view
if you agree with it. , You disagree with it if you disagree with it. You
like some people who/' black or brown. You dislike others. You like
some people who are white and you dislike others.
All right, if we could pass on from this perhaps, Prime
Minister, to the concept of the new nationalism that is being talked
about a good deal since you have been Prime Minister, this concept
that I think you first used on my programme of being Australian to
the boot-heels. Except in the case of perhaps the MLC where there
is a bit of Australian economic nationalism, there has been little
tangible evidence of what you mean by the new nationalism. Now, is
the new nationalism just a slogan or does it have a reality to you? o 
F*
PM / 6 / 1D7 1 .
It has a reality to me, and it has a reality which can
be expressed both tangibly and intangibly. It can be expressed tangibly
in the case that you have mentioned, the case of the MLC. Some people
think it was wrong. I think it was right to discover who it was that was
buying up these shares and to make sure that that company was not
taken over. It can have tangible expression in the guidelines spelt out
not in the same detail as they must be spelt out in as soon as possible,
but spelt out in my speech at the Australia Club. That is that we don't
want good Australian companies taken over and owned by overseas
interests. We do want an opportunity to participate in equity capital
with developmental projects so that Australians will benefit from the
growth of the companies as Australia grows. This is sort of tangible
economics. Yes, but in the case of the Gove aluminium project,
this may mean an actual diminution of the proportion of the Australian
ownership, providing the quantum is greater.....
It doesn't really matter, because in the case of the Gove
aluminium project, Australians were offered the chance of a 50 per cent
equity in participation. Now this is all one asks, that they be offered
the chance. If they turn it down, if the investors in Australia aren't
prepared to take that up, then that is their loss. Ultimately it may be
Australia's loss, but that is their loss, and it is not sufficient reason
for preventing the developmental project going ahead if the opportunity
is offered. But, of course, there is more than economic nationalism.
There is the psychological sort of nationalism. You have declared
yourself publicly against Australia as a republic. But is the concept
of Queen of Australia and you said, after all, our allegiance is not
to the Queen of England but to the Queen of Australia, is this really
meaningful? You mentioned Alice in Wonderland before. Now isn't
this a bit of an Alice in Wonderland
No, I don't think so, because in fact that is the legal
situation now that the Queen is " divisible", if you are going to call that
an Alice in Wonderland concept, but nevertheless, a lot of legal concepts
are is divisible and is the Queen of Australia. I believe in a
constitutional monarchy for Australia, and I believe in our allegiance
going to the Queen of our own country, rather than to the Queen considered
as the Queen of some other country. Now, you also asked me about
psychological nationalism. I want to see grow in the Australian people,
and I believe there is growing in the Australian people a primary feeling
of being Australian so that they are happy even if they live in Victoria
because of the great development going on in Western Australia, so that
they are happy even if they live in Western Australia because of the Bass
Strait oil discoveries which will benefit Australia. So that they think
not primarily of the area of Australia in which they live, but of the nation
in which they live and what they can do to benefit the nation as a whole.
And what they can do to see that the nation as it grows, as it becomes
more powerful takes its full place in the community of nations.
' 1~
PhK
PM. 
6-
Q. PM. Q. / 7
ranKywa y Iyfou conceded that young people say people under
that the concept of the Queen of England as the Queen of
Australia was an almost meaningless concept, would you concede then
that perhaps you may see an Australian republic whether you like it or
not in your lifetime? I don't believe I will see it in my lifetime. I wouldn't
want to see it in my lifetime. I would oppose it because I believe that
the constitutional monarchy is a good form of government and perhaps
the best form of government that has yet been evolved. The concept of
a head of state above and beyond political considerations inside that
state to whom all can look.
But this is true of our Governor-General
As the Queen's representative. It is not, I think, as
true applied to a representative as it is applied to a monarch itself,
and you are asking me about the Queen herself.
/ A But surely Australia, so far as other nations looking at
VAustralia, Australia would be better served in a sense if Lord Casey
? o ould go to bed as Governor-General one night and wake up as
President of an Australian republic with yourself as Prime Minister
next morning. We would still have the Queen as head of-the
Commonwealth and we would still have the ex-Governor-General as
the symbol? Well, I am saying that what I would like to see, and do
see and want to continue seeing is not the Queen as the head of the
Commonwealth but the Queen as the Queen of Australia.
Well, can you assert change without at the same time
altering already existing UK and US ties?
Altering already existing UK ties and US ties...,.
I don't see why they should alter the ties. I don't believe that either
the United Kingdom or the United States would take a different attitude
towards Australia merely, because Australia is becoming more nationally
conscious. and placing its own interests or what it sees as its own
interests first amongst the responsibilities of its own government.
Clearly, over a comparatively recent span of years changes have taken
place. The United Kingdom can have a different foreign policy in regard
to certain things than Australia. In the past, it couldn't in fact it
didn't. It was the one foreign policy. It can have different defence
policies now. It can have different economic policies now. But we
are each seeking the same ultimate goal for mankind and we are each
activated by the same traditions of the rule of law and of democracy.
And indeed we in our Australian boots and they in their English boots,
though there may be by-paths of particular aspects of policy, are
marching side by side not in the same pair of boots but as partners.
PML 6, / 010 
6 9 / 0( 0
Prime Minister, how do you think the United States
under President Nixon would react to a shade more independence
in Australia's foreign policy?
I don't believe the United States expects us to follow
blindly their foreign policy any more than I hope they expect us to
accept without question their economic policy. I see no indication that
they would, and I certainly see no reason why we should not paying
regard to our own interests decide our own policies.
Q. Prime Minister, I wanted to ask you something about
ehe celebrated Gorton style. Now, how does your style of leading party
/ V1 _ J and government compare with say, that of the Menzies' style?
PM. I don't know what my style of leading the party and the
government is. I just do what seems normal and natural to do and I
don't know how that would compare with other previous leaders and I
don't think it is a thing on which one can make comparisons. I would
imagine each individual would have his own method, his own natural
inclination, his own natural approach, and I would have thought
comparisons were unnecessary and not likely to lead to any great
benef it. Do you think you are a creature of impulse? Do you
think you rely on intuition? You are often said to shoot from the hip.
Is that a valid charge? Well, I wouldn't myself have thought so. -Although
sometimes it is a necessary part of a politician's make-up to have
some feelings of intuition. But looking back over the past, looking
back over the weeks and weeks of negotiations that went into the
arrangements which culminated in our entering overseas shipping,
looking back over the weeks of negotiations that led to an oil-pricing
policy, it would seem to me that if that was to be regarded as shooting
from the hip, then somebody that carried on that way in the old West,
wouldn't have lasted two seconds, because you had to think it out first.
It's curious, though, that you should mention the old
West. I think one of the most interesting things about you is your degree
of enthusiasm for the United States Civil War. How did you become a
US Civil War buff? Well, because I suppose from sentimentality, and that
is certainly all it could be. Certainly not from conviction cr from
commonsense, one supported the cavaliers in the war, knowing that
they should not have won and being glad that they did not
Wrong, but romantic!
Yes. One supported the Southerners because they
couldn't get any munitions or anything in and the Northerners could,
and they were outnumbered and they fought on, and it's a terribly
good thing they didn't win. Again, kind of romantic. Now, I married
a girl who happens to come from Maine, the very northernmost Yankee
./ 8
PM. PM. Q. PM. Q. PM. 
1'
-8-
State, and-she was rather in favour of the Union cause. This led to a
lot of good-humoured discussions, and then to the buying of books and
then to the buying of more books, and it had this added interest from
an historian's point of view because I am an historian that in that
conflict, for the first time, a cleavage between old methods of making
war and new methods occurred. The rifle was brought in instead of the
musket; the rifle cannon was brought in instead of the smooth-bore'
cannon. Even aerial observation was brought in from balloons.
Oh, you had that in Napoleonic times, of course.., a bit.
Well, I think you might have a bit. You probably know
more than I do, but the Army of the Potomac used this quite a lot.
Railways were used much more than ever before to move troops
around from point to point. Entrenchments were used. At the beginning
of the war, for example, it was felt to be ungentlemanly to crcui behind
a tree. You stood up. After a while you dug a hole which was the
sensible thing to do. But you asked me why this happened, and this is
the sort of evolution of it.
Can't you see a certain irony for a centralist like
yourself identif ying with the South. It is much easier to see you
identifying with Lincoln and Sir Henry Bolte as Jeff Davis
-PM. Q. PM. I told you it was a romantic attachment and I wasn't
necessarily intellectually convinced that the South should win and I
) think it was a good thing probably that they didn't. No it was a good
V. thing they didn't: Prime Minister, the " Power Struggle", the Alan Reid
book. You must have obviously read at least part of it. What impression
did you have? Is it substantially accurate as an account of your climb
to the top? Well, some bits of it I can only speak about the
bits in which I myself figure. There's a whole area in the middle of
the book which seems to be devoted to arguments between Mr. McEwen
and Mr. McMahon taking place way back in the past before we " ruled
off the book". I don't know and I am not interested in them, and whether
they are accurately presented or not I don't know. But the parts in which
I appear are reasonably, but by no means entirely, accurate.
It is certainly not designed to push your particular barrow?
PM. PM. damage me. No, I don't think it is designed to push my barrow or
In a sense, as the inheritor of somebody else's kingdom,
you must be looking forward to an election, because an election can
resolve matters. Are you looking forward to the election contest?
Well, the election resolves who is going to be the
government is that what you mean? / 9
PM. oloo 
9
Q. Yes, but you have got an inherited government. Clearly,
if you had a mandate from the people under your own belt
PM. As you say, I have an inherited government, but that
surely as the record shows doesn't indicate that one is bound down to
whatever it was that the previous government was thought to be bound
to do. I hadn't heard in previous governments of suggestions for Going
some of the things that I have suggested to you of entering a shipping
line, of trying to prevent takeovers of good Australian companies, of
having a new look at overseas investment policy, of trying to re-examine
in depth the health and social services schemes, of removing the fear
of long-term illness these are all things which we have done, not as
a matter of inheritance but as a matter of initiative.
Q. Prime Minister, if Mr. McMahon were toappointed
Governor of New South Wales, which would be essentially a step
outside your control, would you envisage a wholesale reshuffle before
the elections?
PM. Well, you are asking such an entirely hypothetical
question I have never heard any suggestion that Mr. McMahon would
want or was likely to be, or that anybody had ever thought of him being
appointed Governor of New South Wales.
Q. I am sorry. I didn't intend to spring it on you but it is
certainly being shouted fromn the housetops in New South Wales, rightly
or wrongly, I don't know.
PM. Is it?
Q4Q Do you see much change in your own party since you
haveg ab eene wPriem e hM iniostnerr a nd aretl ataedd yto uth is, w do yaotu see sthhev dnistanceh
narrowed in the last twelve months?
PM. I think the gap between the Country Party and our own
Party in one sense may have narrowed. In another sense, it didn't need
PM, to narrow. We had the same ideological approach as distinct from the
Labor Party, which has two ideological approaches fighting inside it.
We had the same ideological approach all the time. We were close like
that.
Q. All of you? From Sir Wilfrid Kent Hughes right through
to Don Chipp?
PM. II think so. I don't see any significant differences in
anything but emphasis on some ad hoc decisions but the same
ideological ends, I think, are there. On other matters, we are
working very very closely together in the day to day matters. Certainly
I believe it would be impossible to find two people working more closely
together than John McEwen and myself. 
1, -1 -6
i V1419S/ 10
As two practical and pragmatic politicians, do you see
yourself and Gough Whitlam converging in a sense. Do you think that
your emergence as Prime Minister has made any difference in the Labor
Party and Mr. Whitlam's role in it?
Well, I wouldn't know what affected Mr. Whitlam' s
/ role in the Labor Party, but I would think it would be things inside the
Labor Party rather than things outside which would have an effect on
the attitudes which from time to time he might take up.
Prime Minister just as the very last question.
Do you have any ambitions as a record-breaker? Would you like to
see yourself as a long-term 15-or perhaps 16-year Prime Minister?
No, I wouldn't. In fifteen years' time, I would be
approaching middle age, and I think a shorter period of time than
that is quite enough. Prime Minister, thanks very much.
Q. PM.
SQ y j) 61 C, V 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 8/ 19692' I. 1 3
MIDDLE EAST: MESSAGE TO UNITED NATIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, said today
ftat on behalf of the Australian Government he had sent the following
message to the President of the Security Council and to the Secretary-
General of the United Nations:-" I wish to express the deep concern of
the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia at
the recent trials and mass public executions in Baghdad
which were contrary to the proper dictates of humanity.
The timing and manner of the hangings have been
condemned by peoples throughout the world including
some in other Arab countries.
" It is the sincere hope of my Government
that there will be no repetition of this spectacle which
was so repugnant to the conscience of mankind and which
can only exacerbate the situation in the Middle East and
increase the difficulties of securing the objective for
which we all are striving of a just and lasting peace. You
may be assured of our support for your efforts to avert a
repetition. A message from the Prime Minister was read by the
Speaker, Mr. Aston, at a rally arranged by the Executive Council
of Australian Jewry in the Sydney Town Hall this evening. The text
of the message is as follows:-" The Australian Government is most
concerned at the continued explosive situation in the
Middle East, and abhors the recent mass public
executions which, besides running counter to the world's
conscience, can only exacerbate this situation.
" We believe that all parties to the dispute
should, without delay, sit down around the conference
table and begin discussions aimed at restoring peace and
stability to the Middle East.
" Any such settlement must be formally
based on the acceptance of Israel as a sovereign nation
existing as of right, entitled to live and develop in
security, free of constant threat, posing no threat to its
neighbouring countries, and using for the good of all,
rights and opportunities so dearly bought.
CANBERRA 3 February 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 9/ 1969
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS K-0~ J1969
Statement by-the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Invitations have been extended to representatives of
national organisations to meet with Ministers in Canberra next month.
Ministers will meet these organisations on 10 March
in three separate groups: primary industry, manufacturing industry
and commerce. The talks will, I am sure, be most useful in providing
Ministers with an up-to-date appreciation of the views of those directly
Involved in commerce and industry.
Invitations have also been extended for representatives
of the Export Development Council and the Manufacturing Industries
Advisory Council to have separate discussions with Ministers on the
morning of 11 March and with representatives of the Australian Council
of Trade Unions that afternoon.
Below is a list of the national organisations invited to
be represented at these talks.
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS INVITED TO BE REPRESENTED
AT E03NOMIC CONSULTATIONS
March 1969
Primary Industry Group
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Primary Producers? Union
Australian Wool Growers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers' Federation
Australian Mining Industry Council
Manufacturing Industry Group
The Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Commercial Group
The Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers
CANBERRA 6 February 196 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 11/ 1969
NUCLEAR POWER IN AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth has been in contact with the
States about matters associated with the introduction of nuclear
power into Australia. The Government feels that the time is coming
much closer when nuclear power can be competitive with other
forms of power in a number of areas of Australia. There are
many considerations which would be of common concern to the
Commonwealth and the States, and we feel it is opportune to
examine the various matters involved.
The Government has proposed that the Minister
for National Development, Mr. David Fairbairn, should visit
the States and have discussions with appropriate State Ministers
and authorities regarding introduction of nuclear power into
Australia in the future. These discussions would be most useful
as a basis for initiating steps toward the introduction of nuclear
power into the country, including types of reactors, and ensuring
that those reactors would be independent of overseas fuel supplies.
CANBERRA 6 February 1969 



0/ 0
E fBARGO EiBARGO EMBARGO EMBARGO EMBARGO
EMARGOED NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE MIDNIGHT ( EST)
ON THURSDAY 6TH FEBRUARY, 1969
N. D. 14 91
STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
( Hon. David Fairbairn, M. P.)
AUSTRALIAN PLANS FOR CAPE IREAUDREN FEASIBILITY STUDY
SThe Minister for National Development, Mr David
Fairbairn, today gave details of the arrangements made to
ensure Australia's full and effective participation in the
feasibility study. " We have set up an Australian Plowshare Committee
to watch over the study", Mr Fairbairn said.
" A Cape Keraudren Project Technical Committee
has also been established to co-ordinate the investigations
into technical and economic issues.
The Cape Keraudren Project Committee will be the
W working body for the feasibility study, and will maintain the
necessary liaison with the United States Atomic Energy Commission.
SThe Chairman of the Committee will be Dr A. R. W.
Wilson, of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission who is
SDeputy Director of the Commission's Research establishment
at Lucas Heights, near Sydney. He is thoroughly experienced
in the American Plowshare programme, having visited the United
States on a number of occasions to study developments.
In 1963, Dr V'ilson headed a three-man Australian
mission which made a first-hand appreciation of the United
States progress in the scientific, engineering and safety
aspects of the use of nuclear explosives. 
He has also acted, at the request of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, as adviser to the
Government of Panama on the safety aspects of the proposed
" Trans-Isthmian Canal Project".
In this, the use of nuclear explosives is being
studied, since this technique is estimated to offer economies
of the order of several hundred million dollars over conventional
blasting techniques.
0 The Australian deputy co-ordinator for the Cape
Keraudren Project Committee is Dr R. Warner, of the Australian
Atomic Energy Commission. Dr Warner is a Gold-medallist in the Faculty of
Chemical Engineering, University of New South Wales, and has
been closely associated with Plowshare developments for some
years. The Project Committee will include experts from
a number of Commonwealth Departments and organisations, among
them the Bureau of Mineral Resources and the Bureau of
Meteorology, the Government of Western Australia, and the
Sentinel Mining Company. The Snowy Mountains Authority may
also be associated with the Committee.
Commenting on the decision to proceed with a
feasibility study, Mr Fairbairn said it was very good news.
It could have important implications for development work in
Australia in future years.
" If it proceeds, the construction of a harbour
at Cape Keraudren by nuclear blasting will advance our knowledg e
and skills in this exciting~ new field".
If it proves feasible in all respects the
operation at Cape Keraudren is expected to require five
nuclear explosives each of 200 kilotons fired simultaneously. 
It is estimated that this will produce a harbour 6,000 feet
long, 1,300 feet to 1,600 feet wide and 300-400 feet deep.
This could accommodate ships of up to approximately 150,000
dead-weight tons.
CANBERRA: EMBARGO: 6.2.69 EMBARGO: EMBARGO EMBARGO: EMBARGO
EMBARGOED NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE MIDNIGHT ( EST) 



FOR PRESS; P. M. L No. 1/ 96
" SOUTHERN AURORA" TRAGEDY O~ j3 FE3 11969
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I extend my deepest sympathy to the injured,
and to the families of those killed, in today's tragic rail
collision in Victoria. I amr sure all Australians are shocked at this
terrible accident, and join me In this expression of sympathy.
I have instructed my Department to keep in
touch with the Victorian authorities and to offer all possible
assistance. The Army was quickly on the scene to help with
the rescue operations. My colleague the Minister for Shipping and
Transport, Mr. Sinclair, has offered on behalf of the
Commonwealth Railways to loan the New South Wales
Railways fourteen rail cars so that the " Southern Aurora"
services can be resumed.
CANBERRA 7 February 1969 



EMIBARGO: NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
MID~ C ~ YT I~ Y RMRY 1969
FOR PRESS: P. M. L No. 10/ 196 13 FES 9
WEST AUSTRALIAN NUCLEAR HARBOUR STUDY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Australian Government recently invited the Government
of the United States to participate in carrying out a study of the technical
and economic feasibility of using nuclear explosives to blast out a new
deep-water harbour at Cape Keraudren on the northwest coast of Australia.
We have today received an official reply from the United
States Government saying that that Government is prepared to proceed
promptly, with the Australian Government, in carrying out this study
which will, of course, pay full attention to all aspects of safety.
It must be emphasised that all that has been so far decided
is that the feasibility study is to take place, under the direction of the
United States Atomic Energy Commission, and the Australian Atomic
Energy Commission, which two bodies will be put in direct contact with
each other to plan and carry out the study.
It has not yet been decided that the execution of the project
itself will take place. A decision on this must await the completion of
the feasibility study, an examination in the light of the results of that
study of the applicability or otherwise of the limited test ban treaty,
and then a new decision by each Government concerned as to whether
the execution of the project will take place.
On behalf of the Australian Government I warmly appreciate
President Nixon's prompt and positive response to our request for
assistance in carrying out this study, and welcome this new expression
of Australian/ American co-operation. Should the explosion itself
eventually occur, it would be a historic development the first practical
application of the atom as a mighty engineering tool for civil construction,
helping to open up new frontiers. All being well, it could be the forerunner
of many other projects for peaceful civil engineering development in
the years ahead. We have already set in motion machinery to speed
the feasibility study and my colleague, the Minister for National
Development ( Mr. David Fairbairn) is announcing details of these measures.
CANBERRA 7 February 1969 
' 8 el TT 71 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 13/ 1969
MESSAGE FROM NEW ZEALAND
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, today
received the following message from the Prime Minister( f
New Zealand, Mr. Keith Holyoake:-
" ALL NEW ZEALAND IS APPALLED
BY THE TERRIBLE DISASTER TO THE SOUTHERN
AURORA. 1 A i
WILL YOU PLEASE CONVEY TO ALL
THOSE WHO HAVE SUFFERED THROUGH THE
TRAGEDY THE DEEP SYMPATHY OF THE
GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF NEW ZEALAND.
CANBERRA February 1969 1 L y
I: cD ~ nn I 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 14/ 1969
LORD CASEY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
satisfaction Casey to be I believe all Australians will share a sense of
at Her Majesty's gracious appointment of Lord
a Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter.
It is fitting that this great Australian, at the
close of his most remarkable, varied and distinguished career
of devoted public service, both at home and abroad, should be
appointed to this, the most ancient and noble order of Chivalry.
On behalf of us all I am conveying to Lord and
Lady Casey our deep gratitude and admiration for their lifetime
of service and our affectionate congratulations on this most
signal honour which Her Majesty the Queen has conferred upon
him. CANBERRA February 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 15/ 1969
NEW MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gti
Following the resignation of the Rt. Hon. Paul
Hasluck, His Excellency the Governor-General has authorised
me to announce that the Hon. Gordon Freeth, M. Minister
for Air and Minister Assisting the Treasurer, will be appointed
Minister for External Affairs. He will be sworn in on Tuesday,
11 February.
CANBERRA February 1969 



FOR PRESS : 1 a
PM. No. 16, 1969
APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNOR-GENERAL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Her Majesty The Queen has graciously approved the
appointment of a distinguished Australian, the Rt. Hon. Paul
Hasluck, to be her Governor-General of, and representative in,
Australia. He will take up the appointment when Lord Casey
relinquishes his appointment at the end of April this year.
In announcing this Her Majesty has also been graciously
pleased to appoint Lord Casey to be a Knight of the Most Noble
Order of the Garter and the Rt. Hon. Paul Hasluck to be a Knight
Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and
St. George. Sir Paul Hasluck, a second generation Australian, has
given long and devoted service to Australia in many fields of
public endeavour. As a public servant he wats the first Australian
permanent representative at the United Nations, as an historian
he was entrusted with the task of writing the volumes of the
governmental history of World War 11, and as a Minister of State
he has carried out his duties with distinction. It is doubtful whether
any other Australian is as well and favourably known to the Governments
of overseas countries, particularly those countries nearest
to our north. Lady Hasluck, a fifth generation Australian, is in her own
right a distinguished Australian author whose books disclose
painstaking research into, and understanding of, facets of Australia's
early history. On behalf of the Government, I offer warm congratulations
to Sir Paul and Lady Hasluck on his appointment which he will carry
out with great dignity and honour.
CANBERRA, February 1969 



FOR PRESSP. M. No. 17,1969
NEW MINISTER FOR AIR
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gort
His Excellency the Governor-General has authorised me
to announce that Mr G. D. Erwinj M. Member for Ballaarat, who
is the Government Whip, will be appointed Minister for Air. He
will be sworn in on Thursday, 13 February.
Mr Erwin's promotion is well earned and he will be a
welcome addition to the Ministry. The new Minister for Air will
also carry out the responsibilities of Leader of the House of
Representatives. The Departmental responsibilities of the previous Leader
of the House of Representatives, Mr Snedden, have been steadily
increasing as evidenced by the record flow of migrants to Australia
aud by the countries with which new migrant agreements have been
made. Because of this, and because of the key importance of
migration to Australia's growth, Mr Snedden' s time needs to be fully
occupied with his portfolio. It will be generally agreed that he has
been a successful and tactful Leader of the House.
Mr Max Fox, the Member for Henty, has been appointed
Government Whip in succession to Mr Erwin.
CANBERRA, 11 February 1969 



RELEASE: 8 a, m. 12 February 1969
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 18/ 1969
PRIME MINISTER'S TALKS WITH PRESIDENTW NIXON
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I have been pleased to accept President Nixon's
invitation to make a visit to Washington on 31 March.
The visit will provide an opportunity for
discussions on matters of interest to both Australia and to
the United States.
CANBERRA 12 February 1969
Background: The Washington talks, beginning on the 31st,
may extend over two days. The Prime Minister is likely to
arrive in Washington on the
Arrangements for the Canadian visit, to take
place in conjunction with the visit to the United States, are
still being finalised. Mr. Gorton last visited Washington on27-28 May
of last year. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. ! 9/ 1969
" THANK YOU" FROM VICTCRIA
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, has rpceive69
the following letter from the Premier of Victoria, Sir Hen
" I would be glad if you would convey to
your colleagues the gratitude and appreciation felt by
the people of Victoria, the government, and myself,
for the wonderful co-operation and assistance given
by Commonwealth authorities in the rail accident
involving the Southern Aurora on the 7th February.
In particular I would like to mention
the prompt co-operation given by the Department of
Civil Aviation, the Army, the Commonwealth
Railways, and the Postmaster -General's Department.
All of these contributed very materially to the
successful operations which, I believe, prevented
the disaster from becoming far worse than it was."
CANBERRA 17 February 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 20/ 1969
VISIT TO CANADA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I have been delighted to accept an invitation from
Mr. Trudeau to make a visit to Canada on Thursday, 3 April,
after my meeting with President Nixon in Washington.
I am looking forward to this opportunity for an
exchange of views with another Commonwealth country which
has an increasing interest in the Pacific region.
CANBERRA 19 February 1969
Background Note: The Prime Minister begins his Washington talks
on Monday, 31 March, and will probably travel to Ottawa on
Wednesday, 2 April. No itinerary beyond 3 April is yet available for
Mr. Gorton. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 21/ 1969
ACQUISITION OF WILLIAM WESTALL DRAWINGS
FOR NATIONAL LIBRARY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government has purchased from
the Royal Commonwealth Society in London an important collection
of 139 drawings and water colours by William Westall, the young
landscape artist who accompanied Matthew Flinders on his
circumnavigation of Australia in 1801-3. These pictures, depicting
parts of the Australian coastline as it appeared before European
settlement, will be housed in the National Library in Canberra.
The Westall drawings and water colours have long
been well and favourably known to scholars. They became even
more widely known as a result of their reproduction in a large
volume published by the Society in 1962.
As well as being on view in the National Library,
they may also be exhibited elsewhere in Australia during the
Captain Cook Bi-centenary Celebrations next year.
CANBERRA 21 February 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 22/ 1969
NEW DATE FOR FIVE POWER TALKS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Five Power talks in Canberra will now be held
on 19 arid 20 June. In London last month, the Prime Ministers of
Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand and Australia, and the British
Defence Minister, agreed to a meeting in Canberra in May.
Subsequently, the Malaysian Government asked that
the dates be varied and the new arrangements have been made in
consultation between the five governmrents.
The first meeting of representatives of Britain, New
Zealand, Malaysia, Singapore and Australia to consider questions
arising from the British withdrawal from Malaysia and Singapore was
held in Kuala Lumpur in June of last year.
CANBERRA 24 February 1969 



PARLIAMENTARY (/ 0P 4
LAUNCHING OF NEW FIVE-YEAR APPEAL
BY GEELONG GRAMMAR SCHOOL
GEELONG, VICTORIA 24 FEBRUARY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Carton
Mr. Southey, Mr. Headmaster, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
It is not a sacrifice, Sir, but a pleasure for my wife and
I to have been asked tonigTht to attend such a cheerful and, in a way, such
a nostalgic gathering. Indeed, it is' such a cheerful gathering that I am
touched with a little wand of doubt as to whether everybody here knows
precisely why it is they have been asked: But fortunately speaking of
course politically it is not for me to tell you, but for those who are to
speak later. I think the function that has been assigned to me, which I
notice has been said to be going to take twenty minutes, but which in fact
is going to take very much less, is to take your minds for a moment off
what those who follow me will say and to use an American football term
run interference. I said " a cheerful and a nostalgic gathering", and it is
nostalgic for me to stand here again in this vaulted hall which seems
to have changed very little, except for being elongated a little bit, since
the time when I sat here as a very small boy and was very lucky if I got
a slice of toast at breakfast as a mark of favour from one of those
handmaidens who used to wait upon us. If you got one, you knew you were
right, that she rather liked you that day. Otherwise you didn't get toast
at all. But not only does the nostalgia come from the hall itself or
from the portraits that one sees hanging opposite one here. I have seen
three headmasters of this school. Admittedly I had a brief acquaintance
with the first. But I remember him wiell, for it was he who did his best
to have me expelled at an early stage from this school. It was for what
I still believe was the relatively mild misdemeanour of having brought
down from my home a 25/ 50 Browning automatic with a full clip of
cartridges, which I was accustomed to use in the bucolic glades of Mystic
Park, and which I had no intention of using upon him or upon any master
or any boy: But it appeared to him, coming as he did from England, that
the discovery of such a lethal weapon in a locked cupboard to which,
incidentally, he should not have had a key was something which deserved
/ 2 
the gravest condemnation. However, he was argued out of his intentions
and subsequently left, with no bullet holes anywhere around him, and was
superseded by the headmaster whom I suppose most of us here know, Mr.
R. Darling. Trhat was the second headmaster that I knew. Mr. Garnett
, is the third. It is my hope, and my belief, that in the years which lie
ahead of this school there will be portrait after portrait around the walls
of this great hall. And perhaps in another hundred years there will be
an indication, through those portraits, of the progress which this school
has made, just as there is an indication for those who knew the school in
the time of Dr. Brown, in the time of Dr. Darling, and now in the time of
Dr. Garnett, of the progress which has been made in the last twenty-five
or thirty years. I believe it is essential that such progress should be made
by independent schools in Australia. There are three main reasons why
I say this. We have always, I think, believed that there was a democratic
right for parents, if they were prepared to make some sacrifice themselves,
to choose the type of school to which they would send their children. They
should not be denied by any act or any law or any economic action of those
in power the opportunity always provided they would help to pay for it
themselves to choose that form of education for their children which
they believed would suit their children best.
This exercise of a democratic right is so wound up with
oreducational system and should continue to be so wound up with it
tat I myself regard it as one of the most important facets of education
W in this nation of Australia.
Secondly, Sir, there is an educational advantage in this.
By that I do not mean that this or any other school of this type is at any
9 tshpee csitfaicte . t imIe d ob entotet rm feitatend t htoat eadtu aclalt. e tIht em yaoyu nbge thaint misa ya sncoht oboel. ruInt dbeyp endsi
on the headmaster. It depends on the staff. It depends, in the case of a I
state school,* equally on the headmaster and the staff.
Nor do I mean that all new educational advances come from
schools such as this, because they don't. But. what I do mean is that when
there are two educational systems side by side, when there are schools tLtt
are run by the state and when there are schools that are run as this school'
is run, then there is more room for experiments in educational attitudes,
in educational methods, and there is less likelihood of bureaucratic control
of all curricula and education. Indeed it is this competition, if that is the
word, and I think perhaps it is, not in the sense of competition in the markel
place, but in the sense of competition for excellence which spurs both thel
state and the private school to the benefit of both. I: / 3 
Were there but one system of education, were we to have
a system such as I am told exists in France where a Minister for Education
can, at a given moment, say, ttffi every school in France at this hour of
eleven o'clock in the morning, the third form is being read to from page
649 of the second volume of Proust" then we would indeed be in danger
of having a monolithic system. A monolithic system can be moribund.
One in competition cannot. And these are the educational advantages that
schools such as this bring to the community.
Thirdly, of course, though having been a parent I know it
is difficult for parents to understand, there is an economic advantage
not of course to those who have children going through the school at a
particular time, but to the community at large. Because if all those -who
attend this and other schools such as this throughout Australia were
tomorrow to have the doors shut to them, and be required to go to state
schools, then this would be impossible. The bill to be paid would be so
great that school fees would seem as nothing in comparison to the taxes
which would be placed upon you. Thirdly, therefore, there is this economic
advantage. Sir, this school is one with a long and distinguished record.
It has been a beneficiary in certain ways from Commonwealth Government
schemes and State Government schemes, but what it has also done is
something which the Chairman mentioned. It has sent out from its portals
graduates, not only to one state of this country but to Queensland, Western
Australia, Tasmania, South Australia to the whole of the nation of
Australia and they have come back here tonight from all corners of the
land to the one part of the nation which gave them education.
Perhaps this happens in other schools too. I believe it does.
I believe it will happen more and more, but it is another great advantage.
I believe that, through this medium, there should be a national outlook able
the more easily to be disseminated than would be the case perhaps in some
other schools. Now, it is not for me to talk any longer. It is for those who
are to follow me now to speak to you, but I do conclude by saying this.
Those of you who know the young of today, the young at any school, the
young perhaps at this school and those of you who know them well would
probably not, most of you, describe them by the word " meek". Certainly,
the ones I have run across could not be so described. But, Sir, meek or
not, they will inherit Australia, and they will do the better for this nation, 1K
and for the children they will bear tQ you as grandchildren, if they are
given every possible facility for education which this nation or this school
or you yourselves can provide.
It is as true today as it was true when Disraeli said in the
19th century of England that " upon the education of this country the fate of
this country depends", and it is upon the contributions that schools such as
this make to education, that the education of this country depends. That is
why tonight, with some nostalgia and great affection, I am so honoured to
have been asked to speak to you for a short time. I thank you. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
DEFENCE
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the Parliamentary Debates,' 25 February 1969] " 4,
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-Mr Speaker, the purpose of
this statement is to inform the House of
what the Australian Government is prepared
to do militarily in Malaysia-Singapore
after the British withdrawal from those
areas and to set this in the context of our
general interest in, involvement in and
thinking concerning the region. It is not to
be thought that we look on our activities
in that region as being purely, or mainly,
military. Any examination of our policy in
relation to our neighbours of the north will
show that we have encouraged them to
develop policies promoting political stability
and economic growth, promoting their own
defence capabilities in association with our
own forces and those of our allies and in
promoting regional co-operation.
Indeed, -the stability and security of the
area rests on many things. It rests on the
avoidance of territorial or other disputes
between the countries in the region. It rests
on the economic progress of those coun-tries
and on the capacity and willingness of rulers
there to see that that economic progress is
reflected in the raising of the standards of
living of the ordinary people. It rests on
peaceful co-operation between those countries
in many fields. And these are the bases
without which there will not * be endurin.-
stability. 12398/ 69 Therefore, these are the goals which Australia,
through diplomatic effort, through
economic assistance, through assistance in
the field of trade, will strive to help these
countries at-tain. For this is fundamental to
the Australian Government's approach-a
positive, co-operative effort to encourage
and assist peaceful change and progress. Yet
just as ultimate stability depends on progress
and rising standards of living, so does the
possibility of progress depend on maintaining
immediate stability. And provision for
defence is necessary to help provide that
immediate stability. Indeed, helping in conditions
of stability to accelerate progress,
and helping by military means to preserve
conditions of stability, are two sides of the
one coin. And the military action we propose
to take in the area to our immediate
north is the side of the coin that concerns
us in this statement.
Just a little over a year ago Great
Britain announced a considerable acceleration
in the pace and scale of the withdrawal
of British forces from Malaysia-Singapore.
Those forces are to be totally withdrawn.
The withdrawal is to be completed by the
end of the calendar year 1971-and the circumstances
under which they may return to
assist in an emergency are unknown. For
Malaysia, Singapore, New Zealand and ourselves
this latest announcement underlined 
the fact that an era had ended. During
the lifetime of any one of us sitting in this
House British forces have been stationed
in Malaysia-Singapore to keep, or try to
keep, peace and stability in that region.
During the Second World War, and
since, Australian and New Zealand forces
have assisted in that task and Malaysian
and Singaporean troops have contributed
also. For our part we contributed to the
long drawn out military measures which
defeated the Communist subversion campaign
in Malaya, externally inspired and
sustained, which became known as the
Emergency. We contributed to the military
measures which repelled the raids and infiltrations
during the sad days of Confrontation.
We contributed, with New Zealand,
Malaysia and Singapore, to a force the
backbone of which was provided -by British
forces-seen to be there and known to be
backed by all the resources and reinforcements
which Great Britain could, if necessary,
send them. Now all that has changed.
The major power will be withdrawn. It is
no longer a contribution to the efforts of a
major power which we will all be called
upon to make. It is a substitution for the
efforts of a major power. And such a substitution
must fall far short of what previously
existed and be of a different
character. Faced with this basic change, we and the
other nations concerned have had to
reassess our position and then discuss with
one another what each of us should do in
the light of such reassessment. There have
been almost continuous consultations at all
levels-military and civilian, political and
technical-on steps to be taken to meet the
changing situation. Over a period of time the
plans of each of us have been influenced and
shaped by what has been thought and
suggested by the others and by the contributions
each has felt itself able to make,
or to be prepared. to make in the future. Our
own starting point was and is that we are
a part of and are situated in the region.
Hence security, stability and progress for the
other nations in the region must also contribute
to the security of Australia We
cannot fail to be affected by what happens in
our neighbours' countries. What affects their
security affects our security. Again, if
economic development in the region is to occur at the pace required, and if the
stability needed for this is to be maintained,
the immediate economic support of great
nations outside the region, and the potential
military support of great nations outside the
region, will be needed.
Australia, the most industrially and technically
advanced nation in the region, surely
would not wish, in these circumstances, to
refrain from -helping the region in all ways.
We could not turn our hacks on our neighbours,
refuse to help provide forces for their
security, and wash our hands of the possible
consequences to them and to ourselves. Yet
there were obviously several possible courses
for us. One theoretical course was to withdraw
all our forces from Malaysia-
Singapore at the time that Britain's withdrawal
is completed; to withdraw into
Australia behind a sea frontier and turn our
backs completely on the region as regards
providing military assistance, except for a
willingness to assist in United Nations
action. We reject this utterly. It is contrary
to our historical actions in Korea, in Vietnam
and in the region of which I speak,
and it is contrary to our future interests.
Were we, with our potential, to do this we
could scarcely expect smaller countries in
the region to be encouraged to protect themselves
or larger countries outside the region
not to be affected in any future decision they
might have to make should the region be
endangered. For us, the question has never
been whether we should play a part
militarily, but how we should play that part.
A second possible course was to decide
to withdraw all our military forces, of all
arms, at the same time as Britain withdrew,
but to assure Malaysia-Singapore that we
retained an interest in their military
security, that we had not withdrawn to our
island Australia from which we would
never make a sally to assist them, but that
we would, if and when we judged it necessary,
be prepared to despatch military
forces to their shores to help them. This
course could well cast doubt on our
sincerity of purpose as far as Malaysia-
Singapore and other countries of the region
were concerned; and it had also obvious
military drawbacks.
It is much easier to despatch aircraft
from Australia to assist in another area of 
the region if Australian aircraft are already
situated on a base in that area, and operating
from it, and in possession of or provided
with all the complicated equipment
needed to service and maintain and guid. 2
such aircraft. It is much easier to despatch
ground forces to an area if, in that area,
there is a securedly held base and the
headquarters and command and signals and
supply complex is already set up and
operating and needing only expansion
instead of construction de novo. And of
course, it is much easier for a country
which is to be assisted to believe that it will
be assisted if forces from the country which
may provide such help are there and are
visible. We therefore, took the view that
while a capacity for swift additional
assistance should ' be maintained within
Australia, yet it was essential for some
forces, to ' be stationed within Malaysia-
Singapore itself. In so stationing them we
are doing not only what we believe right
but also what these countries want us to do.
Accordingly we are prepared to maintain
and are planning to maintain forces of all
arms in that area after the British withdrawal-
without setting any specific terminal
date.
The forces planned to be retained will
consist of 2 squadrons of Mirages, totalling
in all 42 aircraft, and stationed at Butterworth
in Malaya, except for one section
of 8 aircraft which will be stationed at
Tengah in Singapore. In addition, both
ourselves and the New Zealanders will each
maintain a naval ship in the area at all
times for purposes of protection and not
merely for purposes of training. Further,
we are planning to maintain, in conjunction
with New Zealand, a 2 battalion
organisation of ground troups of which the
Australian component excluding personnel
required for headquarters, cornmunications
and the Jungle Warfare Training School
in Malaya to which we shall contribute
will be approximately 1,200 men. These
troops, in accordance with the advice
tendered to us by our military advisers on
military grounds, and because of the considerable
financial savings involved will be
based at Singapore, although one company
will be detached in rotation to Butterworth
except on occasions when the whole force
is training either at the Jungle Warfare
School or elsewhere in Malaysia. It has. of course, already been accepted by all
concerned that for purposes of defence,
Malaysia and Singapore are indivisible.
Consequently, no matter in what part of*
the Peninsula ( including Singapore) our
forces are stationed, we regard them as
: being there in order to assist the security
and the stability of the whole of that
Peninsula. Now, Mr Speaker, having specified the
Australian Forces which we are prepared
to dispose in this way, I wish to indicate the
conditions under which they will be there
and the role which we envisage they will
fulfil. They will be stationed in t ' he area
under existing arrangements, the terms of
which are governed by our association with
the Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement.
Should that Agreement in the future cease
to be operative we would wish general
understandings rather -than specific treaty
obligations to be worked out with the countries
concerned and ourselves. Olur forces
will not, of course, be there or remain there
unless their presence continues to be
actively desired by -the governments of the
countries in which they are stationed. While
there, they are not intended for use, and
will not be used, for the maintenance of
internal civil law and order which is the
responsibility of the government concerned.
Their presence, and their military cooperation
with Malaysia and Singapore, are
not directed against any other country in
the region, and this we believe is well understood
and accepted. Indeed, * by helping to
strengthen the defences of one part of the
region it is hoped that -they will indirectly
contribute to the stability of the whole.
Their presence in Malaya and Singapore,
and their participation in training and military
exercises with Malaysian and Singaporean
troops will we believe have value in
helping to build the indigenous defence
capacity of both Malaysia and Singapore,
will -provide additional security while that
indigenous defence capacity is built up, and
will make it more possible for Malaysian
troops to be assigned to other parts of
Malaysia should -the Malaysian Government
so desire. They will. be available-
our troops-subject to the usual
requirement for the Australian Government's
prior consent for use against
externally promoted and inspired Comnmunist
infiltration and subversion of 
the kind which became familiar during the
Emergency and which is judged by our
military advisers to be the most likely form
of aggression in the area.
Our advice is that the greatest threat to
stability and security arises from the possibility
of insurgency in South East Asian
countries which could ultimately expose us
to threat by the spread of Communism in
an insecure and -unstable Asia. We have
seen insurgency associated with direct military
action in Vietnam and whilst the
decision to employ our forces is, as it
always has been, a matter to be determined
by the Australian Government at the time,
and in -the circumstances of the time, these
forces will be available to oppose any insurgency
which is externally promoted,
which is a threat to the security of the
region and which is -beyond the capacity
of the forces of Malaysia and Singapore to
handle. It is clear however that at some time in
the future it could be possible that a situation
might arise when the scale of such subversion
and infiltration from outside--or
some other organised threat to the region at
present unforeseen---could be such that
Australian resources alone would be insufficient
to support successfully the forces
of Malaysia and Singapore. If such a situation
should arise we would have to look to
the support of allies outside the region and
-the scale of Australia's continued effort
would in that case have to be decided in the
light of all the circumstances that then
prevail. What they would be we cannot now
know and we cannot therefore now make,
precise decisions. But we can, and
have decided, that we are -prepared to
dispose part of our forces in the manner
I have described. At the same time we shall
continue our efforts to help with the training
of local Malaysian and Singaporean forces
which we expect will be increased in size
and capacity, and to provide financial
assistance for defence aid aimed at assisting
Malaysia and Singapore to build up their
own defence capacity.
We have, to date, allotted some $ 41m
for the supply of equipment to the
Malaysian armed forces, the Royal
Malaysian Police, and the Singapore armed
forces-and we have allotted $ 4m for the
provision of specialist training courses in
Australia and for meeting part of the cost of Australian servicemen seconded to the
Malaysian armed forces. This programme
has been and is continuing in close consultation
with the Malaysian and Singapore
defence authorities.
Side by side with military measures to
promote regional defence and co-operation,
the Government has pursued and will
pursue active measures in other fieldsdiplomatic
and economic. The Australian
Government is itself in regular contact with
all the governments of the region of South
East Asia and with other governments with
a direct interest in the region, either through
bilateral dealings or by participating in the
work of international organisations. It has
been our endeavour to play a constructive
role in helping to ease tensions and to
reduce or eliminate causes of friction. We
have seen it as a positive task to help promote
political and economic conditions
which will allow the independent countries
of the region to proceed with their programmes
of national development in an
atmosphere of confidence.
The basis of security for the region is
weakened when there are divisions within
the region-divisions that threaten to get
out of hand and to lead to serious clashes.
Of course, there will be differences of
opinion between countries and interests will
not coincide on all matters but it is not an
impractical aim to try to have some assurance
that differences will not lead to armed
clash and that no country in the region need
fear for the security of its own borders.
Where differences exist within the region,
their settlement should be sought by peaceful
means and by peaceful means only,
and various ways of achieving this exist.
Some of them are directed at the removal
of the causes of disagreement, others are
directed at creating an atmosphere in
which solutions can be sought. One possibility
that has appealed to us as an aim
is the attainment of a non-aggression pact
or pacts whereby the countries of the region
would declare their intention of never resorting
to force against one another and of
respect for existing territorial boundaries.
I do not regard this as being the total
answer to the problems of regional security
and regional development, but it could be
a most useful and stabilising element in
a total approach. It is not capable of immediate
achievement. As in so many matters. 
we shall have to feel our way forward,
making progress as conditions permit. The
countries of the region, including Australia,
cannot force anything on one another, but
by trying to understand one another's
interests and aims and broadening our
co-operation with one another the conditions
for still closer co-operation will be
created. One of the difficulties at present disturbing
the region is the dispute between the
Philippines and Malaysia over Sabah. For
our part we respect the territorial integrity
of all the countries in the region within
their existing boundaries. And we believe
all governments in the region should do
the same. We recognise Malaysia as the
rightful successor to Britain in Sabah and
we believe that the people of Sabah have
already exercised the right of self determination.
We believe, too, that the Philippines
would not wish to prosecute its claim
by armed attack and indeed the former
Minister for External Affairs was assured
of this by the Government of the
Philippines. Bearing in mind that the use of Australian
forces is always a matter for decision
by the Australian Government-and that
that decision will be made in the light of
our judgment of all the circumstances at any
given time-we believe that the best contri-
12398/ 69-2 bution we can make to the peaceful settlement
of that dispute is by diplomatic means.
Mr Speaker, this statement has confined
itself, as I said it would, to the question
of what we are prepared to do in Malaysia-
Singapore after the end of 1971. It has
touched on the disposition of part of our
forces. Our military advisers have for some
time, knowing that we wished to provide
for the possibility of such disposition and
in the context of their new strategic assessment,
been working on plans for the future
composition and equipment of Australian
forces which will give us flexibility-a
capacity for home defence which will also
allow us to contribute in accordance with
our treaty agreements of SEATO and
ANZUS. This study is still proceeding.
But I commend to the House the
decisions here announced: That we are
-prepared to provide to the region in which
we live military -assistance for which
Malaysia and Singapore have asked-military
assistance visible to them-and an
assurance that both we and they share a
common purpose in being prepared to combat
that Communist inspired military subversion
which our advisers consider to pose
the major threat to the region. I present
the following paper:
Defence-Ministerial statement, 25 February
1969.
, Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. O. MuuAri at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



MOORABBIN LIBERAL PARTY BRANCH DINNER
TOWN HALL, MOORABBIN, VIC. V 28 ' FEBRUARY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Chairman, Mr Mayor, Mr Chipp, Distinguished Parliamentary
Colleagues, both Federal and State, and Ladies and Gentlemen
That is rather a hard introduction for me to live up to,
though at the beginning of this speech I would like to say that as long as
I am entrusted with the Prime Ministership of this country, I shall try to
live up to it, and I know I will be supported in that by such Members of
the Federal Parliament as your Member from Higinbotham in the past and
from Hotham in the future Don Chipp.
I came along tonight to have the opportunity to meet you.
I came along to have the opportunity to talk to you, most of you being
Liberals; the rest of you, undoubtedly, when you put your minds to it,
are going to become Liberals:'
I am touched and I think my wife is touched that so many
of you have come along tonight to see us, to hear us and to meet us.
Perhaps I should try to put before you some ideas of my own as to what
government is all about.
Every three years, one goes to the polls. Every three years
the television stations have proponents for this side or for that, and the
newspapers have people writing articles for this side or for that. The
public meetings to which nobody goes have people standing on platforms,
speaking for this side or for that, and occasionally when they do go to a
public meeting which is usually when a Prime Minister is there people
are trying to hit him on the head with a banner or to stop somebody hitting
him on the head with a banner.
This is just the outwa-rd show of what it is all about. What
really are the basic reasons for government? What do you really want to
get from the governments that you elect? What kind of advances do you
expect? What kind of Australia do you have in your minds not only for
yourselves, not mainly for yourselves, but for the children you have, and
in some cases, odd as it may seem because everybody here looks so young
the grandchildren you may have'?
I suppose and I do not put these in any order of priority but
just as they come to my mind that you would want to have in the nation of
Australia, a government which would try to see that every employable
person in Australia was employed, that there was no waste manpower,
that there was no person with skills and integrity and capacity who had to
sit at home and who was utnable to support his fa-mily because the economy
could not offer him work to do to further the country in which he li ved. 
-2
I say this-with some feeling because I do remember when
I was young-there was a time when there were many many people in
Australia who were willing to work hard, who had the skills to contribute
to the building of a nation, who had to sit at home because it was said
" There is no chance to employ you because we haven't got enough money
to do it. I think one of the basic things a nation wants is to ensure that
every man who can contribute to the advance of that nation is given the
opportunity to contribute to it, and is paid according to his merits,
according to his capacity and according to his contribution.
I believe you would want to see more than that, more than
the mere chance of employment being offered. I believe that you would
want to see and if you wouldn't, you ought to want to see that not
merely employment but the opportunity for advancement according to
the talents of an individual is provided in a nation such as this. And
I do suggest that this has been done.
I do suggest that in the period of time during which the
Liberal Party has been in office and during which great leaders of the
Liberal Party have led this country, leaders in whose steps I follow but
whose stature I do not yet pretend to attain to during that period of
time, people who are willing to work have had employment opportunities
never offered before. They have had the opportunity to develop their
talents and to move upwards in a way this nation had never offered
previously. And this is one of the things that government is all about.
But there are other new problems crowding in upon us,
because we are in a way an adolescent nation. We are half-way between
the nation that we were in 1939, a junior nation and certainly between
1900 and 1939 a junior nation, a child, as it were, of the Mother
Country and half-way between that and the mighty nation which we
may be, if we properly judge, in fifty or one hundred years' time. In
that sense we are, I say, adolescent between the child stage and
between the world leader stage.
One of the things that is going to decide how in 50,
100 years' tine this turns out, is what we do now concerning the
investment and the ownership and the control of the industries of
Australia and the development of Australia.
It is true that no developing nation such as ours can
possibly attain, in the time in which it ought to attain, greatness unless
there is from outside great capital investment. I look backc to the United
States of America, which grew as quickly as it did only because of a
great flow of investment from outside. I wonder what the situation of
the United States of America would be now if those investments, which
developed so greatly, had not had to be sold off by Great Britain in the
First World War, and in the Second World War, in order to enable her
to play a leading part in protecting the freedom of the world, If this
had not happened, the investments that were made in that country in
the 1880' s and the 1890' s and the 1900' s would have grown to what
proportion now? How much of the proceeds of those investment, if
they had not had to be sold off, would now be flowing to Great Britain? 
3-
I do not want to see indeed I will not see I do not want
to think of seeing in 50 or 60 or 100 years' time too much of the
proceeds of Australian raw materials, of Australian capacity, of
Australian initiative, flowing out of this country instead of remaining
in it. And yet, feeling that as deeply as I do, and kcnowing its
importance as I do, I also know that if we are to grow as quickly as
the world situation may require, if we are to bring into this country
the flow of migrants, the record flow of migrants this year, in order to
build our population as quickly as our future safety may require, then we
must have from overseas this capital investment.
So there is a balance, a steering of a course between
Scylla and Charybdis on one side, an absolute necessity, if we are to
grow as we must, for overseas capital investment on the other Bide
a requirement to see to the utmost of our capacity that such overseas
investment is married to an opportunity for Australian equity so that
our children shall participate in the growth that overseas investment
brings. This is another thing that government is all about. This is
another thing that people like Don Chipp and myself and the others that
you have elected are working at,. And before long, perhaps six weeks,
perhaps eight weeks, perhaps ten weeks, but before long, I believe that
we will have the chance to put before you a programme, a proposition
which will steer this course between these two in a sense, opposed,
desires. This is of the utmost importance for the future of this nation.
What else is government about? Well one thing, of course,
and this is, I think, the keystone and always has been of the Liberal
Party, is that we should seek to see that those who are old or ill or
aged or in some other way disadvantaged, or the victims of the slings
and arrows of outrageous fortune, should be helped by those who are
more affluent. I do not mean that those who are not prepared to work
should be supported by those who are. I do not mean that there should
not be a requirement for people to make effort in order to get some
achievement or in order to be able to live and support their families.
But I do mean that when there is some great misfortune that falls upon
the people in our community, then the rest of the community should
see that that misfortune is overcome, and that that man on whom
misfortune falls, and his family, should be succoured by the rest of
the community. I think that during the period we have been in government
during the last twelve or fourteen months some considerable steps
have been taken in this direction. And I am certain that in the months
to come before the endi of the year, even greater steps will be made in
this direction. I believe that in a year we will be able to make the steps
./ 4 
-4
which will show that-Poverty-which-is not poverty because of the fault of
an individual, will be-able to be banished from our midst. Also that
the fear of long illness, which-has already been removed by what we
have done and therefore is no longer a significant. subject, but that the
fear of the difficulty of family illness will be able to be removed from the
Consciousness of Australians.
These, with many other matters of this kind which I can't
go into but education is one are what government is all about. But,
basically, if these things are to develop in a nation, there is one other
item which ought not to be a transcendant matter but which, in a way,
I think is, to which government must direct its attention. That is
defending the capacity to do those things of which I have in shorthand
been speaking to you. Because it is of little use to have a policy on
investment, and it is of little use to have a policy on trying to overcome
illness and poverty, and it is of little use to have a policy to advance
education or to make better roads unless one can be sure that in the
years ahead the people of Australia will themselves be able to develop
that policy freely and without some invading power telling them how to do
it. And so, although it should not be significant, and so
although it takes so much of ow production, yet if we are to be able,
as independent people, to decide what we want to do in these other
matters, then the capacity to defend our right to be able to do it without
coercion is perhaps transcendant.
He re we are a little isolated, because here, as I said the
other night in the House, an era has ended. Great Britain has gone from
our part of the world. The United States may not and I say no more
than may not be as interested as she was. So we, and the closest
countries to us in the region of Asia in which we live, must co-operate
and we, as the greatest technological power in the region, as the most
advanced industrial power in the region, must try to help the region
economically. We must try to help it in the way of trade, and must be
prepared to put into defence hardware, and into the manpower for
defence services, more than any of us would want to put, were it not
that we have to do it in order to retain the right of free choice as to
how we are to run our country.
Well, we in the Government have indicated how we pr~ opose
to do this. We have indicated the means of co-operation with our
neighbours. We have indicated that Australians, should there be
difficulty in the regions to our North, should there be an incursion of
communism there which may eventually threaten us, we have indicated
that in that case Australians will be there. This is one of the things
that government is all about.
I grew up in a time, you know, when Hitler was rising to
power in Europe, and in a time when there were many voices raised
saying " Do not oppose this man. His ideas may be wrong. His racial
desire to exterminate all Jews may be wrong. He may say he is going to 
5
conquer other countries, but that is just rodomontade for internal
consumpt:. n. Do not let us worry about this. And so country after
country fell under the control of a ruthless and authoritative power.
This made, perhaps, some impression on me. Not the imminent, but
the possible future threat, is in our part of the world. And as long as
we are in government, we are going to do our best to see that this threat
wil~ l be able to be resisted by Australians should it become imminent.
These are some of the matters with which you are concerned
and with which I am concerned. Others are to ensure that there is a
chance for personal choice, that there is no direction as to what a man
should or should not do or where he should or should not work or where
he should or should not invest his savings.
Last week: in the Parliament, quite clearly, there came out
some basic significant difference between the Government, which I lead,
and the Opposition which seeks to become the Government. Because
there is black and white was spelt out what in 1949 so many of us came in
to fight against. There it was stated by the Opposition should we
become a government, we will tell insurance companies, which are the
depositaries of the savings of the people; we will tell banks which are
the depositaries of the savings of the people, where they must and where
they must not invest those savings. And if they wish to invest them
in some development which will bring them in 6 per cent, and we, a
Labor Government, think they should invest them in somL-thing else which
will bring them in 2 per cent, then we will make them invest where
we want them to invest.
We do not say that. We say there must be a personal
choice by a man as to the job he will take, and a personal choice by the
man as to the investments he will make, and a personal choice by
companies as to where they will invest for the benefit of the shareholders
in those companies. This perhaps has more significance for the
development of a country than may at first appear.
I suppose in a way it is unusual it must be unusual that
one party which has been in government in this country for the last
twenty years, which is about a third of the time that Australia has been
a nation. It started in 1901. It is now 1969 all right 70 years. For
the last 20 years out of 70, one government has been running this
country. I doubt if this could be matched in any other country in the
world. One would have thought that in this period of time, tiredness
would have crept in, that there would have been a clinging to shibboleths
of the past, that something new would not have been developed by a
party which had been so long in power. This isn't so.
We are looking now to examine and we have been
publicly examining the sacred cows which since 1901 have for so
long been unquestioned. Dare I mention things like Commonwealth/ 6 
6-
State relations, for-example,-and a number of other less controversial
subject$, all of which need to be looked at, and about none of which I
propose to enter into controversial discussion tonight.
This is not an indication of decadence; surely this is an
indication of a new approach. And may I suggest to you that it being
true that for 20 out of 70 years there has been this kind of government
in Australia, that the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Look at
what has happened in those 20 years. Look at the development that has
taken place. Look at the increase in population that has taken place.
Look at the increase in employment that has taken place. Look at the
future that has opened up for this nation in that period of time, If the
proof of the pudding is in the eating, then the pudding that has been baked
in the last 20 years is good for the nation, and if it is good for this nation,
it is good for the world.
Sir, I have only one other thing to say, because I have been
speaking to a great degree, of the past. We really haven't started yet.
We are 12 million people now. We will be 28 million people by the turn
of the century, some 31 years, and that in the life of a nation is just the
blinki~ ng of an eye. ( Tape changeover brief section missing)
These are the goals which are attainable before us. On
the progress which has been made towards them, on your judgment of
the progress which has been made, I believe that the philosophy which
has made possible that progress is the philosophy which will make possible
the attainment of those goals. That will be done, but it will only be done
if the people of Australia, of whom you are a cross section, agree with
us that the ways in which we seek to attain these goals are the right ways,
and believe that we are genuine in seeking to attain them. If you did not
believe both these things, I do not think that you would be here tonight.
The fact that you are here tonight is of immense encouragement to me,
to Don Chipp and to those who stand with me.
I thank you for coming. We draw encouragement from your
coming, and I believe that the work which so many of you do will be to
the great benefit of this rising nation of the world. 



STATEMENT ON
COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS
ARRANGEMENTS 1969-70 TO 1973-74
The present Commonwealth Aid Roads legislation will
expire on 30 June. Before the end of the current session of the
Commonwealth Parliament we therefore propose to seek legislative
authority for new arrangements to operate for the next five years.
Thxe isingarrangements provided for Commonwealth
Aid Road grants of $ 750 million for the five year period 1964-69.
This was $ 250 million, of 50 per cent, more than was provided for
the five year period before that. In addition, other Commonwealth
financial assistance to the States for roads purposes, such as the
" beef roads" schemes, amounted to $ 36 million during the five
years. The Commonwealth has long acknowledged a financial
obligation to contribute to the development of the Australian
roads system and is nowadays financing more than one-third of the
total amount spent annually on roads throughout Australia.
At the operational level, responsibility for the detailed
planning and carrying out of road works in the States has rested with
the States. Naturally we have become increasingly concerned with
the problem of achieving the best allocation of national resources.
between the building and upkeep of roads and other pressing demands
for developmental works. We want to ensure that the resources
made available for roads are applied in ways which will best serve
the nation's evolving road requirements.
Following the 1964 review of the Commonwealth Aid
Roads arrangements, we set up the Commonwealth Bureau of Roads
to undertake a thorough survey and appraisal of the existing roads
system and of foreseeable roads requirements.
Whilst considering what new arrangements we should
propose for financial assistance to the States for roads during the
next quinquennium we have been greatly assisted by the
information and advice the Bureau has furnished to us. The
Premier' s have already received copies of the Bureau's report. 
I feel sure that they too would have found it enlightening and
helpful. It would have been impossible for the Bureau to prepare
such a report without the extensive assistance it received from the
State authorities concerned with roads matters. We appreciate
their contribution and the way they have co-operated with the
Bureau. The Commonwealth Government ac. epts the Bureau's
assessment that, provided it is applied economically, expenditure on
roads at a rate considerably higher than at present could and should
be undertaken during the next five years. 4e recognise the high
returns, in terms of increased productivity and reduced
transportation costs, that can flow from well-directed investment
in this field. WVe are, therefore, prepared to increase very
considerably, under a new set of arrangements, the amount of
Commonwealth financial assistance to the States for roads purposes.
The new arrangements we have in mind aim to bring the distribution
of Commonwealth assistance as between the States more closely
into accord with relative needs for road expenditures, and to direct
this assistance more specifically than in the past to the development
of particular classes of roads that seem to us to have high
importance from a national standpoint. 
3.
We propose that Commonwealth assistance should be
provided specifically for
construction and reconstruction of arterial and sub-arterial
roads in urban areas;
construction and reconstruction of non-urban arterial
roads; construction, reconstruction and maintenance oi other
rural roads;
planning and research.
Under the existing arrangements the Commonwealth has
imposed a speciiic requirement that at least 10O% oi* the total Commonwealth
Aid Roads grant be spent on construction and maintenance oñ roads in rural
areas, other than highways, trunk roads and main roads.
Under the arrangements proposed the allocation of money
lor such roads will be the same amount of money as was received in 1968/ 69
plus an escalation of 5T% each year waich will be compounded.
Ta-us although the old formula oi 403% of the total grant
available has been abandoned the actual amounts available for alich roads
will increase in eaca year of the L'ive year period, and such roads will
rceceive an amount of $ P394. 55 million an increase of 9i 65 million on
the amount required to be spent on this class of road during the last
quinquennium. The proposed specific allocations for arterial and
sub-arterial roads in urban areas and for non-urban arterial roads will
be innovations. We consider that a big increase in construction and
reconstruction of arterial and sub-arterial roads in urban areas is needed
to help overcome the acute traf-iic problems of the larger cities. The
central place the non-urban arterial roads must have in the progressive
development of a more efficient highway system spanning the nation fully
warrants the provision of specific assistance for their development. The
allocatici fcr both these classes of arterial roads would, we propose, be
for construction and reconstruction only. 
The proposed all ocation for planning and research
reflects our view that considerably more resources should be directed
to these activities and tnat planning and researcn will pay handsome dividends
and permit us to plan and build more efficiently in the future.
We are therefore prepared to make the States a
" 1principal" Commonwealth grant for these purposes of 200 million
during the next five years.
Tiie method of dividing the total sum available between
the States has been adopted in order to approac more closely a pattern
of distribution in accord with relative needs for road expenditure.
We have felt unable to move abruptly from the formula
o. L-distribution which has been in use for the last five years to one
entirely in accord with economically evaluated needs as portrayed by
the Bureau of Roads because doing so would not pay sufficient regard
to the disruption of the existing pattern oi roads expenditure and the
operational and other problems that drastic, rapid, changes could
create f1or various States.
We iiave thereiore decided miat, for the next five years
and as a transitional arrangement, the distribution between tne 3States
should be primarily on the basis oi. giving equal weight to the distribution
under the existing legislation and the distribution indicated by the Bureau's
" scheduling programme". The " scheduling programme" is based upon an
estimate by the Bureau of Roads, made after consultation with the State road
authorities, of tae amount of road work capable oi yielding high economic
returns wiiich can be carried out during the next five years with the
resources likely to be available in that period.
We therefore propose that the sum of 40, 20J million
be distributed between the States on the basis recommended in the
minority report oi the Bureau. 
This distribution will produce the following results:
million
New South Wale 3.4
Victoria .2 54. 4
Queensland 2% 31. 6
South Australia 12
Western Australia
Tasmania 54.3D
Totaljj
E~ ven thouL; h this partly reflects the existing distribution we
recognise that it could create difficulties for some States. Because of this
the Commonwealth is prepared to provide special supplements to ensure that
no State receives over the next five years less than 52 per cent more than in
the present quinquennium. These supplements will be " phased out" t by the
end of the period. These special supplementary grants, which would be available
for expenditure on construction and maintenance of any type of road, would
total million and would be distributed in this way: million
South Australia J
Western Australia 42-. 8
Tasmania 2.25.
TogTether the principal and the supplementary grants would
amount to 252, 935 million: an increase of $ 5.32. million, or 67 per cent, 
on the grants for the present quinquennium. I will circulate a table showing
the distribution between States for each year of the next quinquennium.
Let me explain in greater detail our proposals for specific
allocations, within the sum of 203 million I mentioned, for urban and nonurban
arterial roads, other rural roads and planniny and research.
Urban arterial and sub-arterial roads are those falling within
Classes 6 and 7 defined by the Bureau of Roads in Appendix V to its report.
Non-urban arterial roads are those in Classes 1 and 2 and other rural roads
those in Classes 3, 4 and 5. These classes of roads are described in a
statement I will circulate.
Wie also propose that 1. 5 per cent of each State's share of the
203 million be specifically allocated for expenditure on planning and
research approved by the Commonwealth.
The differences be tween the total of each State's share of the
2) 3 million and the sum of the allocations for expenditure in that State on
" other rural roads" and planninx and rescarch comprise the specific allocations
for urban and non-urban arterial roads. The relative sizes of these
allocations in each State corresponds with the proportionate relationships
between them in the Bureau's " Scheduliny Programme".
Combining-the fig--ures for all States, the total allocations would
be as follows:-million
Construction, reconstruction
and maintenance of " other
rural" roads 39.. 55
Construction and reconstruction
of non-urban arterial roads 186.76 
7.
Construction and reconstruction
of urban arterial and subarterial
roads 69
Planning, and Research 18. 3
Total Principal Grant 1, 230. X).
As I mentioned earlier, urban arterial and sub-arterial roads
would be those falling within Classes 6 and 7 as defined by the Bureau; nonurban
arterial would be those within Classes 1 and 2; and other rural roads
those within Classes 3, 4 and 5. 1 add that, for this purpose, the
delineation between urban and non-urban areas will be mapde by defining as
urban areas those areas of capital cities designated by the Statistician as
Capital City Statistical Divisions and the urban areas of major provincial
cities having populations greater than 403, 03-0 at the last Census. The
Commonwealth will consult with the States re--arding the particular roads
that will be included in each of the main classes. 
8.
ych.-tbe. separate and specific allocations or
funds for the three-broad classifications are to be used for the class of
roads specified. The amounts to be provided are very large and we
recognise that, in exceptional circumstances, especially in the case of
construction of urban arterial and sub-arterial roads, a State might
encounter difficulty in using all of its annual allocation because of planning
or other delays. Provio ion will accordingly be made in the new
legislation to meet such problems, if they arise. Under the present
legislation, amounts of Commonwealth funds set aside by the States
during 4 year for expenditure on roads, have to be spent within six months
after the end of that year. We do not intend to insist on this in future,
and propose that on request by the States, the States may accumulate
funds within each class during the term of the new Commonwealth Aid
Roads Act, subject to the Commonwealth being satisfied that evely
effort had been made to spend the money available within six months
of the end of the year for which it was available The funds would
be held in respect of that class by the Commonwealth until required for
expenditure by the State. We are also prepared, in exceptional circumstances,
to allow limited transfers between the funds. In both cases it would
rest with the State concerned to seek the variation.
This brings me to the matching arrangements. Under
the existing legislation, each State has been required, if it was to qualify
for a specified part of the total grant, to spend an equivalent amount
from its own resources in excess of a base figure. For the next five
years, we propose that each State should increase its expenditure on
roads from its own resources at the same rate as the number of motor
vehicles on register in the State. The broad objective would be to ensure
that the State Governments' allocations for roads expenditure from their
own resources increased progressively. The proposed requirement
would not be an unduly onerous one certainly not in relation to the
proposed increase of 67 per cent in the Commonwealth's contribution. 
SThe arrangements I have outlined will, we believe,
enable roads development and maintenance to match the increase in
demand for roads and also achieve a significant reduction in backlog of
road works. It is obvious that there will be a significant and nationwide
improvement in standards. They are also designed to ensure the progressive
development of a national roads system along lines best designed to
serve our evolving road needs,
We face a huge and complex task and one that calls
for the closest co-operation between all the road authorities, both
Commonwealth and State. Through co-operation much can be done to
meet the problems in this field an6 develop an efficient roads system of
which all of us, as Australians, can be proud.
We also want to improve co-operation with the States
over the wider field of transportation generally. For this reason we
propose that studies be made in depth on a co-operative basis of all
aspects of transportation problems in Australia.
Let me crystallise the proposals in this way. The
arrangements we are proposing for the next quinquennium are likely
to ensure that the Commonwealth will be providing a substantially
increased share of the finance for expenditure on roads.
The proposed increase in our grants* will be
$ 502.05 million or 67 per cent. An increase of over half a billion
dollars is, we think, a very generous one and one that must considerably
improve the standard of roads in this country during the next five
years. 



C69 027
PRESS ! NTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR JOHN GORTON AT BRISBANE AIRPORT 3 MARCH 1969
Q.
PM: VQ PM:
PM:
~ Q. PM: Mr Prime Minister, this morning's bombing of the
Russian Embassy in Canberra. Can you tell us a little bit about
that and what happened?
i can't tell you about that. I left Canberra quite early
and I haven't had anything which T can significantly say about that
at alf. Mr Prime Minister, thejapanese document affair
which is going on at the moment. Do you feel the Austra~ an
Security Service should lose a littie bi t of its autonomy-and have
to answer to the Government?
No. The. Australian Security Service does answer to the
Government. Of course it answers to the Government. But this
appears to me to be an attempt to denigrate the Australian Security
Service by the Left Wing of the Australian Labor Party baase you
will notice that there is a whole series of questions by L-Et Wingers
on the Notice Paper Is there poison gas in the Security Service?
Did they follow somebody who came here from some other couriry..
questions of this kind, all without foundation. Now, they ask these
knowing that the policy of all governments since Chifley's time has
been neither to confirm nor to deny allegations that are made for
obvious reasons. If you say somebody was or wasn't wolking for
Security, they ask about somebody else, and then they ask about
somebody else, and negative information is j ust as good as positi ye,
so the policy is to say nothing in these matters. Bi. it does seem
to me to have overtones of an organised attemptby Left Wingers to
try and denigrate the Australian Security Service.
is it pure politicking at this stage?
1 believe it is.
When can we expect an election can you give us an idea?
No, but I am rot expecting one next month.
Mr Prime Minister, the alleged American Base near
Alice Springs has been denied by a lot of people in high places.
Would you care to comment on it now that it has apparently been proved
to exist there? / 2 fli 
PM
E 0u
0 4I
Oc0
r-CU
05 I would refer you to the comment made in the House
of Representatives by the Minister for Defence in reply to a question
by the Opposition. They asked him ab out military affairs and other
things, and the Minister for Defence said, quite properly, that there
must be information which is not to be publicly provided.
Mr Gorton, do you mind if I re-ask the question
concerning the Russian Embassy. How much damage was caused there
and what do you know abD ut it?
No. ' r
S 614IJ oz-
PM: Well, i know very little about it at all yet. I don't
know what damage was caused there or any of the circumstances
about it whatever. We left quite early this morning, and I have had
'
On the home front in Qiueensiand. Most of the State
is covered with drought at present. The Premier has said he has
made or is making approaches. to you for special drought aid or more
drought aid. What consideration have you given to this at this stage?
PM: I don't recollect any special approaches made by the
Premier. They will have come in and been passed on to the Treasurer,
but in detail I can't give you any answer to that.
Reverting to this bombing of the Russian Embassy
this morning. Any reports would have come in to my own Department,
but I have nothing at all except the most sketchy information. For
all I know it didn't even happen, I have just very sketchy
Q. Should it prove to be true, Sir, do you see this as
an upsurge of violence in this country?
PM: I would most certainly hope not. Should it proxe to
be true ai-d prove to be serious well, it is serious even if it is on
a minor scale, of course. It is thoroughly and utterly reprehensible:
I would certainly hope that there is not an upsurge of viblence in
this country from any quarter.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, another qu~ stion on the home
front. Qu. eensland has applied for special aid for the Central
Queensland Powerhouse, Is there anything you can tell us about this? 



FORL PRESS P. M. No. 23/ 1969
ROYAL VISIT 1969
The Commonwealth Director for the visit by Their
Royal Highnesses, The Duke and Duchess of Kent, in August 1969 is
Mr J. H. Scholtens, C. V. 0. Assistant Secretary, Ceremonial and
Hospitality Branch, Prime Minister's Department.
As announced on 30 December 1968, The Duke and
Duchess are expected to begin their visit in Canberra, from where thei
will travel to Port Moresby where The Duke will open the Third South
Pacific Games on Wednesday 13 August. Their Royal Highnesses will
also be visiting Darwin, the Northern Territory, South and Western
Australia. Details of the itinerary and the programme of
engagements will be announced as soon as possible.
Prime Minister's Department,
CANBERRA. 3 MARCH 1969 



OPENING OF NEW LIBERAL PARTY HEADQUARTE 9 N
Brisbane, Q'd. 3 MARCH 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chalk, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and
Gentlemen: This is, of course, not by any means the first visit I
have made to Queensland as Prime Minister. Indeed, I am not quite
sure, but I think it might be the fourth or fifth or something of that
kind. It is a very happy occasion for a visit, to be able to open this
building, although I understand it has been in use for a month.
Nevertheless, the mere fact that it is being officially opened now
does not render null and void anything that has been done during the
month that it wasn't officially open.
I find it pleasant to be here for two reasons one
because,: as I know you will all agree, this is an extremely attractive
and efficient building in which to do the work of a political party. The
other reason is that I believe it is, in a way, symbolic symbolic of
a political party which makes advances, which progresses, which
moves in this case from premises which are not sufficient to premises
which are sufficient. This is an indication, I believe, of that
progressiveness in the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party, a
progressiveness which I believe extends throughout the whole of
Australia as far as the Liberal Party is concerned.
We have, as you said, Sir, been in existence some
twenty-five years or so and in government for twenty. I think this is
a record which all those who have supported the Liberal Party, or
now support it, can look back on with pride and with a belief that the
work that they have done in the branches and in the electorates has
been reflected in great good and great progress accruing to the nation
of Australia. If you look back to the time when this party came in to
office, I think it is not unfair to say that at that time Australia was
relatively stagnant and the policies of the Government then looking
after Australia were relatively sterile. There were problems then
which called urgently to be overcome. And in the period since this
Government achieved office, I think they have been overcome.
At that stage one of the problems was how to provide
for full employment for all those willing and able to work in Australia,
and at that stage, those who were then the Government, and now seek
hopelessly to be the Government again, were saying that five per cent
of unemployment was a reasonable sort of level for a country to reach;
e. / 2 
-2
you couldn't expect it to go much lower. Yet we know that we hay e
gone much lower and that in Australia today there is no fear of
unemployment for any man able and willing and with skills to contribute.
There was little growth in Australia at that time, yet
since then the growth in this country, as your Chairman has said,
compares with the growth of any country in the world and exceeds the
growth of at least ninety-eight per cent of the countries of the world.
Now this doesn't mean there aren't still problems to be
overcome. Of course there are. Problems will always be with us.
But it does mean that the problems are new in kind because they are
problems stemming from the great growth that Australia has made,
from the great increases in its population, from the accretion in size
of its cities, from the calls from all quarters for capital for still
further development and for manpower to service that capital in still
further development. But at least these problems stemming from
growth, problems which I believe we are overcoming though in the
history of any nation there will always be problems are better than
the problems which stemmed from the sterility and stagnation of the
past. Here in this State is, I think, a magnificent e xample
of the growth of which I have been talking. A good deal of it is due
to the creation of a climate by the Liberal-Country Party Government,
the creation of a climate which encourages an individual, which
rewards an individual for the work and contribution he makes to the
nation in which he lives. Some of it is due to deliberate decisions on
the part of our Government; such decisions as, for example, to take
action to see that a city such as Townsville was given the potential for
growth. That city is now in a position where it is among the fastest
growing cities in Australia. Why? Because of deliberate decisions to
place there a university college ( soon to be a university if not one
already); a teachers' college; and, a large Army establishment. With
this comes all those who flow in to service the people in such
establishments, because another decision by the Government was the
establishment throughout the North of a network of roads, opening up
the country as it has not been opened up before and enabling the delivery
of cattle from the interior in a condition which previously was impossible.
And if you look through this great segment of Australia
now and bear in mind what is happening in Townsville, what is happening
in Weipa, what is happening in Gladstone, the growth of Mt. Isa, the
construction of the Fairbairn Dam and many other such developments,
you will see what is being contributed in this State to this State, but
more importantly than that, what is being contributed by this State to
the nation of Australia. You spoke, Sir, of nationalism, and I will never cease to
speak of it. This is an example of the kind of nationalism that I mean,
that these great developments in this part of Australia should be
recognised throughout the whole nation as contributions not to a pa rt
/ 3 
3-
of Australia but to the whole. The contributions made in Western
Australia by Mt. Tom Price and the other great developments must
be recognised as contributing not just to Western Australia but to the
nation as a whole, including Queensland, just as the oil strikes in Bass
Strait must so be considered by all parts of this nation. Because if
we are to attain the destiny that lies before us, which is within our
grasp, then we must, of course, give loyalty to the towns in which we
live, to the cities in which we live, to the areas of Australia in which
we live, but we must recognise that above and beyond and overriding
all that is a loyalty, a pride and a sense of achievement in whatever
good happens in any part of this great nation of ours.
This is not to be translated as chauvinism because it
isn't. But it is to be regarded as an opportunity given by Providence
to a new nation, to take a hard land, to wring from it a standard of
living better than that any other land has known, and to contribute to
the region in which we live unstinted assistance of all kinds so that
we from our national development assist our neighbours and thereby
assist ourselves. As a result, our children and grandchildren may
in time, as I believe they will, be able to say: " This new nation is
now significant in terms of numbers, in terms of industrial muscles,
in the councils of the world. This new nation has taken initiatives
to help its ill and aged and poor in a better and more effective way
than has been taken anywhere else in the world. This new nation has
not withdrawn inside itself but has been willing to share what has been
given to it by nature and what it has torn from nature by muscles and
by thought, to share that with its neighbours".
If this is so, then when that time comes there will be
no Australian who cannot in the world hold his head high and feel pride
in his heart. If that time comes, as I am sure it will, then the
Liberal Party and those of you who have worked for it so hard will
get a better reward than any other I can think of.
Sir, there is another great development project proposed
in Queensland now a suggestion that a gigantic power-house may be
built on the central Queensland coalfields, calling for some $ 200 million
in loan funds. This is an exciting suggestion. I can say no more about
it than that it was put up by Mr. Chalk and the Queensland Government
to us and that it requires close examination in order to determine the
extent of the coal deposits, the exact price at which electricity from
those deposits can be sold, the willingness of overseas firms to use
that power in order to develop the areas around that particular powerhouse,
and indeed a number of other feasibility studies. These are
the first steps. I have written to the Queensland Government and said
that we recommend and suggest that there should be a meeting of
officials from the Commonwealth and from Queensland so that these
matters may, as a first step, be thoroughly investigated. I can go
no further than that at this stage, and this meeting is entirely without
commitment. But should the scheme turn out to be -feasible, should it 
4
turn out to be what its proponents believe it might turn out to be, should
it do that, and should the resources be able to be found and made available,
then that will be one more great forward step I won't say for Queensland,
I'll say for Australia. I think, Sir, that is all I have to say. Indeed, I have
spoken longer than I was told to. So I will just conclude by thanking
you all for what you have done and for what I know you will do to keep
this nation moving, as it has been moving, only moving even faster in
the future. 



FOR PRESS: VISIT BY MR LESTER PEARSON
The Right Honourable Lester B. Pearson, cu-r ty
Chairman of the World Bank Commission on International Development
and former Prime Minister of Canada, will visit Australia in April
following discussions in a number of countries on matters concerning
economic development and aid.
Mr Pearson will arrive in Australia on Monday 14 April and
leave on Monday 21 April.
In Canberra he will be received by the Governor-General
and will call on the Prime Minister. He will also have discussions with
the Inter-Departmental Committee on Aid. On Wednesday 16 April, Mr
Pearson will attend a Cnbinet Luncheon
Ad ditional Background Mr Pearson will be coming primarily in connection with
the work of the Commission and, while in Canberra from 14 to 17
April, will be the guest of the Australian National University where he will
hold conversations with the Vice -Chancellor, members of the staff of
the University and other persons on problems related to the Commission' s
enquiry into international development. Mr Pearson has also agreed to
give a publk lecture at the University and to meet Press, radio and
television representatives at a press conference on Wednesday 16 April.
Mr Pearson will leave Canberra on Friday 18 April for
Melbourne, where he will call on Sir Robert Menzies and later be the
guest of the Australian Institute of International Affairs at luncheon.
Mr Pearson will spend the weekend privately and will
leave Sydney for Tokyo on Monday 21 April.
( A copy of a press release issued by the International
Development Commission in Ottawa and Washington
at noon on Tuesday 4 March 1969 is attached for background
information on the membership and work of the Commission)
Press Secretary,
Prime Minister'gs Office,
Canberra, A. C. T.
7 March 1969 



FOR PRESS 3i:
PM4L No. 24/ 1969
MRS. HOFFMANN'S STORY
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
In accordance with established practice, the
Government has consistently refused in Parliament either to confirm
or deny that Mrs Hoffmann did any work for ASLO at the Japanese
Embassy eight years ago.
Again, in accordance with that practice, I do not
propose either to confirm or deny the truth of Mrs Hoffmanns
published story. But the reported comments of Mr Whitlam and
Senator Murphy on the matter appear to me to be both hysterical
and ludicrous. If the story is not true, it can be disregarded. If
it is true, then it shows that as a result of attempted espionage and
bribery against Australia' s interests, Mrs Hoffmann engaged in
counter espionage in Australia' s interests.
Surely no Australian cculd object to that except
apparently Mr Whitlam and his Parliamentary colleagues of the Labor
Party. By their objections I think that they do Australia
a disservice. But this is neither to confirm wr deny Mrs Hoffmann's
story itself.
CANBERRA, 8 March 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 25/ 1969
CONGRATULATIONS TO THAI PRIME MINISTER
Following the appointment of Field Marshall
Thanom Kittikachorn as Prime Minister of Thailand over the
weekend, the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, asked the
Australian Ambassador in Bangkok to convey the following
message:-" It is with pleasure that I send you
my sincere congratulations on your appointment as the
first Prime Minister of Thailand under the new constitution,
I am confident that your appointment, following the holding
of democratic elections, will ensure the continued success
of your dedicated efforts to increase the security and
prosperity of Thailand and its people.
J. G. GORTON"
CANBERRA March 1969 



" AUSTRALIA 19
AUSTRALIAN FINANCE CONFERENCE SEMINAR
Wentworth Hotel, Sydney, N. S. W. MARCH 1969
k-J i APR 1969
SPEECH BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen:
I have really come here tonight because I believe that
the objectives of this Seminar and the calibre of the people who are
attending it are in both cases so great they should be recognised on a
national basis. There are a number of things which I think should be
said even though they may be already in your minds, and probably they
are or you would not have come together to discuss what our nation will
be like in 1980. This morning the Treasurer spoke to you of the progress
we have made over the last decade. Now let us think of the progress
possible for us between now and 1980. What sort of a nation could we
then be? What sort of a place in the world would we then fill? What
sort of a potential still remaining before us could we have achieved in
the decade from now onwards?
These are most significant questions, and ones to which
you, academics, public servants, businessmen and ordinary Australians
in every walk of life must direct their minds. This is a duty because..
how long ago 25 years or more ago great numbers of Australians and
men from Britain and the United States gave up their lives in order to
ensure that we and other nations who are like-minded would have a
foundation on which to build the fut ure, the foundation being the interplay
of freedom in a community and the use of freedom in a community.
And they secured that foundat ion, but a foundation is not a building.
Without a sure foundation, you cannot have an enduring
structure. But the foundation having been achieved, it is now necessary
and essential that the enduring structure should be built on it, for those
who gained the foundation and for those who will come after us. This,
I think, is the problem to which you are directing your minds. You cannot,
of course, provide a building without great effort and thought and
planning. And I presume that the effort and the thought and the planning,
and the directions they should take, are what were in your minds when
you decided you would have this seminar.
Well, what could Australia be like in 1980? Let us
look at the material possibilities. There has been, in the years just
recently past, an explosion in Australia. We have an opportunity which,
0 a 0. 0. 2 
-2
I think, no other nation in the world has within its grasp.
Not so many years ago we were thought to be poor in
natural resources, to be growers of wool, or growers of cattle or producers
of cricketers or tennis players, and not a nation with the immense
potential as such countries as the United States. Yet, in those few vealrs
we have and let me here quote what may be wearisome but nevcrtbele~ s
true s tatistics we have discovered oil fields which, by 1980 and before,
will be producing some two-thirds of the oil requirements of this nationl.
Yet we must discover more because will not be able indefinitely, from
the oil fields so far discovered, to produce all the requirements we need
in the future. Indeed, perhaps 11, 12 or 14 years will see the present
discoveries needing to be augmented.
We have discovered natural gas in almost unlimited
quantities, which will be fed in not onl y to the domestic hearths of this
country but into the industrial complexes, to provide a cheap and reliable
source of industrial energy. We have discovered iron ore in mountains,
and the amount of iron ore in them seems to be illimitable while the
quality appears to be unmatched from any other iron ore sources in the
world. And from these mineral sources alone, long before the period
to which you are looking, something like one billion dollars a year of
export income will be coming into this nation.
We have more than one-third of the world's kcnown
deposits of bauxite to make alumina and aluminium and I mean to make
alumina and eventually aluminium. Our bauxite output will rise from
about one million tons, which is our present output, to ten million tons
in 1972. Production of coal for export will double. Nickel discoveries
will add to the future that lies so close within our grasp, and we are
likely to be one of the great exporters of nickel in the world. And
phosphate, copper and other minerals which have been discovered will
follow. This is no credit to us. These things were there.
But they have been discovered adI vhb* Is been daae to expl oit their discovery
has been of some credit to us, th~ ough you, better than anyone else, will
know how much more can be done to make it of yet more credit and of
yet more benefit to the nation in which we live.
In addition to these natural resources, primary products
have added to our glimpses of thc future, so too has our industrial
secondary development. But therc. is very much more to be done.
What in 1980 will our numbers be? They will be
million, a 25 per cent increase on the numbers now living in Australia.
And what will an increase of 25 per cent in our population enable
Australia in 1980 to do?
It is up to you, and to us all, to see that the best possible
uses of these material opportunities are made. And then what would we
want our nation to do? 
-3
Well, I believe that you would want, and the Australians
of 1980 would want, to see that we took our place in the region in which
we live as the technological leader of that region, as the manufacturing
leader of that region. We would want to be a nation which provided
to the greatest extent possible commensurate with our own requirements,
technological assistance, aid of all kinds to the economies of the cou ntries
in our region and, if necessary, military assistance, to provide that
security without which economic progress is probably impossible. That
is why we have as one decision we have had to make indicated that
we were in and of the region in which we live, economically, politically
and militarily, and have provided an earnest and a visible instance that
Australia is there and is going to be there to the utmost of its capacity
now, and I believe in 1980, if we are wanted.
Further, we would want to see that such material
progress as comes to us from the great opportunities that are within our
grasp are spread more evenly amongst our population. I don't mean by
that, any more than the Treasurer meant this morning, that those who
contribute most because of their brain power or organising power or
luck or whatever it may be, should not be rewarded most. But I do say
that if there is great material prosperity to come to us, as I believe
there is, then it is wrong, it is unsupportable that there should be people
who are bankrupted by illress or who are unable in their old age, having
borne the heat and burden of the day, not to have a comfort able life, and
a life without worrying whether there is enough money to buy enough to
eat. This is one of the things that I believe we must be working for in
1980, indeed before that if possible.
But if this nation is to be what you men of vision, and
Australians of vision want it to be and believe they can make it, then
material prosperity is there, and the spreading of that material prosperity
is possible and the taking of our place in the world is possible. All these
things depend on the thought and the effort and the devotion and the
leadership of all of us in this room and of Australians outside who, as
I believe, have themselves perhaps an unformulated but certainly a
sincere vision of what they want the future of their country to be.
What is going to happen though if we do develop as
quickdy as we can, what is going to happen about the ownership of
Australia in 1980, and of the various enterprises in Australia in 1980?
There are two things which are in a sense conflicting,
which we must have in our minds when we think of this problem.
Firstly, it is utterly impossible for us as a nation to develop as quickly
as we must, to bring in as many immigrants as we must, to provide
the industrial muscles we must, unless there is a strong inflow of
overseas capital. From our own resources we cannot generate enough
to do all that we need to do in the time available.
And yet, that having been said, and that being
essential, it is also necessary to seek to see that by 1980, the inflow
of this capital which I reiterate still must come has not come in 4 
-4
such a way that there has not been an opportunity for Australians fully to
participate in the growth which this capital makes possible. There are
a number of facets of this problem, of this difficulty of steering between
Scylla and Charybdis. One of them, of course, concerns the question of
takeovers by overseas companies of Australian companies. As far as I
am concerned, if there is an inefficient Australian company which would
benefit from an infusion of capital, from an infusion of technological
know-how, from an infusion of management, then the provision of
per cent, or even 60 per cent of overseas capital to see that that
company became efficient would not in any be repugnant to me. But if
there were an efficient Australian company, if there were a company
which was operating with good management, good technological application,
and there sought to be a raid on that company by people with a long spoon
who could afford to buy it out at high prices and wait for growth to repay
in five, ten or twelve years' time without dividends in the meantime, then
I would not think it was in Australia's interests that, in such cases, that
should happen. There are questions of development capital required
which are quite different from what I have been speaking about so far.
We have made it clear, as a government, that we would like to see, that
we wish to see, that when development capital comes to Australia to
exploit some hitherto unused resource, to open up some area of the country,
that it would provide an opportunity for some Australian participation
on the ground floor. This is not a matter for legislation. This is not a
matter for something rigidly written in a bill. These are ad hoc decisions
in almost every case. But I think that if a government makes it clear that
it would like this to hap pen, then this does have an effect on responsible
overseas companies who are thinking about coming to this nation and
developing some area of it.
It does have and has had an effect on really responsible
overseas comp~ anies in their decisions as to the amount of equity they
would be prepared to offer and I use the word " offer" and I will later
say why I use the word " offer to Australians, I have no doubt that this
is already happening. Then there is the question of an overseas company which
having, to our benefit and don't let us ever forget this to our benefit
as well as to their own, having carried on some development which needs to
employ new funds for further development, and which seeks to raise a
proportion of those new funds inside this country ( and funds raised inside
this country are not overseas capital and I am speaking of funds raised on
fixed interest) Surely, again without legislation to bring down rigid rules
for this, surely it is not unreasonable to suggest that if such a company
wishes to raise fixed interest money inside Australia, whatever proportion
it may be of the total new funds proposed to be used, that the attitude of a
government towards an approach to raise such fixed interest capital
inside Australia 
would be influenced by the amount of equity such a company was prepared
to offer to Australian shareholders. This indeed is what we have been
saying. It may well be and I would not deny it that so much
capital is requized for the development of Australia and for new funds to
continue the development of Australia that the money markets of Australia
and the savings of Australians could not meet the requirements of x per
cent of equity. I think it likely that they could not. That is why I use
the word " Ioffer", because what is important to me is that in such cases
people are prepared to allow Australians to enter with equity such
companies if Australians are prepared to take up the offer. But if they
are not prepared to take it up, as for good reason they were not
prepared to take it up in Gove, or if because of existing economic
circumstances in any particular year it is thought that a float could not
be filled if it were offered, then at least the offer has been made.
If Australians cannot accept it, then that is no reason why the development
should not go on. But if we are thinking of Australia in 1980, it is as
well to have in mind not the legislative compulsions which people talk
about because there are so many different circumstances in any
particular application. But it is as well, I think, for those who come
to us from overseas to know that they won't be disadvantaged, but to
know what it is that Australians would like them to do and, one hopes, to
be prepared to enter into some kind of partnership with Australian s so
that ly 1980, we will be able to be in greater or lesser degree partners,
and not merely the subject of investment.
Of course we are partners in some degree already as
all of you will know, because we get 45 per cent of any profits that any
overseas company makes:' But nevertheless, that having been said, it
is still not unpleas ant to think that there would be a partnership, there
would be an opportunity for Australian participation, depending on the
circumstances and the amount and the economic climate at any particular
time. Well, we'll see by 1980 how it has worked out.
Then we want, I think, in the nation that we all
envisage, more than just these-material advantages. There must be
some conception of the philosophy that the nation wants to live by. I
would hope that by 1980 we would have been able to develop a system of
education which would provide us with the scientific graduates and the
technological people from the Colleges of Advanced Education and from
the universities who will be able to give industry what it wants. They
would be people who would be able, as technologists, to adi ance the
boundaries of knowledge in technology in industry, and be able as
technicians to understand those advances and to service the requirements
of the latest machines and techniques. / 6 
-6-
We would want to see that each individual in this
nation would have an opportunity to choose the type of work which fulfils
him, whatever it may be, whether it is producing television shows or
whether it is out on the new frontiers driving bulldozers. Whatever it
may be, in whatever field whether it is as a teacher, actor, politician
or businessman people should be able to choose the type of occupat ion
which will give them some belief that what they are doing is not only
being done for themselves but is also contributing to the nation of which
they are a part. To give this opportunity is part of what I mean by the
philosophy a nation lives by. And I would hope by then, and I believe by
then, there would be no individual in Australia whose first loyalty, whose
first thoughts, whose first devotion was not to the nation in which he lives,
rather than to the part of the nation in which he lives.
But much sooner than that, we will have what we have
only had before perhaps in wartime, and that is a sense of unity of purpose,
a sense of delight in victory, whether that victory occurs in the West or
in Bass Strait or at Weipa or in Gladstone or in Groote Eylandt. Each
individual will have a feeling of satisfaction at the efforts he or she is
contributing to the growth of a great nation. This is the nation of which
you have a vision, and which, God willing, could by 1980 be an example
to the rest of the nations of the world and which, after 1980, will continue
to unfold the story of Australia Unlimited. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 26, 1969
ECONOM. C CONSULTATiONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr dahn Gorton
The Government met with represeatatives of industry
and commerce in Canberra today.
Today's discussions were with national organisations
representing primiary industries, manufacturing industries and
commerce. The Government saw these organisations in three separate
groups, thereby continuing the practice begun in j-, My last year.
The talks were again worthwhile in providing Ministers
with an up-to-date appreciation of the views of those directly involved
in commerce and industry.
The series of economic consultations will continue
tomorrow when Ministers will hold separate discussions with representatives
of the Export Development Council, the Manufacturing Industries
Advisory Council and the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
Attached is a list of those taking part in today's talks.
CANBERRA, March 1969 
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED AT
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
MARCH 1969
Primary Industry Group
National Farmers' Union
of Australia President Mr F. J. McAvoy, CBE
Australian Primary Producers'
Union President Mr R. B. Gerrand
Australian Wool Growers' and
Graziers' Council President Mr B. A. Wright
Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation President Mr R. V. Sewell, OBE
Australian Wheat Growers'
Federation President Mr T. M. Saint
Australian Mining Industry
Council President Mr N. S. Kirby
Manufacturing Industry Group
Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia President Mr J. C. Campbell
Master Builders' Federation
of Australia President Mr R. A. O'Neill
Federal Chamber of Automotive Executive
Industries Member Mr N. W. Lawrance
Commercial Group
Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia President Mr B. R. Macklin
Australian Bankers' Association Chairman Mr C. H. Rennie
Australian Council of Retailers President Mr T. Luxton, DSO, MBE 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 27/ 1969
DROUGHT RELIEF FOR QUEENSLAND
Statem ent by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
In view of the recurrence of drought conditions
over a large area of Queensland, the Commonwealth is prepared
to participate with the State, on a for basis, in the provision
of finance for drought relief measures.
These measures will include:-
* Rail and road subsidies on the transport of fodder
and the movement of livestock to agistment:
* Carry-on finance for drought affected farmers
who are unable to obtain credit from normal
commercial sources:
* Grants to local authorities in rural areas to relieve
unemployment caused by drought.
Details of the arrangements will be determined in
the course of Commonwealth-State discussions to be held later
this week.
Background: The Commonwealth has already provided approximately
$ 15-1 million to Queensland since 1965-66 as re-imbursement to
that State for drought relief expenditure... and has also given
additional amounts totalling approximately $ 5 million for special
revenue assistance to offset the effects of drought on the State's
Revenue. CA NBERRA
11 March 1969 



9 196
FOR PRESS PM. No. 28/ 1969 ( A)
NEW ROADS AGREEMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
During the five years ending on 30 June this year, the
Commonwealth Government has provided $ 750 million towards the costs of
roads in the States. During the five years beginning on I July this year, the
Commonwealth Government proposes to provide 252 million towards
these costs. The increase will be over half a billion dollars or 67 per cent.
The money will be divided amongst the States by a new
formula. That is, the 200 million will first be divided according to
the existing formula of one-third-area, one -third-population, and one-thirdmotor
vehicle registration. The 200 million will then be divided by
the scheduling formula suggested by the Bureau of Roads Report. The
allocation for each State will be the mean of the two amounts so obtained.
This is because adopting the scheduling formula in toto
would unduly disrupt the existing pattern of road expenditure and because
of the operational and other problems that drastic, rapid change could
create. This proposal, if it were left at that, would lead to South
Australia, West Australia, and Tasmania receiving inadequate increases
during the next five years.
Therefore a further $ 52 million is to be provided for those
States, thus ensuring that no State will receive an increase less than
per cent of the amount received in the last five years.
As a result of these proposals, the amounts of money will
be divided amongst the various States as shown below
Last 5 years Proposal -for Increase
next 5 years millions
N. S. W. 209.1 380.4 171.3
Vic. 146.9 254.4 107.5
Q'ld 137.0 231. 6 94. 6
S. A. 86. 129. 43.0
W. A. 133.6 200.4 66.8
Tasmania 37.5 56. 25 18. 
The Commonwealth proposes that the money
from the principal grant available to each State will be
made in three sepDarate grants
One is to be spent on urban roads
One is to be spent on maintrunk and arterial roads
One is to be spent on other rural roads
Out of the basic grant to each State 1.5% is to be allocated
to planning and research.
The sum to be allotted to urban roads throughout
Australia, during the five year period, is to be '. W: 600.69 million.
This is for construction and reconstruction of
the cities' major traffic arteries, the throughways,
expressways, traffic interchanges, and other types of urban
road systems. It is not for ordinary street systems.
The sum to be allotted to national trunk roads
will be S186.76 million.
This is for the construction and reconstruction
of such roads. These are the roads outside the cities which
provide for long distance movement of traffic, the highways
that join the principal centres of population.
The sum to be allotted for " other rural roads"
will be ' 4394.55 million.
This is for construction, reconstruction and
maintenance of these roads.
The tables below show the amounts each State
will receive for each of the three categories of roads.
UIRBiLIi RO-DS
N. S. W. 201.01
Vic. 156. D1
Q'land 99.24 This is 50.06% o of the
9.3principal grant.
62.41
Tasmania 22.59
600.69 
3.
MAIN TRUNK ROADS
N'IS.. 1 1W.
Vic. Q I land
S . A.
W. A.
Tasmania 63.87 17.72 56.72 13.67 23.91 10. 87
186.76 This is 15.56% of the
principal grant.
QTHER RURAL ROJAIDS
S. S
Vic. Q I land
S . A.
N-. Tasmania 109.82 76.85 72.17 45.10 70.88 19.73
394.55 This is 32.88,, of the
principal grant.
of the basic grant to each State is to be allotted to
planning and research. This will total $ 10 million.
In addition to the allocations shown in the
-tables above, which deal only with the division of the
principal grant the States shown below will receive
supplementary grants as follows.
Millions
Sa.. W. A.
Tasmania $ 40.8
632.25
These supplementary grants can be spent on any category of
road according to the decisions of the State Government
receiving them.
Each State will be required to increase their expenditure
on roads from its own resources at a rate no less than the
rate of increase in motor vehicle registrations in that State.
CANBEJRRA 13 March 1969 



FOR PRES3: P. M. No. 29/ 19
SPECIAL NON-RECURRING REVENUE GRANT
At the meeting of the Premiers' Conference this
afternoon the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, announced that
the Commonwealth would make a special non-recurring revenue
grant of $ 12 million to the States.
This amount, allocated in the same proportions
as the distribution of the 1968-69 financial assistance grants,
would be ear-marked for the reduction of the 1968-69 budget
deficits of the States. It would not form part of the grants for the
purposes of calculating the 1969-70 financial assistance grants.
The distribution of the $ 12 million is shown in
the following table.-
N. S. W.
Vic.
Qid. S. A.
W. A.
Tas. Total. $ 000
3, 999
2,999 1,866 1, 350
1, 296
499
12,000
CANBERRA 13 March 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 30/ 1969
DROUGHT RELIEF FOR QUEENSLAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government announced on
11 March that, in view of the recurrence of drought conditions
over a large area of Queensland, the Commonwealth was
prepared to participate with the Queensland Government on a
for basis in the provision of finance for drought relief
measures. In Canberra today the Queensland Premier ( Mr.
Bjelke-Petersen) and the Treasurer ( Mr. Chalk) asked the
Commonwealth to consider giving assistance in the form of
direct grants if the present seasonal conditions in Queensland
continued after the end of this financial year;
I told the Premier and the Treasurer that the
Commonwealth Government would be prepared to consider this
matter in the light of the seasonal conditions at the time.
CA NBERRA
13 March 1969 



19-I
FOR PRESS: PM. 31/ 1969
MESSAGE FROM ISRAEL
Ovet the weekend, the Prime Minister received
the following message from Tel Aviv
" 1 WAS DEEPLY MOVED BY YOUR PERSONAL
EXPRESSION OF SYMPATHY WITH US IN THE DEATH
OF PRIME MINISTER LEVI ESHKOL, AND ON BEHALF
OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL AND IN MY OWN NAME
I THANK YOU FOR THE CONDOLENCES OF THE
GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA IN OUR
NATIONAL MOURNING.
YOUR HOMAGE TO THE MEMORY OF A
BELOVED LEADER HAS BROUGHT US MUCH COMFORT.
YIGAL ALLON.
ACTING PRIME MINISTER."
CANBERRA, 16 March 1969 



FOR PRESS: Issued from the office
of the Press Secretary.
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO U. S. AND CANADA
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, will leave
Australia on the night of Saturday 29 March for his talks with President
Nixon in Washington and Mr Trudeau in Ottawa.
The discussions in Washington will occupy Tuesday
( 1st) and Wednesday ( 2nd ApriA co~ mmencing a day later than originally
scheduled because of unavoidable changes in the President's programme.
In addition to his talks with the President, Mr
Gorton will call on the Vice-President and senior members of the
Administration. He will attend a dinner in his honour to be given by
the President at the White House on Tuesday evening.
Late Wednesday afternoon he will fly to Ottawa,,
ready for the talks with Mr Trudeau and his Cabinet on Thursday ( 3rd).
On Wednesday night he will be guest of honour at a dinner hosted by
Mr Trudeau, while on Thursday he will attend a special dinner given
by His Excellency the Governor-General of Canada. He will leave
Ottawa on Friday the 4th ( Good Friday).
Mrs Gorton will be accompanying the Prime
Minister. The delegation will include the Secretary of the Prime
Minister's Department, Mr C. L. Hewitt, the Secretary of the Department
of External Affairs, Sir James Plimsoll, and personal staff.
The Prime Minister and his party will be
travelling by commercial aircraft to San Francisco, and by Presidential
aircraft from San Francisco to Washington. The Prime Minister of
Canada is arranging air transport for Mr Gorton' s visit to Ottawa.
CANBERRA, 16 March 1969 



PA~ L11~ ME O9F F) C 9op 7
RESTR ICTED
OPENING OF THE HAROLD HOLT MEMORIAL
SWIMMING POOL
MALVERN, VIC. 16 MARCH 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Mayor, Sir Robert Menzies and Ladies and Gentlemen:
May I start by saying how glad I am to have the
opportunity to be here today in my own electorate in which I am
able to appear in all too infrequently, for reasons which I hope you
will understand and forgive.
Now this piece of paper in my hand was a speech
which was written to give to you, but it appears to be not much use
to me now because the Mayor has said practically everything that
was written in it except for that bit about bikinis: Consequently,
it has been necessary for me to make a few rough notes while
listening to the Mayor. So what I have to say to you will not be as
polished as it otherwise might be, but nevertheless it will be
sincerely meant and felt.
I should tell you, however, that very frequently on
0 these occasions I am so happy to reach the end of a speech perhaps
not as happy as those who listen to it: that I sometimes forget
whatever it is that I am supposed to be opening. I hope that won't
0 happen on this occasion, but if it should the thing is open nevertheless.
I am told when this happens, a gun is going to go off immediately
and people are going to dive off the towers but I am assured there
will be blank shells in the gun.
Now, Sir, we have here a fine example of local
government action. You mentioned, Sir, and brought back to my
mind, that too many people thought of local government as being
merely occupied with building roads or collecting rubbish, and it
did remind me of a true story.
Many years ago, the little daughter of some friends
of mine came back from a walk and said: " Yesterday when we
passed the corner there was a dead dog on it, but today when we
passed it had gone because Pranci Proconsul had taken it away.
Now, the child's parents were a little bemused at this because the
introduction of this matter with rather obscure religious overtones
was not at once clear to them. But it became clear the next day when
a little more investigation disclosed that Pranci Proconsul was in
fact the Prahran City Council. But we know, Sir, that they do far
more than that and this is visual evidence of it, because there is
history repeating itself. / 2 
-2
I was surprised at the number of hands that went up
for people who had been here when the first opening took place, an
opening of a pool which was then a trendsetter 42 years ago and which
is now being followed by a complex of pools which I am told are the
finest in the Southern Hemisphere and if anybody wants to deny that
I am quite prepared to have an argument about it. They really are
a magnificent complex and they retain the trees and general park-like
approach, which is so necessary for functions of this kind.
How proud the late Prime Minister, who represented
the city of Malvern in the electorate of Higgins in the Federal
Parliament with such distinction for so long, how proud he would be
to have his name associated with this facility provided for the people
of Malvern and how he would hope, as I hope, that whereas 42 years
ago there were few, comparatively few, who could swim, today there
is a generation, more and more of whom are able to swim. Partly,
I think in this instance, this has been due to the work of the lifesaving
association formed here and in other centres throughout Australia.
The nation should take this business of swimming very
seriously. We are blessed in every State with some of the best ocean
beaches in the world, and we have such swimming facilities as these
at rivers and lakes throughout our country. Yet far too often there are
reports of boating accidents in which somebody has been drowned
because they could not swim. This should not happen in a country
like Australia. Sir, I think in providing facilities such as this and
by the work citizens are putting into teaching children to swim in
facilities such as this, we are on the way to seeing that all can swim.
Harold Holt, that fine swimmer himself, a man who
kept fit and encouraged others to keep fit would be pleased to have
not only his name associated with this complex, but be delighted at
the possibilities which this complex opens up for fitness and for
teaching children to swim.
Sir, I think I have said all I would wish to say. I now
declare this swimming complex to be open. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 32/ 1969
U. S. ASTRONAUT TO BE CORAL SEA GUEST OF HONOUR
The Governments of Australia and the United States
announced today that R. Walter Cunningham, lunar module pilot of
Apollo 7, will be the official guest of honour during the Coral Sea
Commemoration ceremonies to take place in Australia from 3-11
May. Mrs. Cunningham will accompany the astron E'
Their itinerary will include Canberra, Bris ape/ ,7 0~
Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney. I969
They will visit Australia as the guests of the
Commonwealth Government and the Australian-American
Association. Details of the programme will be announced later.
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE:
Mr. Cunningham was born on 16 March 1932, at
Creston, Iowa. Reared in Venice, California, he received a
Bachelor of Arts Degree in Physics from the University of
California at Los Angeles ( UCLA) in 1960 and a Master of Arts
Degree in Physics in 1961 from that same University.
Cunningham joined the United States Navy in 1951
and entered flight training in 1952. He was assigned to a Marine
squadron in 1953 and remains a Marine reservist.
Prior to his selection as an astronaut, Cunningham
was with the Rand Corporation where he worked as a research
scientist. He performed error analysis and feasibility studies of
defence against submarine -launched ballistic missiles and problems
of the earth's magnetosphere. His later work at UCLA was the
developing, testing, and analysing results of a triaxial search
coil magnetometer which was flown aboard the first NASA Orbiting
Geophysical Observatory satellite.
Cunningham was one of the 14 astronauts selected
by NASA in October 1963.
He is married to the former Lo Ella Irby of Norwalk,
California. The Cunninghams have two children: Brian, born 12
September 1960; and Kimberly born 12 February 1963.
CANBERRA 27 March 1969 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
AID TO INDONESI
( Ministerial Statement 1.
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 27 March 1969]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-I wish to inform the House
that the Government has dccided to increase
its aid to Indonesia from the $ 12.7m which
is provided this financial year to $ 15m in
1969-70. In addition it has been decided to
commit in advance a total of $ 4m to finance
economic development projects up to an
expenditure of $ 2m in each of the years
1970-71 and 1971-72. The Government
has made this decision at this time in
advance of the Budget for 1969-70 because
Indonesia is still faced with very serious
and highly complicated problems in its
efforts to regain economic stability. The
decision will serve to emphasise once again
the great importance the Government
attaches to helping its closest and largest
neighbours to achieve a proper and adequate
rate of economic growth.
The $ 15m will be used largely to continue
an aid programme of the same kind as has
been established in 1967-68 and 1968-69.
Although I am not able to give specific
details of the programme for 1969-70 until further discussions have been held with the
Indonesian Government I can say that the
funds are intended to be used for programmes
basically the same as those undertaken
in the last 2 years-that is, for
balance of payments support, imports of
commodities, economic development projects
and technical assistance including
offers of training awards in Australia. I
might add that other donor countries are
also making special efforts to assist the
continued rehabilitation and development of
the Indonesian economy. The United States
of America, the Netherlands, Britain and
Belgium have between them so far pledged
approximately $ US181m as aid to Indonesia
in 1969. These pledges are being made
towards meeting Indonesia's requirement
for foreign aid in 1969, which has been
estimated at $ US500m. I present the following
paper:
Aid to Indonesia-Ministerial statement, 27
March 1969
and move:
That the House take note of the paper.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MuRRAY at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra
14098/ 69 



VISIT TO THE US AND
CANADI9
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
DEPARTURE. PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY TH
PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN, GORTON, AT-M IW%
AIRPORT 29 MARCH 1969
PRIME MINISTER Would you like me to read out the messages we have
sent to the United States and Mrs Eisenhower one was a personal
tribute sent to President Nixon
Q. Could you read the personal tribute to Eisenhower that
you sent to President Nixon?
PM: This was sent by us to President Nixon:
" TODAY ALL AUSTRALIANS ARE SHARING WITH
YOU AND WITH THE AMERICAN PEOPLE A DEEP SENSE OF
GRIEF AT THE DEATH OF GENERAL EISENHOWER.
" WE MOURN HIM AS A LEADER OF MEN WHO
SERVED HIS COUNTRY AS PRESIDENT WITH DEVOTION AND
HONOUR. WE MOURN HIM AS A LEADER IN THE FIGHT FOR
THE FREEDOM OF NATIONS. HE LED THE CRUSADE IN
EUROPE AND BORE THE AWESOME BURDEN OF SUPREME
COMMANDER IN WORLD WAR II WITH COURAGE, SKILL AND
THE HIGHEST QUALITIES OF LEADERSHIP. HE ACCOMPI1SHED
A GREAT VICTORY FOR THE FORCES OF ENLIGHTENMENT
AND HUMAN DIGNITY IN THE WORLD.
" HE RESPONDED TO HIS COUNTRY'S SUMMONS TO
THE HIGHEST OFFICE IN THE LAND WHEN OTHER MEN
MIGHT HAVE SAID ' I HAVE DONE ENOUGH'. AND AS
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, HE LED THE MOST
POWERFUL OF THE FREE PEOPLES OF THE WORLD AT A
CRUCIAL TIME IN WORLD HISTORY, AFTERWARDS HE
CONTINUED TO DEVOTE HIS GREAT HUMAN RESOURCES TO
THE ISSUES OF HIS TIME.
" AUSTRALIANS, AS DO PEOPLE THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD, SALUTE HIS ACHIEVEMENTS AND MOURN HIS
PASSING.
That is the message thmt we have sent. ,2 
-2-
Q. W-har-are-the iain-twpics tharyou. wil1he discussing
when you-meet-members -of-the Administration?
PM: Well now, of course, I will not be able to have
discussions with the President in the way it was planned that we
should have them. But I will still be having talks with the Secretary
of State and with the Secretary of Defence, and I imagine though
this is not yet quite clear with the Secretary of the Treasury.
I wil also be talking to some Presidential aides Mr Kissinger,
for example, and this, I think, will be a most useful preliminary
exercise, though I am sorry that the high level talks will not now
be able to take place. These will be initial talks, and I think they
will be of value for the time when, as I hope in May or June
depending on the President's agenda we can have thle talks
which were scheduled-to have been held this time. Then, of course,
the Canadian visit will go on as planned.
Q. Will you be seeking an assurance that the Americans
will remain in South-East Asia after the Vietnam war ends?
PM: I will be seeking to discover the current thining
of the American Administration in regard to that rather than
seeking assurances or otherwise. I want to try to discover the
actual thinking at the moment.
Q. Will you be discussing the use of nuclear weapons
at Gape Keraudren?
PM: L Well, we never intended to use a nuclear weapon at
Gape Keraudren in Western Aus tr alia. What we had thought would
happen there would be that the Sentinel Mining Company, which hias
iron ore leases, would join with us our own Atomic En ergy
Commission and the United States Atomic Energy Commission in a
feasibility study for the blasting out of a crater which could be
turnedI into a harbour. This is not nuclear weapons in any shape
or form. But it looks as if the Sentinel Mining Company now has
doubts as to the economit feasibility of using such a harbour, having
re-examined the grade of ore and various things of this kind. So
this particular project is probably and I say probably unlikely
to go ahead, but both our own Atomic Energy Commission and the
United States Atomic Energy Commission will be examining whether
there is somewhere on our West or North-West coast a situation
where a harbour is wanted and where this kind of experiment can
take place.
Q. Do you feel that the closenesofte between
Australia and America depends on your/ reiationship with Mr Nixon
the kind of personal friendship you strike up with him?
PM: Not really. But I think the ties between Australia and
the United States probably transcend personal relationships of any
two individuals. I think they can be reinforced considerably if two
individuals, one a Prime Minister and one a President are, as it
were, on the same wavelength, understand each other and trust
each other. I believe this applies to the United States or, for that
matter, to the Uniited Kingdom. / 3 
-3-
Q. "' DQYWi-tinkthaLxreC&amp; atacks on your personal life
and your lead~ ership will affect your standing in the United States?
PM: I don't think they will at all. There have been two
I think they are part of a campaign. One seemed to be concerned
with some story about I don't want to use names, but I suppose
I have to Miss Minelli, whom I have met once in my life, and who,
in accord with her mother and sister and everybody else concerned,
threw that out the window. The other was an attack which I don't
really thoroughly understand even to this day. It seemed to be
concerned with whether one w. ght to go and visit someone at one
o'clock or half past one, if one is asked to or not. Since there was
no suggestion from even the self -styled accuser, of impropriety, I
am not quite sure what it is all about,
Q. Your talks with Mr Trudeau, of course, will go ahead
as scheduled. Can you elaborate a little on this?
PM: Well, only to this extent that the Canadians have
indicated or Mr Trudeau when I met him in London indicated that
he felt that he and his country should have a closer relationship
with the Pacific area than they had had before. Now, I wculd like
to explore that to see what part of the Pacific area that he is
specifically interested in, to see what form his interest takes.
do notice that he has said something concerning wheat sales, and this,
of course, is of great importance to us in Australia too. These
matters, I think, could be of significance to both our countries
but I only say " could be of significance". They are worth exploring.
Q. I take it, Mr Gorton, there was no chance of having
earlier talks with Mr Nixon?
PM: Oh no. No. He has been touring Europe, and indeed,
originally, I was to be the first political head of state that he was to
talk with or rather head of government that he was to talk with.
Mr Trudeau has spoken to him, but there was no chance of anyb~ ody
really eomi~ g to the United States before. Now, we will have to
fit in the next visit as best we can, and I think from messages I
have received, both President Nixon and myself would like this to be
done as soon as is possible for him and his itinerary and me and
my itinerary, although I would bend mine quite a lot to fit in with
his.
Q. Sir, does this mean, withthe period of mourning
extending to five days , that you are prepared to extend ywur visit to
the United States and Ca n ada
PM: No. I think that the period of mourning for General
Eisenhower would be likely to be more than five days andi I haven't
any intention at the moment of extending the visit. Rather from the
messages that one received, one would be over there examining with
the relevant people whether the meeting that was scheduledto take / 4 
-4-
PM ( Contd.) place this time with the President not with the other Secretaries
but with the President could-possihbly take place in May or early
June, which I would hope.
Q. Sir, do you feel, being one of the first political heads
of state to have talks with President Nixon , that you will play a part
in formulating his ideas as far as South -East Asia is concerned
influencing him before his ideas become hardened, seeing that he
has just come into office?
PM: I would hope, as in the case of talks between reasonable
people, that suggestions could be made by me which would be taken
into consideration by him, and suggestions could be made by him
which would be taken into consideration by me.
Q. Mr Gorton, if I can ask a question on the security
of South-East Asia, do you feel that the recent fighting between Russia
and China has lessened the threat of China to the area?
PM: I think that is a matter of sufficiently high policy and
a matter so impossible to define in any precise way that I couldn't
probably answer that question. There does appear and I say
" tappear" for some time to have been some tension between Russia
and China in the border areas between the two of them, and it has
flared up recently. But what effect that has on the policies of either
country I don't believe we have properly assessed as yet.
Mr Eggleton I think the Prime Minister has an announcement of
special interest to Sydney to make, so would the local Members
concerned come and sit near the PM?
PM: This is an announcemnent which is perhaps of most
interest to people in the Sydney area, and particularly in the area
around Mascot. I have flanking me the three Federal Members who
are concerned with it. They are conccrned with it, if I may say so,
to my cost, because they have taken up so much of my time about
it, because their constituents are concerned with it, and it deals
with the situation of an alternate airport to the one we are sitting
in at the present moment. Now, I will read it to you This is
as a result of an examira tion by the Department of Civil Aviation
and report to myself and it concerns the Towra Point, which is
just across the bay and which has been considered as a possible
site for an alternate airport. I have been in touch with the Department
of Civil Aviation and the Minister of Civil Aviation on this matter.
This is the gist of the announcement 
-4-
PM ( Contd.) place this time with the President not with the other Secretaries
but with the President coulcposily take place in May or early
June, which I would hope.
Q. Sir, do you feel, being one of the first political heads
of state to have talks with President Nixon , that you will play a part
in formulating his ideas as far as South -East Asia is concerned
influencing him before his ideas become hardened, seeing that he
has just come into office?
PM: I would~ hope, as in the case of talks between reasonable
people, that suggestions could be made by me which would be taken
into consideration by him, and suggestions could be made by him
which would be taken into consideration by me.
Q. Mr Gorton, if I can ask a question on the security
of South-East Asia, do you feel that the recent fighting between Russia
and China has lessened the threat of China to the area?
PM: I think that is a matter of sufficiently high policy and
a matter so impossible to define in any precise way that 1 couldn't
probably answer that question. There does appear and I say
" 1appear" for some time to have been some tension between Russia
and China in the border areas between the two of them, and it has
flared up recently. But what effect that has on the policies of either
country I don't believe we have properly assessed as yet.
Mr Eggleton I think the Prime Minister has an announcement of
special interest to Sydney to make, so would the local Members
concerned come and sit near the PM?
PM: This is an announcement which is perhaps of most
interest to people in the Sydney area, and particularly in the area
around Mascot. I have flanking me the three Federal Members who
are concerned with it. They are conccrned with it, if 1 may say so,
to my cost, because they have taken up so much of my time about
it, because their constituents are concerned with it, and it deals
with the situation of an alt e~ rnate airport to the one we are sitting
in at the present moment. Now, I will read it to you This is
as a result of an examina tion by the Department of Civil Aviation
and report to myself and it concerns the Towra Point, which is
just across the bay and which has been considered as a possible
site for an alternate airport. I have been in touch with the Department
of Civil Aviation and the Minister of Civil Aviation on this matter.
This is the gist of the announcement 
PM ( Contd,); " The community noise problem involved in
-the operation. of jet aircraft in the Towra Point area
would be so severe, that the Minister for Civil Aviation
has advised me that he has decided to direct the
Interdepartmental Committee, convened to consider
the future airport needs of Sydney, to exclude this
site from its consideration,
" While accepting that the advantages which
modern aviation brings to the community as a whole are
considerable, I nevertheless feel that our airport
planning must avoid the imposition of an unacceptable
noise burden on any particular section of the community.
This I believe would be the situation if we went ahead
with jet airport development at Towra Point,
Accordingly I have told the Minister for Civil Aviation
that I concur in his decision not to give further
consideration to possible future jet operations at
Towra Point.
This is of interest, as I say, to people living around this area
and I take this opportunity with my colleagues, who have pressed
it on me so strongly, to make this announcement.
Thank you. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 33/ 1969
PRIME MINISTER'S MESSAGLES ON THE DEATH OF
GENERAL EISENHOWER,
The Prime Minister, N'fr ( aorton, this morning sent
the following messages-
To Mrs Eisenhower " WE DEEPLY REGRET AND HAVE BEEN SADDENED
BY THE NEWS OF YOUR HUSBAND'S DEATH. GENERAL
EISENHOWER IN HIS LIFETIME RECEIVED THE RESPECT
AND ADMIRATION OF ALL AUSTRALIANS, AS THE WAR-TIME
LEADER OF OUR ALLIED FORCES AND, LATER, AS THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. HIS, GREAT
ACHIEVEMENTS AND HIS DEDICATED SERVICE TO HIS
COUNTRYMEN AND TO THE WORLD ARE MARKED IN OUR
HISTORY AND WILL REMAIN LONG IN OUR MEMORY.
ON BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN * GOVERNMENT
AND THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, I EXTEND TO YOU AND
YOUR FAMILY OUR DEEP SYMT\ PATHY.
To President Nixon "? TODAY ALL AUSTRALiANS ARE SHARING WITH
YOU AND WITH THE AMERICAN PEOPLE A DEEP SENSE OF
GRIEF AT THE DEATH OF GENERAL EISENHOWER,
WE MOURN HIM AS A LEADER OF MEN WHO
SERVED HIS COUNTRY AS PRESIDENT WITH DEVOTION AND
HONOUR. WE MOURN HIM AS A LEADER IN THE FIGHT FOR
THE FREEDOM OF NATIONS. HE LED THE CRUSADE IN
EUROPE AND BORE THE AWESOME BURDEN OF SUPREME
COMMANDER IN WORLD WAR HI WITH COURAGE, SKILL AND
THE HIGHEST QUALITIES OF LEADERSHIP. HE ACCOMPLISHED
A GREAT VICTORY FOR THE FORCES OF ENLIGHTENMENT AND
HUMAN DIGNITY IN THE WORLD.
HE RESPONDED TO HIS COUNTRY'S SUMMONS TO
THE HIGHEST OFFICE IN THE LAND WHE? 4 OTHER MEN MIGHT
HAVE SAID ' I HAVE DONE ENOUGH'. AND AS PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES, HE LED THE MOST POWERFUL OF THE
FREE PEOPLES OF THE WORLD AT A CRUCIAL TIME IN WORLD
HISTORY. AFTERWARDS HE CONTINUED TO DEVOTE HIS
GREAT HUMAN RESOURCES TO THE ISSUES OF HIS TIME.
AUSTRALIANS, AS DO PEOPLE THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD, SALUTE HIS ACHIEVEMENTS AND MOURN HIS PASSING." i
CANBERRA, March 1969 



l~ 4', 9
FOR PRE.&amp; S:_ jqA3 PM. No. 34/ 1969
PRIME MINISTER TO ATTJEND EISENHOWER
FUNERAL
The Prime Minister, Mr Gorton, will represent Australia
at the service in Washiington on Monday fAr the late President
Eisenhower. Mr and Mrs Gorton will leave for the United States as
scheduled late this afternoon.
While in Washington, Mr Gorton will be received by the
President, but his official talks with Mr Nixon have been postponed.
It is expected that the Prime Minister will meet senior members of
the Administration. He will then go on to Ottawa as planned for
his talks with the Canadian Prime Minister, Mr Trudeau, on
Thursday. The discussions with President Nixon will be rescheduled
for the earliest mutually convenient date possible.
CANBERRA, 29 March 1969 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 35, 1969
TOWRA POINT RULED OUT AS AIRPORT SITE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The community noise problem involved in the
operation of jet aircraft in the Towra Point area would be so severe,
that the Minister for Civil Aviation has advised me that he has
decided to direct the Interdepartmental Committee, convened to
consider the future airport needs of Sydney, to exclude this site
from its consideration. While accepting that the advantages which modern
aviation brings to the community as a whole are considerable, I
nevertheless feel that our airport planning must avoid the imposition
of an unacceptable noise burden on any particular section of the
community. This I believe would be the situation if we went ahead
with jet airport development at Towra Point. Accordingly, I have
told the Minister for Civil Aviation that I concur in his decision not
to give further consideration to possible future jet operations at
Towra Point.
CANBERRA, 29 March 1969 



VISIT TO THE U. S. AND
CANADA 1969 718
CANADA
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, ~ I
MR. JOHN GORTON, ON ARRIVAL IN OTTAWA
2 APRIL 1969
My wife and I are delighted to be in Canada. I much
appreciate this opportunity again to meet your Prime Minister, Mr.
Trudeau, so soon after our talks in London.
I look forward to our discussions here in Ottawa, and
I am sure they will be of benefit to both our countries. I shall not,
in a statement on arrival and before I have talked with Mr. Trudeau,
presume to detail what we are likely to discuss.
But some of the subjects of common concern are obvious.
Canada and Australia have an interest in world peace and security so
that all nations, no matter how small, can be free and live without
fear. As Pacific nations, we are both concerned to see
stability and progress in Asia, with genuinely independent, economically
developing, self-reliant states, and we in Australia have played and
will play an active role in regional co-operation.
Another field for discussion could be the development
of further contacts between Canada and Australia. The more we visit
one another the better. I am very happy to accept Mr. Trudeau's
invitation to visit Canada, and he and other Canadian Ministers will
always be welcome in Australia. In fact, we are looking forward to a
visit very soon from the Canadian Minister of Trade and Commerce,
Mr. Pepin. Our two countries need to keep in touch and work together
whenever we can. Although many miles separate Canada and Australia, we
both have much in common. We both have a Pacific coastline and are
both developing an industrialised society in a harsh environment. We
both depend heavily on primary products to earn foreign exchange and
are therefore greatly interested in freedom of access to markets for
primary products and in realising payable prices for such products.
And we both have large scale immigration programmes. / 2 
-2-
Our friendship is of long-standing and we share a common
purpose in many international activities. We have been comrades-inarms
in two world wars, in the fighting in Korea, and we have taken
part together in U. N. peace-keeping operations.
We were proud to take part in your centennial
celebrations at Expo ' 67 in Montreal and we acknowledge the imagination
and vision that made it such a success.
As Pacific and Commonwealth partners, we should build
an even closer relationship in the future. I am sure we will. 



VISIT TO THE U. S.
AND CANADA 1969
CANADAV 4Y96
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN -GORTON, AT THE NATIONAL PRESS CLUB,
OTTAWA 3 APRIL 1969
PM. It is pleasant to be visiting Canada, and I hope an augury
of the visits backwards and forwards by ministers between our two
countries, both of which are so interested in the Pacific. This is an
area where, I think, we have an opportunity for greater joint action in
the future than we may have had in the past.
I would like publicly to announce that there will be an
Australian parliamentary delegation visiting Canada this year. It will
be lead by one of our ministers and will have six other members, three
of whom will be from the government parties. The details of the
programme haven't been worked out, but the visit will occur during
the Australian winter recess which is round about June, and I think will
be of immense advantage to our own members of parliament. We are
grateful that the opportunity for this visit has been afforded to us, as
I am grateful for. the opportunity for my owna short visit. And that is
all I think I wish to say by way of an opening comment. It's over to you.
Q. Did you discuss the price of wheat with Mr. Pepin and
the Prime Minister, and what were the upshots of these discussions?
PM. Well, we mentioned the subject of wheat, and as you
know, it is suggested that Australia is doing something about freights
which is enabling it to sell wheat at lower than the I. G. A. arrangements.
This, on the other hand, in my view, has not by any means been
demonstrated, although as a result of the claim which, as I say has
not been demonstrated to our satisfaction, both the United States and
Canada have felt it necessary to drop the price at which they are sellibg
wheat. But the upshot of the discussion, I think, can be put this way:
that these things ought to be clearly demonstrated and shown to be
matters of fact, and there's a technical meeting going on in Washington
today and tomorrow or tomorrow and the next day, I'm not sure
which but more important than that is the clear agreement between
all our three countries that it is essential that the International Grains
Agreement should be made to work. We all have an equal interest in
seeing that it works and there will be further discussions on this
matter with our Minister for Trade when Mr. Pepin comes to Australia.
Q. I believe you've had your problems too with foreign
ownership. Do you have any very definite ideas as to what should be
done with it, do you have any policies in the direction of buying back
Australian industry? / 2 
-2-
PM. -NWljiawemusAruhsatvraeli-ai ni f we're to develop
as quickly as we., have-to-develop, if we're to. bring . in the number of'
migrants that we need to bringin1Jif~ we~ re. to -bring in the technological
know-how, if we're to have the capital which we can't generate from
within a population of our own size, then we must have large quantities
of overseas capital, We start from that point. It just must come
either from the United States, the United Kingdom, or other countries.
What we have been saying is that we welcome this, we need it, we must
have it. But we would like countries who come in for developmental
purposes to give an opportunity for Australian equity in their enterprise
at the beginning, if possible, of that enterprise. This has been an
expression of governmental opinion, and I am told that it has had some
effect even though it is not a matter of legislative compulsion. We
believe that responsible companies, and most of the big companies are
responsible, will take notice of expressions of governmental desires
and governmental opinion, and we want to see a participation by
Australians in equity holdings in the development of Australia. It is
very difficult to translate this, in fact I think it would be wrong to try
to translate this, in any codified legal form because there are so many
variations and combinations that it would be self-destructive to try and
do it. But we do express the view that good corporate behaviour, which
is a phrase I think one of your own former ministers developed, does
require that the capital which comes in and is owned from abroad
must or should give Australians a chance at some stage to
participate in the growth of these companies. We don't expect that an
Australian should be given an advantage to come in and buy shares in
the company after it has been proved to be successful, and not take a
risk before. it's been proved to be successful. But we'd just like them
to have a chance to have some participation in growth.
Q. Are you moving at all in the direction of a development
fund similar to ours which would enable the government to plow
Canadian savings into it?
PM. Well, we've got a resources development bank,
Australian Resources Development Bank, which I think has some
relation to the fund you are going to set up you haven't set it up yet,
I think which you are going to set up. But I haven't studied it
sufficiently to know how close those relationships are, but there is an
Australian Resources Development Bank.
Q. I'm sorry, Sir, but I would like to get back to wheat. I'd
like to pin it down. Do you deny outright that Australia had anything to
do with breaking the International Grains Agreement?
Pm. Well, I haven't seen any conclusive figures or facts
produced that indicate that there was anything for me to deny.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you have a reputation for always
wanting to see what the weather is well ahead. Could you tell us
something of your defence policies after 1971, and whether you will
have to rely much more on your own defence resources and not perhaps
on the Americans, if they so choose to move some of their forces?
Are you on your own? 
3-
PM. It depends on what part of the world you are talking
about. I would regard Australia and New Zealand as in fact being
covered by the Anzus agreement we have with the United States. But
if you are talking of the region to our north, where not the United States
but Britain, in fact, took the main heat and burden of the day until
recently, then we have made it clear that we regard ourselves as having
an obligation in that region. A responsibility not only militarily, but
to try to help economic growth, to try to help build the standard of
living, to try to bring the countries in the region into a better
understanding of each other, and to provide some defence forces there
on the spot and visible after 1971. I don't know that I've got enough of
a crystal ball to know whether if something developed after that period
of time we would then be on our own or not. The United Kingdom has
indicated that under certain circumstances it would be coming back to
the region, but these circumstances are not clear. All I can say is that
we feel that at the request of Malaysia and Sirgapore, in particular, and
with the unstinted acquiescence of Indonesia, we do feel we can contribute
towards stability by having some forces stationed in that area, and
therefore a declared military interest. By contributing to stability we
are going to contribute to that kind of economic growth which, in the
long run, is the real basis of security.
Q. Are you going to increase your defence budget?
Pm. I think you'd have to wait until the budget came down,
but if you are talking in terms of money as distinct from talking in
terms of gross national product, I would think it quite likely that this
would have to occur.
Q. You know that Canada trades a lot around the world, but
has almost no merchant navy. You, being an island, must have similar
problems. How do you tackle that field?
PM. Well, we've just recently made when I say recently,
I mean some months ago the announcement that we propose to obtain
ships ourselves, one to take part in the Japanese-Australian conference,
one to take part in the Australian-European conference, and one to take
part in the Australian-West Coast of America conference. These ships
will be Australian manned, and they will, in fact, herald the entry of
Australia into having some ships of its own.
Q. What is the actual situation?
Pm. Well, at the moment we've just decided to buy them.
At the moment we only do coastal shipping.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, did you have an exchange of views
with Mr. Trudeau on the recognition of Red China?
PM. No, that was not a subject that was discussed at any
length at all.
Q. Do you have plans for opening up Australia for these
people to the north, or do you still have a strong white Australia policy?
e / 4 
4-
PM. Well, we don't use the term you've just used. We call
it ' restrictive immigration policy' and we always have. And, there are
some reasons, I think, for calling it a restrictive immigration policy
because if it were able to be accurately described in the words you've
used, then there would be nothing but white people allowed to immigrate
to Australia and this is not the case. Apart from some ten or twelve
thousand students from Asian countries which we have constantly in
Australia, there are many who become naturalized Australians. Of
course, if someone marries an Australian, they automatically become
naturalized, but l am speaking of people who have been living there for
some time and who apply for naturalization and becone naturalized
Australians. The policy has been liberalized considerably over recent
years. Again speak from memory but I think I'm pretty accurate in
this. I think at one stage people from our north had to live in Australia
for 15 years before they could apply for naturalization. Now it's five,
the same as people from any other country. So, there has been quite a
liberalization and quite an increase in the numbers coming to us. But
we do look for two things. We do look to see that such people integrate
with the Australian community; in other words that they will belong to
the local football club or the local tennis club and have a circle of friends
amongst the community in which they live rather than communities of
their own. This is of pretty great significance, we think. I believe
that at the moment it is true to say there is less racial feeling in
Australia than almost any other country that I know. It just doesn't
occur to people. It just simply doesn't occur to people that there is
a racial question, and I think one of the reasons for this is because
there is a reasonably small minority and an integrated minority.
Q. The Trudeau government is facing a real problem in
Western Canada for various reasons. Western Canadians feel this
government is not adopting an economic policy vis-a-vis the American
market they would like, but more specifically in relation to your case,
western Canadians, particularly British Columbians, feel Canada should
pay far more attention to the Pacific nations, the Pacific Rim as they
call it, from an economic point of view. Could you tell us if you feel
that Canada is doing enough in the Pacific area, in a general sense?
PM. I don't think it's up to me to indicate what I think the
policies of Canada, or the policies of Mr. Trudeau should be, but I
have understood and I think it has been made clear, has it not, that
there has been more emphasis placed by this government on interests
in the Pacific than has been the case in the past. At least so it has
seemed to me. And we welcome that.
Q. For obvious reasons, your country took a f irm stand
in South East Asia. Did you discuss the Vietnam situation and the
Paris talks with our Prime Minister?
PM. What I did was explain the reasons why Australia has
taken the stand it has taken in Vietnam arid why the government
believes it is right for us to be there. 
Q. Could you tell us what other matters came into your
discussions with our Prime Minister, and in particular, as a result
of these talks, is there a possibility of Mr. Trudeau making a
reciprocating visit to Australia in the near future?
PM. Well, I hope there is, but the question of a return visit
wasn't raised. I had previously understood that it would be some time
before Mr. Trudeau could make a visit, but he knows and has known
since the London Conference that we would be delighted to welcome
him, more than delighted to welcome him, at any time he could get
away from Canada to come and talk to us.
Q. What about the other matters you discussed?
PM. Well, we had a quick survey of situations in South East
Asia, generally, not confined to Vietnam, but generally. I put forward
some views of my own on behalf of the Australian government on the
importance we attached to the region of Indonesia, Malaysia, and
Singapore, and its economic development and the improvement of the
standard of life of its people. And we had, as you say, some
discussions on wheat, and several other matters relating to how we
could seek to have greater numbers of visits between our two countries.
And we both, I think, agree on this: that talking closer affinity is good
and Mr. Trudeau is doing it and I'm doing it and we want it. But it
is not going to happen on Tuesday week. One of the difficulties of
wanting something and saying this is what should happen is that if
you're not careful, everybody says in a fortnight's time, " VWell,
you've said you'd like this, and it hasn't happened, so what's the
good of it?" It's not like that; it's something that must grow and
grow gradually. I believe the seeds are growing and will grow.
Q. I wanted to go back to the Canadian recognition of Red
China. What are your views of Canada' s attitude on this matter? What
is the position of the Australian government? I gather that you have no
intention of following that course with Peking. Could you tell us what
your personal view of this matter is?
PM. Well, our view is that the Canadian government is a
completely independent government and a government quite capable
of making its own judgments. Such jUdgrn-nts as3 it wishes to make
we will naturally respect.
Q. What about your own position vis-a-vis China?
PM. I think our own position is clear. That we do not intend
to recognize Red China. That has been our announced policy and at
this stage I see no change in it.
Q. In what areas do you anticipate this joint action, as
mentioned in your opening statement? / 6 
-6-
PM. Well it could well be in the economic field, in various
countries in Asia. It could be an interest perhaps of Canada in helping
the economic growth of countries around our part of the world. It could
h~ e visits not only of politicians and of academics but of experts of
various kinds who could try and study various problems not only in
Australia, but again in that area of the world. Not anything startling
or significant for a start.
Q. Foreign aid, health, and so on.
PM. That kind of thing, yes.
Q. Canada's attempt to establish diplomatic relations with
communist China seems to be based on the assumption that recognition
of the Peking regime might lessen tensions in the Far East, in the
Pacific area, and in the world generally. What is your view of this
assumption?
PM. Well, I am not sure that that is the assumption that the
Canadian government has made and I'm certainly not going to be put into
any position of commenting on any Canadian government decisions. I
think we would all of us, eventually, wish to see China brought into the
community of nations, and behaving as a responsible member of the
community of nations. This must be the long-term hope of the world,
but for our own part, looking at it as at present, we don't propose to
change our present policy.
Q. Do you see China as the main threat in your area?
PM. I'm not quite sure what you mean as the main threat in
our particular area. I don't expect to be invaded by China next week
or anything of that kind, but I don't think there is much to be served
by picking out particular places and calling them main threats anyway.
Q. Did you and Mr. Trudeau discuss Mr. Nixon's recent
anti-ballistic missile decision?
PM. No, not at all. This, I think, is a matter which affects
Canada but not us.
Q. In light of your recent discussions with President Nixon
do you feel his policy in Vietnam has changed any from President
Johnson?
PM. I would think it essential that any discussions that were
held between President Nixon and myself, if they were to be meaningful
discussions, were discussions which were held between President Nixon
and myself and remain between President Nixon and myself.
Q. I wanted to ask you if President Nixon or Prime Minister
Trudeau asked you to abide by I. G. A. prices. / 7 
-7-
PM. The-answer-to that is no. President Nixon did not mention
the-matter of. wheat -at all, and Mr. Trudeau did not ask us to abide by
the 1. G. A. price. The matter rather lies along these lines. That the
United States and Canada have dropped their prices below 1. G. A. prices
and they say that they did this because they felt that although Australia
had not dropped its prices below 1. G. A. prices, there~ was something
funny going on with freight rates. But I gather that they haven't quite
been able to point out exactly what it is that is alleged to be funny that
is going on with freight rates. This, I think, will be the subject of these
technical discussions that are taking place. If, in fact, it can be shown
that in a disguised sort of a way and it hasn't yet been shown that
Australia is dropping below the I. G. A. ( prices), then that would be
serious and we would meet with Canada and the United States in order
to make sure that the 1. G. A. which is so important to all our three
countries, would meet the ends for which it was designed. But none
of that is to indicate that I am in any way accepting that there is anything
funny going on.
Q. Don't you feel it rather odd that the trade minister of
our country says to you openly and publicly that he feels that there is
something going on in the freight rates?
PM. I'm paraphrasing. You're not to say that I put those words
into his mouth I'm paraphrasing the general thing that there is a
question of whether freight rates are accurately worked out according
to the formula which was devised. Now, that's a better way of putting
it, but my own way of putting it means exactly the same thing.
Q. I was going to ask you about China again. Perhaps it
might give you an opportunity to say something you might want to say.
In the light of Canada's position with China, in the light of the statements
by Senator Kennedy about the U. S. moving closer to China, is there any
possibility of Australia doing the sensible thing and reviewing its position?
PM. I believe as I said before that ultimately we all want to
bring China into the community of nations as a responsible member of
the community of nations, and I am sure that any steps that Australia
takes, if and when it takes them, will be sensible steps.
Q. I think it would be very helpful, with regard to communist
China, if you would explain why you do not now recognise the communist
China government.
PM. I think there are a number of reasons. One is that the
communist Chinese government does not, in fact, look with favour upon
being recognised unless its claim to Formosa is also recognised. And
we would have some strong reservations about a community of 12 or
13 million people, a community which is probably giving to its citizens
one of the highest living standards of any country in Asia, being handed
over willy-nilly, to the control of a power to which it didn't wish to
go. That would seem to us to be wrong. That's one reason. / 8 
8-
Q. I was-wondering while-you were in Washington, did you
see any signs-of---change-in-the America nattitude, a softening?
PM. Well, we didn't discuss that matter at all so I had no
chance to see any signs.
Q. You are going to see our defence minister. Do you know
of any problem on this level?
PM. None whatsoever, but I would be interested in his views
of how the use of joint services by the Canadian Armed Forces i s
progressing, and in telling him of our defence explaining to him our
own defence policy as to our involvement in our region. But there is no
sort of concrete defence proposals between the defence services of our
two countries that I know of.
Q. In your talks in Washington, did President Nixon give
any indication that the United States is contemplating reducing the
level of its forces in Vietnam this year? And, additionally, is Australia
contemplating any reduction in the level of its forces in Vietnam?
PM. I would answer only for Australia, and I am saying under
present circumstances there would be no reduction of Australian forces
in Vietnam this yeari But you're asking me to predicate something on a
whole lot of things that might or mightn't happen.
Q. This involves the domino theory going back to communist
China. Do you fear is there a fear in Australia that if there is
a communist victory in Vietnam that Australia will eventually be on the
Chinese or communist Asian domino board?
PM. I'd like to rephrase that question for you, if I may. I
still think that if aggression and force succeeds in South Vietnam, that
Laos and Cambodia would be in a position where they would be either
completely dominated or perhaps occupied. And I think it quite likely
that countries at present having some difficulty would also be more open
to infiltration and subversion. In other words, 1, like most of the pEople
who live in that area, as distinct from people who live in other areas,
most of the people who live in that area don't dismiss the domino theory
as being sheer nonsense. Neither do I.
Q. Do you think that Australia would eventually be on the
domino board?
PM. I have no fear about Australia as such at all. But I feel
that it could well be as we have seen in our lifetime once before, if one
place after another becomes the focal point of subversion and disruption
and overthrowing. Rightly or wrongly, and this is a matter for each
man's individual judgment and conscience, we felt in Korea and in the
emergency in Malaya and in the confrontation between Indonesia and
Malaya, and in Vietnam that aggression, even small aggression, should
/ 9 
-9-
be prevented from succeeding; or else one would run into the same
danger the world ran into before when aggression in Poland and
aggression in the Sudatenland, when aggression in Austria was allowed
step by step to succeed. We believe that for all nations, and particularly
for small ones, there ought to be a world in which aggression doesn't
take place. That if it does take place, it should be seen to be not
successful. 



VISIT TO THE US AND CANADA
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
ARRIVAL PRESS CCNFERENCE GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, ON ARRIVAL a:
AT MASCOT AIRPORT6 6APR I L 16
PRIME MINISTER: Good morning, gentlemen. I think I have been
travelling for 26 hours, if my count is right. I will thro~ w this open
to anything you might want to ask me for a few minutes before I go
to get some rest.
Q. What were the results of your talks with
Mr Nixon, Sir?
PM: I think I would put it this way, that the real
value of them, although it wasn't worked out to be that way, was
that they laid the groundwork they were preliminary talks they
laid the grundwork for further pursuit of the subjects in May,
after there has been time for full American consideration of those
subjects. I think their real value lay in opening up all these subjects
so that in May there would be far more detailed consideration and I
think therefore, more valuable talks as a result.
Q. Sir, can you see any changes in American
policy in the Pacific area as a result of Mr Nixon's conversation
with you?
PM: I don't think so. I wouldn't presume to say
that definitely, but I think the new American administration is
re-examining problems in all parts of the world. But I am sure in
my own mind that they are not putting the South-East Asian area
the Pacific area away. They are not saying " Well, this is no
longer important". I am sure they have a full realisation of the
importance to the world of this region as well as the other regions
which they are re-examining generally.
Q. What are the main subjects on which these
investigations will be taking place and which you will be discussing
later with the President?
PM: Well, we will be talking about I will
be talking about the stability and security of the particular region
in which we are closely interested, and of the American attitude
towards that, towards the economic assistance in that area, towards
trade assistance in that area, towards all kinds of assistance in
that area. We will be talking about though not reaching conclusions
on, of course the situation in Vietnam. There will be further
matters to be reported there. Then there are trade matters as well
.2 
-2
PM ( Contd. which are by no means Insignificant the question of meat exports
and wheat exports and then with Dr Kissinger, or with the
Secretary of Defence or the Secretary of State, there will be a
number of " nuts and bolts" things. These will be not so much
procurement in Australia of buying sugar in order to feed
the troops in Vietnam, but rather manufacturing parts here, . the
cross-fertilisation of military equipment that kind Of " nuts and
bolts" talk.
Q. Did you discuss the Australian wheat freights with
Mr Trudeau?
PM: I did mention that we knew there was alleged to be
a problem. I had rather longer discussions on them with Mr Pepin
who is the Trade Minister and who will be visiting Auatralla quite
shortly. They,. I think, have a view, although I pointed out it
hadn't been demonstrated to us, that while Australia has not got
this price below the IGA minimum for wheat, it is perhaps not
working out its freight rates in accordance with some rather
complicated formula. I don't believe that has been demonstrated
and I said so, but it is the subject of technical discussion at the
present moment, I understand.
Q. Can you see any chnange in the rates?
PM: Well, I can't, as I say, because this is a matter of
technical discusrion in Washington now, I believe, between our own
representatives and others to see whether anything of that kind is
happening. But what is quite certain is that Canada and the United
States have dropped their wheat prices below the IGA minimum and
the United States say they have had to do it because of thi~ s freight
business. Well, this will all be worked out to see whether it is
a matter of fact; whether it~ r isn't so. What is quite clear is that
all three countries must see that th-IGA works, that nobody does
undercut, that it does work because it is to the benefit of all of us
that it should.
Q. Judging from the press conferences that you had in
Canada, they were very concerned by it.
PM: Well, wheat is of immense significance to Canada
and ourselves and indeed to the United States. It is of great
significance to all three countries, and there is an awful lot of
prairie and wheatgrowing land in Canada.
Q. Sir, there were reports that you were discussing
mutual projects recently ; 3 
-3
PM: We were-talking, but not talking specifically, on the
approach -wicti. Mr Trudeau had made clear he felt Canada should take
that is looking rather more towards the Pacific countries and,
I take it, South-East Asian countries and Asian countries generally.
There were no mutual projects, but I took the opportunity to say
where we thought things coiuld be done of advantage to the region
generally.
Q. In your talks with Mr Nixoin, and Dr Kissinger, Sir,
did the question of America' k possible change of attitude to Red
China come up for dis cussion and any possible effects it may have
on our own attitude?
PM: No. It didn't come up for discussion at all. It wasn't
raised. Are you basing this on the speech by Senator Kennedy?
Q. No. On the reports that were received back. Is it
likely to come up at the next meeting?
PM: I haven't got it down, and I have had no indications
myself that there is likely to be a discussion.
Q. Did you receive any indication of the progress of peace
talks in Paris?
PM: I had an indicatioin of what was happening in Paris, but
this was in private conversation and I am afraid it must remain
entirely private. I wouldn't make any comments of any kind up tin it.
Q. Sir, what were your impressions of Nixon as a leader?
PM: Well, I think you kn ow because I had an informal
press conference with some of the Australian boys over there.
I believe he will be a great leader of the United States. I liked him
very much as a man, as you know. Sometimes you meet people and
you really do like them. Somctimcs more rarely yuu dislike them.
Very often they are just people. I really did like him as a man and
s0 1 might be a little coloured in my judgment. But I think he s hould
be great because they have terrific problems in so many parts of the
world and in their own country, and they really do seem to be
digging in to try to find out and define the problems and what the
causes of them are, and this must be the first step towards trying
to solve them. I would hate to have the burden of trying to solve
them myself 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
AMl TO MALAYSIA AND SING 0
( Ministerial Statement
-[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 1S April 1969]
Mr G40RTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)-
by leave-In the course of my statement
to this House on 25th February I
said: we shall continue our efforts to help with
the training of local Malaysians and Singaporean
forces which we expect will be increased in size
and capacity, and to provide financial assistance
for defence aid aimed at assisting Malaysia and
Singapore to build up their own defence capacity.
We have been actively pursuing these purposes.
I am now happy to say that
following discussions with the Malaysian
Government we will make a gift to
Malaysia of ten of our Sabre aircraft,
together with spares, ground support equipment
and a simulator for training purposes.
When the Sabres are delivered they will, be
in Al condition with an operational life
before them of at least 6 years. To train
Malaysian pilots and ground staff to fly and
maintain the Sabres we will send to Butterworth
nearly ninety Royal Australian Air
Force instructors and personnel. The aircraft
with their spares and so on will, be
by way of addition to our current Defence
Aid Programme. The costs involved in
operating the aircraft will naturally be
borne by the Malaysian Government and
the other costs involved will be met from
the present uncommitted portion of our
Defence Aid Programme for Malaysia. As
pilots and-ground staff are trained, the
Royal Malaysian Air Force will be able to
14857/ 69 convert the squadron of Sabres from a
training to an operational fighter unit.
, We believe that this contribution on our
part will be of help to the Malaysian
Government in that it will provide an
essential transitional step towards the
eventual acquisition of supersonic aircraft
which we understand the Malaysian
Government has as its long-term aim.
Further, it will enable this step to be taken
without the necessity for the Malaysian
Government to divert very considerable
resources away from the programme of
social and economic development which it
rightly regards as essential to the stability
of the region. Malaysia is also seeking our
help in training operators and technicians
for the radars it is acquiring-themselves
costl-y enough-and in basic training for its
pilots. These requests are under study-and
I merely say at this stage that we will do
what we can to help.
We have also had certain discussions
with the Singapore Government about
directions in which we might aid Singapore
defence plans. I mention here only one
particular aspect. It is that we have notified
our willingness to help the Singapore
Government with the training of certain
operators and technicians required for the
Bloodhound defensive missiles which the
Singapore Government is proposing to
acquire from the United Kingdom Govern-
ment. These actions on our part should be
seen in the context of our continuing
association with our four partners in the
Five Power arrangement-New Zealand,
Malaysia,, Singapore, and the United
Kingdom-and also of our and their
common concern with the security of the
South East Asia region. As I made clear in
my statement to the House on 25th
February 1969, our activities are in no way
directed against the interests of any other country in the region but are intended to
strengthen the stability of the whole; this
we believe is well understood and accepted.
What we are doing now is in fact making
one more contribution to our long-standing
defence aid programme, the purpose of
which is to strengthen the defence capacity
of Malaysia and Singapore within the
framework of a broad concept of regional
security and regional co-operation.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MUR Y at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT OVERS
( Ministerial Statement) 2
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 15 April 1969] r
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-As honourable members are
aware, news of the death of the late
President Eisenhower on 28th March
reached Canberra on Saturday, 29th March,
a few hours before I was to have left on a
visit to Washington for discussions with
the President of the United States of
America. Necessarily, these discussions were
postponed but I continued with my journey
to represent Australia at the funeral ceremonies
for the late President and to make
the official visit to Canada which had been
arranged in response to the invitation of the
Prime Minister of Canada. However, on 1st
April, when I was received by President
Nixon, we were able to re-schedule our
postponed discussions for 6th and 7th May.
This call provided the opportunity for us
to review the topics which we are later to
discuss and the President has arranged for
further preparatory work relating to a
number of topics to be undertaken in
Washington prior to my return.
Subsequently I had separate and preliminary
discussions with the Secretary of
State, the Honourable William P. Rogers,
the Secretary of Defence, the Honourable
Melvin R. Laird, the Secretary of the
Treasury, the Honourable David * M.
Kennedy, and President Nixon's special
adviser, Dr Henry A. Kissinger, on matters
of mutual interest in defence and foreign
14858/ 69 affairs including the conflict in Vietnam
and future stability and progress in the
region of which we are a part. Even in this
introductory stage of our discussions I
found a continuance of the deep interest and
the warmth of friendship that characterises
the Australian-American relationship and 1
look forward to resuming the talks with the
President of the United States and his
Administration on my return to Washington
in three weeks' time.
Since the discussions so far held are of
a preliminary character and since they are
not yet concluded, I think the House will
agree that it would be more appropriate
for a full statement to be made after my
return from the concluding talks. There
was, however, value in the opportunity to
open up discussions on matters which will
be the subject of further study in the United
States before our second series of talks arc
held. On the afternoon of 2nd April I flew to
Ottawa and was welcomed to Canada at
a dinner given by the Prime Minister of
Canada, the Right Honourable Pierre
Trudeau. On the following day I had a
series of discussions with the Prime Minister
and attended a meeting of the Canadian
Cabinet. I also had separate discussions
with the Minister of Industry and the
Minister of Trade and Commerce, the
Honourable Jean-Luc Pepin, the Minister 
of Finance and Receiver-General of
Canada, the Honourable Edgar J. Benson,
and the Secretary of State for External
Affairs, the honourable Mitchell Sharpe.
The Canadian Cabinet expressed their
interest in the various forms which their
own participation in the region could take.
We emphasised our joint and mutual
interest in making the International Grains
Agreement work and we had already
arranged discussions about these matters
between experts which were taking place
on that very day in Washington D. C. The Minister of Finance discussed with me
Canadian experience with overseas investment
in Canada.
The principal purpose of my visit was
to foster closer relations between our two
countries. In addition to Mr Pepin's
presence here this month I hope that a visit
to Australia by Mr Trudeau will not be
long delayed and both our Governments
were delighted that a representative party
from the Australian Parliament will be
visiting Canada in June.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MURRAY at the
Government Printing Office. Canberra 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 36/ 1969
CURTIN BY-ELECTION 2
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton t
I congratulate Mr Garland on winning the Curtin
by-election with what it appears will be an absolute majority.
Voting in by-elections traditionally goes against
the Government. In this particular poll, neither ourselves nor the
Labor Party can draw much comfort from the figures. Factors
influencing the drop in Liberal support included the large numbers of
electors who failed to vote ( which is not unusual in by-elections in
a blue ribbon seat) and the loss of Sir Paul Hasluck's personal vote.
An interesting aspect was the relatively large
vote polled by the Independent candidate, Mr Scoggins, who had
campaigned on a non-party basis with social service questions as
his exclusive issue. Social welfare is a matter concerning the
Government and one on which it is having a thorough examiraion
made. The figures can be of little encouragement to the
Labor Party, whose candidate improved only slightly. Indeed, it
is the smallest increase in Labor Party support in a Governmentheld
seat at a by-election this decade.
CANBERRA, April 1969 



PRESENTATION TO H. M. A. S. HOBART OF U. S.
NAVY UNIT COMMENDATION 14HAY 1969
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 21 APRIL 1969
Speech by the _ Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Admiral Baumberger, Admiral Grabbe, Parliamentary Colleagues
and Distinguished Guests and Officers and Men of the Royal
Australian Navy:-This is a proud day for the Royal Australian Navy
and for the officers and men of HMAS Hobart in particular, all of
those who have served in her in the past or who are now serving in
her. To you, Admiral Baumberger, I say thank you for all
you have said, thank you for the honour you do the Australian Navy,
and, through it, the Australian people, by the presentation of this
Unit Commendation from the United States Navy.
I take this opportunity of personally congratulating
Commodore Griffiths and those who served with him when this
Commendation was won. The job they did was in the best and finest
traditions of the Australian Navy.
This, too, I think, is a day we will all remember as
one more demonstration of the friendship between the Australian
and the American people, a day when our comradeship in arms with
the United States receives special recognition. I say with great
conviction that our two countries are not " fair-weather friends"
We have stayed together, we stay together and we stick together
whether the going is rough or smooth.
Hobart's service with the Seventh Fleet as " an eager,
aggressive and dauntless member" ( to quote from the Commendation)
is an example of that spirit. It's been like that for a long time now,
and that's how I believe it will continue.
This is the first Unit Commendation from the United
States Navy to be awarded to a ship of the Australian Fleet and it will
have a special place in the battle honours of our Navy. For myself,
I feel particularly gratified because I like to feel, in a way, that
Hobart was one of my ships. She was the second of the three guided
missile destroyers ordered from the United States during my time
as Minister for the Navy and she was the first Australian warship to
serve in Vietnam. / 2 
-2
I say to you all officers and men of the Navy here
today that though the conflict in Vietnam is long, and though our
naval ships are engaged on faraway seas, the Australian public and
Government do not forget you.
They admire and respect you for the way you are
doing your job. They are grateful to you for what you are contributing.
They support you. And zhese, of course, are sentiments that apply.
to all our servicemen who are performing with such distinction. IndIeed,
it was less than a year ago in Washington that I had the privilege of
accepting a Presidential citation on behalf of the Sixth Battalion Royal
Australian Regiment. Hobart has done two tours of duty with the Seventh Fleet
off Vietnam and, as you know, is just across the way at Garden Island
refitting. She is being given even sharper teeth by the fitting of an
Australian-made, Australian-designed anti-submarine missile system,
[ kara, and I have no doubt that she will continue to give a good account
of herself, wherever she is engaged.
Today there is change all round and the Australian Navy,
along with our other Armed Forces, will have continuing commitments
in Pacific and Asian waters even when the conflict in Vietnam is over.
It must be the best-equipped and the strongest Navy our resources can
allow, and that's the responsibility of the Government and its advisers.
But it must also be the best-led and the best-manned fleet. And that is
up to the officers and men who man it, and if they continue to man it in
they way in which they have, then there is no doubt it will be the
best -officered and best -led fleet.
I thank you, Sir, for being here today. thank the United
States Navy for Hobart's commendation and all that it means to us, to
the officers and men who have served or are serving in Hobart and to
the Australian people from which they come. 



ANNIVERSARY OF INDEPENDENCE OF ISRAEL
Festival Hall, Melbourne 22 APRIL 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Ambassador and Fellow Australians of Jewish
Faith or Jewish Descent:-
We stand here to give greetings to you all on a stage
from which those bright banners have just been carried banners
which symbolically bore the stars of the Southern Cross and the Star
of David. And how proper that is, for this association is not a recent
one. Back in the 1914-18 War, Australian soldiers, many of
Jewish descent, rode and fought with Jews in Israel. In the last Great
World War, two of the best-known Jewish soldiers today served with
Australians in the Syrian campaign. I am told, and I believe it is true,
that General Moshe Dayan lost his eye while with an Australian patrol
in the Syrian campaign. He was using a pair of binoculars to help
his-Australian comrades, and was hit by an enemy bullet.
And I know that Brigadier General Allon served in a
little-known but gallant action where he guided and led an Australian
patrol behind the enemy lines to hold and seize a bridge and prevent
its destruction so that Australian and other troops coming along from
behind could cross that bridge. They were to hold it for eighteen
hours. They held it for four days.
This is the sort of association in fighting, in war, that
has gone on between Australians and Jews in Israel, so how right it
was that today the flags should bear the stars of both our nations.
And what a special cheer there was, of course, for the
reference to the Six-Day War, a war which, I suspect, must have
benefited the Israeli Treasury immensely because I know that a third
of the budget of Israel is spent on defence but I imagine that at least
another third of its defence material has been made available from
other sources: But that was some years ago, and while it did what wars
can do, and that is settle immediate problems and fighting and wars
can do that, no matter what anyone may say it has not settled the
continuing problem. And since that time I think there have been
one-quarter as many casualties as occurred in that Six-Day War,
many of them children blown to pieces or maimed by button mines,
/ 2 
2-
many of them peasants working in their fields suddenly the target of
mortar or machine gun attack, for Israel is still a beleaguered nation.
That nation still must work, wherever it may be working, with the
tool of its trade in one hand and the sword and the rifle within grasp
for the other. It still must seek to hear all the time above the noises
of the market place the possible call of the tocsin to defend what has
been won, because that must be defended.
War is horrible. Fighting is horrible. But they are
not the worst things that can happen, and who could possibly know this
better than the people now in Israel, with the thousands of years of
persecution in all the lands in which they sought to make their home,
having been driven out from their own. With all those years of
persecution culminating in Nazi aggression who could know it better?
And who could know better that if the choice eventually
has to be made between a battlefield and a Belsen, then free men and
women must choose a battlefield every time.
What we all want is for it to be recognised throughout
the world that Israel is there to stay, and that Israel is a free and
sovereign and independent nation as of right. And we want Israel to
be allowed to divert that money that now must be put into defence to
be used for the further increase of the miracles it has wrought in the
arid land to which it has gone.
Sometimes, it almost makes one despair when one thinks
of what has been wrung from the desert, when one thinks of the forests
which have grown and are growing, where previously erosion held sway,
where one sees the factories and industries springing up where
previously was nothing but nomadic wandering, where one sees not two
but ten blades of grass where only one grew before. It almost makes
one despair to think that that example can be the subject of such threat
and such attacks rather than be followed for the benefit of all those
who live in that region of the Middle East.
What all Australians want, I believe, is that it should
be possible for an enduring peace to be made; that the Arab nations
should sit down and talk and discuss and reach agreement. What that
decision or result will be, I do not know or seek here to indicate, as
long as it brings to all those people living there the chance to progress,
the chance to live in peace, the chance to take care of refugees, the
chance to give human beings in that part of the world happiness,
confidence in the future and a knowledge which you have and which I
have which is quite ineradicable. That is that though the State of
Israel may be 21 today and has attained its majority, it will go on
forever. / 3
11 6 
-3'
What I have outlined could be achieved if the two great
powers not four great powers but two great powers in the world
the United States of America and the U. S. S. were to say, " Enough
of this. Turn your swords into ploughshares. We are strong enough
to see that one will not be attacked by the other and we in concert will
help to hold the peace." This could be done.
For ourselves for myself, for my Government, for
Australians, we are small and therefore perhaps sympathetic
particularly to Israel which also is small. But that which we can do
we will do to support it. That which we can say we will say. That
influence we can bring to bear, such as it is, will be brought to bear
for this end. And I cannot better express that approach than by
reading to you part of a message sent by us to the Executive Council
of Australian Jewry in the Sydney Town Hall some time ago. And this
is our belief as a Government and my belief as a Prime Minister:-
" We believe that all parties to the dispute should
without delay sit down around the conference table
and begin discussions aimed at restoring peace and
stability to the Middle East. Any such settlement
must be formally based on the acceptance of Israel
as a sovereign nation, existing as of right, entitled
to live and develop in security, free of constant
threat, posing no threat to its neighbouring countries
and using for the good of all, rights and opportunities
so dearly bought."
I thank you. 


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
JOHN 0. GORTON, MP, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
23 APRIL 1969
DEFENCE SPACE COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
I have to inform the House that the Government has
accepted proposals which were made by the United States Government
for the establishment in Australia of a joint United States / Australian
defence space communications facility.
The facility will be located at Woomera. A site survey
party from the United States is expected to visit Woomera soon.
Construction should commence in September or October
and the installation should be ready to operate by late 1970. The
joint staff of Australian and U. S. personnel required to operate the
station will be between 250 and 300.
The construction of the station will be an important
contribution to the defence of all free nations. It is a further and most
important tangible expression of that close co-operation between the
United States and Australia in defence matters which is embodied in
the ANZUS Treaty. 



8 MAY 1969
4 4
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 37/ 1969
DEBATE ON DEFENCE SPACE RESEARCH FACILITY
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Leader of the Opposition had a complete opportunity
this evening to agree that my statement should be taken note of by the
House. This gave the Opposition the opportunity for a full debate at a
time of their choosing. He indicated that he did not want this opportunity. If
he has now changed his mind I should be glad to accommodate him by
providing the chance for a debate on whether or not it is to Australia's
interest to join with the United States in arrangements which will
benefit the United States, ourselves and the free world and which are
in full accord with the spirit of the Anzus Treaty.
CANBERRA 23 April 1969 



tSSUED FROM THE OFFICE
OF THE PRESS SECRETARY.
FOR PRESSPORTAITSOF PRIMEMINISTERS
The Historic Memorials Committee has commissioned
portraits of the Prime Minister and two former Prime Ministers.
Mr Gorton's portxait is being painted by Mr Russell
Drysdale; Mr McEwen's by Mr W. A. Dargie; and the late Mr Holt's
portrait by Mr W. E. Pidgeon.
It is expected that the portraits of Mr Gorton and
Mr McEwen will be completed and considered by the Historic
Memorials Committee shortly. If the Committee accepts them, they
will be hung in King's Hall at Parliament House, Canberra, along with
those of all other Australian Prime Ministers.
The portrait of Mr H-olt will be painted from available
photographs and films. It will be some time before it is ready
for consideration by the Committee.
The Historic Memorials Committee comprises the Prime
Minister ( Chairman), the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, the Vice-President of the Executive Council,
the Leader of the Opposition in the House of Representatives and the
Leader of the Opposition in the Senate.
CANBERRA, 28 April 1969 



Issu m-4be ice of
the Press ecrtary.
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO THE UNITED STATES
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, will leave for
the United States on Thursday for the official talks in Washington
which were postponed because of General Eisenhower's death last
month. The discussions with President Nixon and senior
members of his Administration will be held on Tuesday and
Wednesday ( 6th and 7th) of next week.
The Prime Minister, accompanied by Mrs. Gorton,
will travel by Qantas direct to San Francisco, where they will
transfer immediately to a Presidential aircraft for the flight to the
East. Mr. Gorton will spend the weekend at Williamsburg, Virginia,
after his long flight from Australia and preparing for his round of
talks. He will fly to Washington by Presidential helicopter on Monday
afternoon. He will leave Washington on Thursday, after a luncheon
to be given in his honour by Senator J. W. Fullbright in the Foreign
Relations Committee Room at the Capitol. The return travel
arrangements are not yet finalised.
Accompanying the Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton
will be the Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department, Mr. C. L.
Hewitt, the Secretary of the Department of External Affairs, Sir
James Plimsoll, an Assistant Secretary of the Prime Minister's
Department, Mr. A. T. Griffith, and personal staff.
A copy of the Prime Minister's itinerary is attached.
CA NBERRA
29 April 1969 
Prime Minister's Visit to the United States
PROGRA MME
THURSDAY, 1 May
( all times are local)
00 p. m. Depart Sydney Qantas Flight 596
7.55 a. m. Arrive Honolulu International Airport aboard Qantas Flight 596
9. 00 a. nm. Depart Honolulu Qantas Flight 596
4. 50 p. m Arrive San Francisco International Airport
5.20 p. mn. Depart San Francisco aboard a United States Air Force Special
Flight
FRIDAY, 2 May
1. 10 a. m. Arrive Langley Air Force Base, Virginia
1. 20 a. m. Depart Langley by car
2. 05 a. m. Arrive Williamsburg, Virginia
SATURDAY, 3 May
At Williamsburg
SUNDAY, 4 May At Williamsburg
MONDAY, 5 1v
2. 25 p. m.
2. 30 p. mn.
3. 30 p. m.
3.35 3.45 8.00 p. M.
p. M.
p. M. Arrive Williamsburg Inn Golf Course
Depart Williamsburg aboard a United States Marine Corps
Special Helicopter Flight
Arrive Pentagon Heliport, Washington. ( Prime Minister and
Mrs. Gorton will be greeted by the Hon. Emil Mosbacher,
Jr., Chief of Protocol of the United States, and Mrs.
Mosbacher)
Depart Pentagon Heliport
Arrive Blair House
His Excellency Sir Keith Waller, C. B. E. Ambassador of
Australia, and Lady Waller give Dinner in Honour of
Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton at the Embassy of Australia
e. / 2 
-2
TUESDAY, 6 May
30 a. m.
3. 00 p. m.
8. 00 p. m. Prime Minister arrives White House for talks with President
Nixon
Prime Minister meets with Mr. William P. Rogers, Secretary
of State, at the Department of State
President and Mrs. Nixon give a Dinner in Honour of Prime
Minister and Mrs. Gorton at the White House ( White Tie)
WEDNESDAY, 7 May
12. 00 noon
1. 00 p. M.
4. 00 p. m. Prime Minister meets with President Nixon at the White House
Mr. Rogers gives Luncheon in Honour of Prime Minister at
Department of State
Prime Minister meets with Mr. Melvin R. Laird, Secretary of
Defence at Department of Defence
THURSDAY, 8 May
1. 00 p. m. Senator J. W. Fullbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, gives a Luncheon in Honour of Prime
Minister in the Foreign Relations Committee Room at the
Capitol
p. M. Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton depart Washington
MRS. GORTON'S PROGRAMME
( where it differs from Prime Minister's)
TUESDAY, 6 May
2. 50 p. m. Mrs. Gorton visits L'Erifant Plaza
WEDNESDAY, 7 May
40 a. m.
1. 00 p. m. Mrs. Gorton visits Dumbarton Oaks
Mrs. Rogers gives Luncheon in Honour of Mrs. Gorton at the
Naval Academy Alumni House, Annapolis, Maryland
THURSDAY, 8 May
12. 30 p. m. Lady Waller gives Luncheon in Honour of Mrs. Gorton at the
Embassy of Australia 



Issued from the Office of
the Press Secretary.
PRIME MINISTER TO REVISIT CANADA
After leaving Washington D. C. on Thursday
afternoon, 8 May, the Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton will
spend the weekend in the Rocky Mountains in Western Canada
and they will depart for Australia by the Qantas flight leaving
Vancouver on Monday, 12 May.
On his previous visit to Canada the Prime Minister
was pressed for time and was unable to take up an invitation
issued by Mr. Trudeau to visit this part of Canada on that
occasion. CANBERRA April 1969 



I I-NAY ' PO~
SECOND VLSLT TO THE US 1969
S { D1 E Y, N. S. W.
DEPARTURE PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR TOHN1 GORTON AT M OASC
AIRPORT 1 MAY 1969
Q. Prime Minister, it was suggested today that a US Senate
Committee will investigate both Pine Gap and Woomera installations. Do
you know anything about this?
PM:-No. All know about it is that I read a headline in one of the
Sydney evening papers to that effect.
Q. Are you worried that any such investigation would prejudice
the security of the installations?
PM: I would merely have this to say, both on Woomera and Pine
Gap that as far as .; am concerned I would not urge the United States
to make public any information which the United States felt would derogate
from the usefulness of those installations.
Q. . t was suggested in the same article that Pine Gap was used
for chemical warfare research.
PM: I have never heard that. i understand, and believe that
there are no chemical warfare experiments going on anywhere in
Australia, as far as I know.
Q. What particular defence points do you want to discuss in
America?
PM: Oh, quite a wide range of matters all dealing with defence.
I couldn't possibly enumerate them all. Y'ou wouldn't expect me to.
Q. Mr Gorton, what are the important issues you will be
discussing with the President?
PM: There again, I don't believe you would expect me to give
a list. " it wouldn't be exhauscive. I might leave something out. I might
mention something that, as it turned out, we didn't discuss. I think all
I can say is " a wide range of matters dealing with our security and our
relations with the United States and a continuation of the talks which last
time were begun. And that is really all 11 can say.
Q. Sir, do you expect to find any more evidence of isolationism
in the attitude of the US Administration towards South-East Asia both
militarily and politically? 
2-
PM: Have I ever said i found any evidence of isolationiam
Q. Y'ou have not personally,
PM:-Well how could I find any more. You asked me if
I expect to find any more evidence and I want to make it clear that
so far I haven't detected evidence of isolatiods m in the talks I have
had over there.
Q. What aspects of the Vietnam peace talks will you be
discussing with the President?
PM: i couldn't tell you at this stage, but undoubtedly the
subject of peace talks will be raised and talked about, as to what
aspects, I couldn't tell you now.
Q. Will you be talking about withdrawing Australian
troops?
PM: I don't see that happening in the foreseeable future
as has already been explained by the Minister for Defence and the
Minister for the Army. But it must depend on the way things develop,
and no-one can tell precisely how things will develop.
Q. Sir are they ready to retain their role in Asia?
PM: To retain their interest in Asia? I believe the United
States would retain its interest in Asia in one form or another without
special request.
Q. Will you be urging this on the Americans?
PM: . don't think there will be any need for me to urge it.
But of course Australia would like the United States to retain an
interest in Asia, but i don't think there will be any need to specially
urge that. I think it will happen.
Q. Any specific reason for another return trip to Canada
on the way back?
PM: Really just because this is somnething like the fourth
rushed trip in a year or less than a year, and the specific reason
is to have a couple of days somewkere to sleep before the final
hop back. 
-3-
Q. Will you be seeing Mr Trudeau?
PM: I am not sure. I don't think so. I would be delighted
if he w, re able to spend a day to come and see us; I would be very
pleased, but that would be subject to his own engagements in Ottawa.
Q. How would you sum up what you expect from your
talks?
PM: I would like to sum them up when I come back and
when I talk to Parliament. 



FOR PRESS: 0~ AIb P. M. No. 38/ 1969
ADDITIONAL DROUGHT RELIEF FOR QUEENSLAND
Statement by the-Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government has agreed to provide
additional drought relief assistance to the Queensland Government.
The Commonwealth appreciates that the drought situation
in Queensland has become increasingly serious and that further
Commonwealth help is required to assist the State Government.
We will therefore meet the whole cost of any relief
expenditure which the State may incur in 1968-69 in excess of
$ 4 million. The effect of this arrangement will be to place an upper
limit of $ 2 million on the expenditures which the State will need to
finance this year under the current drought relief arrangements which
are on a dollar -for -dollar sharing arrangement between the
Commonwealth and the State.
This dollar -for -dollar arrangement includes the following
measures which the Commonwealth approved in March 1969:-
* Rail and road subsidies on the transport of fodder and
the movement of livestock to agistment:
* Carry on finance for drought -affected farmers who are
unable to obtain credit from normal commercial sources:
* Grants to local authorities in rural areas to relieve
unemployment caused by drought.
The Commonwealth is prepared to confer with the State
towards the end of June regarding the arrangements which might apply
for 1969-70. The Commonwealth has now agreed that freight rebates
on the movement of non-starving" stock from drought areas to slaughter
will be treated as eligible expenditure for purposes of drought relief.
My Government will also facilitate a scheme for the
provision of wheat for stock feed on credit terms ( 12 months credit at
42% interest). / 2 
-V -2-
In addition to these financial measures, the Commonwealth
has agreed to make available on appropriate conditions land at the
Army's Shoalwater Bay training area for grazing drought-affected cattle.
The Commonwealth has already provided approximately
million to Queensland since 1965-66 as reimbursement to that
State for drought relief expenditure. It has also given additional amounts
totalling approximately $ 5 million for special revenue assistance to
offset the effects of drought on the State's revenue.
CANBERRA
1 May 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 39/ 1969
DEATH OF PRESIDENT OF INDIA
Tribute from the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen, has
sent the following message to the Prime Minister of India, Mrs.
Indira Gandhi, on the death of the President of India, Dr. Zakir
Husain:-" IT IS WITH DEEP REGRET THAT I LEARNT
OF THE SUDDEN DEATH OF PRESIDENT ZAKIR HUSAIN.
TO YOU, TO YOUR GOVERNMENT, AND TO THE PEOPLE
OF INDIA MAY I ON MY OWN BEHALF AND ON BEHALF
OF THE GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA
EXPRESS OUR SINCEREST SYMPATHIES FOR THIS
SUDDEN LOSS. I SHOULD BE GRATEFUL IF YOU WOULD
CONVEY OUR SYMPATHIES TO THE LATE PRESIDENT'S
FAMILY."
CANBERRA May 1969 



SECOND VISIT TO THE U. S. 1969
WASH INGTON
ARRIVAL STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON 6 MAY 1969
I am glad to be here on a second visit to Washington
within a space of only a few weeks, and glad that this visit is made
in happier circumstances than the last.
I return for fuller consultations on matters opened up
on my last visit but postponed because of the period of mourning.
I now look forward to resuming my discussions with
the President and with the Secretaries of State and Defence and feel
these meetings will be more fruitful as a result of preliminary talks
last month. I hope to be told Mr. Nixon's latest assessment of
Vietnam and the Paris talks, and to discuss with him the general
problem of world security particularly as it affects Australia's
regional interest in the South East Asian area. 1 hope also to discuss
matters concerned with our common defence.
I am also meeting merubers of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee at the invitation of Senator Fu lbright. This is
an opportunity I warmly appreciate.
My visit to Washington is not to deal with any one
specific subject. I regard it, rather, as a practical expression of
the close, frank and continuing relationship between two good friends
Australia and the United States.
Our two countries share many common objectives.
We both want a world where nations big and small can live in
independence and security, develop their standards of living, and
share in an expanding world economy. In this world of change we
want change to occur peacefully and to be of a kind designed to lead
to better lives for all men. We can and must work together to help
achieve this. 



SECOND TRIP TO THE U. S. 1969
WASHILNGTON
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
AT THE WHITE HOUSE IDINNER 6 MAY 1969
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is a speech, Sir, to which it is very difficult
to reply. I think it is true that there is, between the people of the United
States and the people of my own country, some particular bonds which
are not of recent, birth, but which have matured over the years.
True it is, that in our own country we reached self
government by means of evolution and you by revolution. But nevertheless,
in some degree we think of you as being responsible for us. I know a
lot of other countries do that, too. Because it was only after the
Declaration of Independence and a certain amount of unpleasantness
which culminated at Yorktown following that, that Great Britain looked
to another outlet, if I may put it that way. Put it gave us the first impetus
to the growth of Australia and so perhaps in that indirect way, Sir, you
have helped us in our youth. I
But that was just at the beginning. Since then we have stood
together in many struggles--the First World War, fought far and away
from our shores and yours, but fought for the same reasons, our soldiers
and yours--the Second World War, the Korean War where Australians
were within the first week in action with the United States forces and the
first country so to be in action. And now, the Vietnam War.
I don't know why it is--or perhaps I do--but I am not sure
why it is that when countries talk, as you and I are talking, of the bonds
which unite and have united them, so often one turns to wars and to
struggles in which one has been together. Because, after all, a
successful war does not gain anything new. What it does do, if it is
successful, is prevent the imposition of something bad and obtain an
opportunity for new building upon a proper basis and a proper foundation
of freedom and participation.
Perhaps it is because men have for so long had to struggle,
and probably always will have to struggle, against the idea of absolute
and arbitrary power; against the idea of the secret police and the
hangman; against the philosophy that in order to be free and live in peace
one must subject one's self to the rule--without law--of dictatorship.
Perhaps it is because the fainthearted all through the years have been
/ 2 
prepared to say, " if you wish to eat you must sell your immortal soul. If
you wish peace you must submit to dictation. perhaps it is because there
is in the human spirit a refusal to accept this that one talks of nations
standing together in war, not because it is in war, but because of the
objectives sought by such struggles.
You, Sir, are bearing today a burden, greater, I think,
than that borne by any other man in the world I know. And in a way, here,
history is repeating itself because as I look up there and see a former
Republican-I hope no Democrats will be upset-I see a former Republican
looking down upon us, my mind goes back to those times and that burden
and the turmoil in this country in that period.
Too often do we now look back at Lincoln and tend to think
the speeches he made were well received and tend to think the ideals
he professed were accepted by all the people of the United States. But
not enough do we look back and think of the burden for five long years he
bore during a period when the United States lost more dead than it has
in the many wars since. And hie bore this.
During a period when Copperheads were inciting riots in
order to bring peace and not allow the war to continue; during the period
when the Horace Greeleys and others of the press were attacking not only
his ideas, but him personally; during the period when regiments from
the army of the Potomac had to be brought back to quell draft riots in New
York--that was a burden. But if it had not been carried by the man there
would be no United States today. There would have been, at any rate, a
slave autocracy of the South and what that, in junction with South America,
could then have lead to in the world no-one can tell. But there would have
been no United States.
And so the bearing of these burdens and the successful
consummation of these struggles is something which is not for that time
alone or for this time alone, but which, having been successful in that
time, led to the United States being able to be what it is today, and which,
if it is successful in this time, will lead to there being able to be
throughout the world an opportunity for us, when we next speak, when
we next meet, or at least communicate or whatever it may be, to talk not
of war but of the other progress which is the other part of which you spoke,
Sir, of which the United States and ourselves, you helping us economically,
building us, helping us to build ourselves, the other part may be the real
outcome of successful resistance to aggression. I think it will be.
I think that we will stand together in the future as we have
in the past, the great, the small, the comparatively small, but fired by
the same motives, inspired by the same ideas, resolute in the same way.
/ 3 
-3-
I hope that this will be true. It has been true and I believe
it will be true. And for our part, speaking for Australians, wherever the
United States is resisting aggre-sinn, wherever the United States or the
United Kingdom or any other country is seeking to ensure that there will
be a chance for the free expression of the spirit of man from himself and
not from dictatorship; wherever there is a joint attempt to improve not
only the material but the spiritual standards of life of the peoples of the
world, then, Sir, we will go Waltzing Matilda with you. 



SECOND ViSiT TO US 1969
WASI-i* NPGTON
EXCHANGE OF REMARKS BETWEEN PRESIDENT NIXON
AND PRIME MINISTER GORTON UPON THE PRIME
MINISTER'S DEPARTURE 7 MAY 1969
PRESIDENT NIXON: Mr Prime Minister, as you leave the White House
and you are not leaving the country yet, because we hope you will stay
here for a few more days I want you to know how grateful I am for your
returning to the United States after having been here at the time of
President Eisenhower' s funeral, and for giving us the opportunity to have
a very full discussion of the major issues that are not really between us
so much as they involve our common interest for peace and security in the
Pacific area. This talk has been most helpful, as far as I am
concerned, and as far as the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defence
are concerned. We have opened a line of communication which will be
used very extensively in the months and years ahead in pursuing our mutual
purposes and goals in the world.
I want to say, finally, that as one who has been to your
country on two occasions, I hope to visit there again. And, like all
Americans, I have a very deep personal feeling, respect, for your country,
for your people and for the leadership that you have provided for your
people. We are very proud to have been your ally and friend in
great struggles in the past and to be your ally and friend as we deal with the
probi ens of the future.
PRIME MINISTER GORTON
Thank you very much, Mr President.
I feel that the written statement which you have made,
and which was agreed between us, gives a clear indication of those matters
of common concern which we were able to discuss in such depth. 2 
-2-
I think that we have reached an arrangement for close,
constant consultation between our two selves on matters which might
arise in the future and that this will be a great advantage to both of our
countries. I can only express gratitude to you for the hospitality
that you have extended, for the complete openness of your talks with me,
and a belief that not only the talks but the underlining of the importance
of the ANZUS Treaty to both of our countries which was evolved from the
talks are of considerable significance to Australia and to Australia's
future and I believe that that, in turn, is of some significance to the
United States and to the nations of the Free World as a whole.
Thank you. 



SECOND VISIT TO U. S. 1969
WASHINGTON
TELEVISION INTERVIEWS GIVEN BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON AT BLAIR HOUSE 8 MAY 1969_
CHANNEL 7 NETWORK ( Interviewer Norman Bennell)
* JC~ Q. PM: Q. PM: Q. PM: Q. PM: Firstly, Prime Minister, I wonder what assurances you had
this morning from your talks about the future of the Fill?
Well, we gathered a whole lot of technical information
and about the intentions of the United States Air Force. I think
this will be of great advantage to our own Defence Department
when we return to Australia.
Did you ever feel before these talks that the Fill might be
in jeopardy from Australia's point of view?
Well, one felt that there might be a problem and we wanted
to go into it pretty carefully to see whether that problem was
likely to develop or not. At the moment I would think it would not,
but we want to study all the information, the technical information,
the facts about intentions, the pexbd of use and all that kind of
thing. Turning to your talks in general, I wonder if you could sum
up the success of them2
I think they were successful. I think that the statement made
by the President himself was of great value to Australia and New
Zealand as a reaffirmation by the new President and the new
Administration of the ANZUS Treaty as it applies to Australia,
New Zealand and the United States. You will remember the
phrase taken from the Treaty itself which he used. It says nobody
should think that Australia, New Zealand or the United States stands
alone. I think that was very helpful and very reassuring. I
believe the talks were successful beyond that point. Though I think
I would prefer to wait to make a report to Parliament before I go
into any further details.
Your own impression of the President this time?
Well, it was the same as last time. I liked him very much.
I felt he was a strong man, a man with a sense of history and
the requirements of history, and I feel he would not be a man to
sacrifice what he thought was historically right for some ephemeral
immediate political popularity. /' 2 
y &amp; 7
-2
Is this why you use the term that yrq' would go
Waltzing Matilda with himn?
No. You see I never did say we would go Waltzing
Matilda with him. If you actually look at what I said, I said that
wherever the United States or the United Kingdom or any other
country is seeking to resist aggression, whatever joint effort is
made to try and improve the living standards and the material
well-being and the spiritua I well-being of the peoples of the world,
then we'd go awaltzing, and indeed, this is what we have done
throughout our history with the United Kingdom in two World
Wars, in Malaya, in Korea, now in Vietnam, in the Confrontation
and in trying to assist the general risie in living standards. This,
I think, is a policy which can be very difficult to say was wrong.
Q. Returning to Vietnam, Sir, did you find from these
talks anything hopeful for a settlement of the situation?
PM: I think that I couldn't say that I did find that. But there
is a feeling there may be a possibility in the future some time of
some hope but I don't think it is much stronger than that.
Q. Thank you very much, Sir.
CHANNEL 9 NETWORK ( Interviewer Michael Ramsden)
Mr. Prime Minister, four weeks ago you said of
Mr. Nixon, " I like the guy". How do you feel about him now?
My liking and respect has, if anything, grown very
much. Previously we met for a comparatively short time. On this
occasion, we met for much longer and the talks were far more
wide-ranging, and as they progressed my liking and respect for
President Nixon increased.
Your " Waltzing Matilda" comment at the White House
Dinner. Is this " an all the way with LBJ" type remark?
Perhaps I can best answer that by quoting from the
transcript of the dinner and of what I said.
" And this is that for our part speaking for Australians,
wherever the United States is resisting aggression,
wherever the United States or the United Kingdom or
any other country is seeking to ensure that there will
PM:
I, Q. PM.
Q. PM. 6110 5
&amp; tLJ_ I 
3-
be a chance for the free expression of the spirit
i of man, wherever there is a joint attempt to
improve not only the material but the spiritual
standards of life of the peoples of the world we
will go Waltzing Matilda with you."
Now this is in fact what Australia has always done. She has with
the United Kingdom fought in the First World War to resist the
overrunning of Europe. With the United Kingdom and other allies
later in the Second World War she took the same course. In
Indonesia, with confrontation between Indonesia and Malaysia, she
was there. In the Malayan emergency she was there, in Korea she
E was there and in Vietnam she is still there. And I believe that not
only in resisting aggression but also in positive action to try to
improve the general standards of living materially and spiritually
of the peoples of the worlds, Australia should be there. And that is
what I meant when I said, " We will go Waltzing Matilda with you".
Q. Sir, how conscious have you found the Nixon
Administration of the fact that Britain is pulling out of South East
Asia and the gap there has to be filled?
PM. Well, they are very conscious that Britain is pulling
out of South East Asia and I found the Administration generally
extraordinarily appreciative of Australia's decision to assist to the
limit of her capacity and particularly that that decision was made
without asking for anything in return, was made by Australia as its
own decision, without saying that this was conditional on something
else. They were quite strongly appreciative of this.
-4 Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you have now had your talks
with the Defence Department about the F-Ill1. What would you say
the odds are about Australia purchasing this plane now?
PM I'm not a racing man. Does " odds on" mean that it is
very, very likely to happen?
Q. Yes, I think that is what it means.
PM. Subject to a full examination of all the data, I believe
there is in fact not likely to be a prcblem.
Q. If in the event that we were to take action I know
you are approaching the situation very cautiously is Australia
likely to be penalised in any way financially or do we put this
money in a new venture if we have to? e. / 4 
-4-
PM. Well, it hasn't got anywhere near that stage yet.
People seem to think we are considering the possibility of cancellation
or something like that. We are not doing anything of t he kind. We
are looking at the new data, getting new information about the
intentions of the United States Air Force, the number of aircraft it
will have, the length of time it will be in service with that Air Force,
the question of spare parts. We are looking at that to see whether
there has emerged a problem since the initial arrangement and that
is all. It is not that we say that there is a problem. But we're
looking to make sure there isn't.
Q. One final question, Sir. You've invited Mr. Nixon to
Australia. When do you think the visit will take place and what sort
of a welcome would you like Australians to give him?
PM. I would like to see Australians give him the warmest
welcome that was possible. I wouldn't say when the visit would take
place because, after all, he is a new President and he has a very
heavy programme. But at the latest I would say 1971 and possibly
before.
Q. Thank you very much, Sir.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION ( interviewer Peter Barnett)
0Q. Mr. Prime Minister, at the White House Dinner the
other night you spoke in terms of going Waltzing Matilda with your
friends. What did you mean by that?
PM. Can I quote from the transcript that was made that
night because I think it will make it pretty clear what I meant. I
said: " And for our part speaking for Australians,
AICLZwherever the United States is resisting
aggression, or the United Kingdom or any
other country is seeking to ensure that there
will be a chance for the free expression of
the spirit of man from within himself and not
from dictatorship; wherever there is a joint
attempt to improve not only the material but
the spiritual standards of life of the peoples
of the world, then Sir, we will go Waltzing
Matilda with you. 
L39 z
( contd.) Q.
PPM. Q. PM. Q. PM. PM. And what I meant by that was that Australia would continue to do
what she has done throughout her history and that is to join with the
United Kingdom or the United States or the United Nations in attempts
to prevent aggression from being successful either in the First
World War, the fascist aggression of Hitler, confrontation in
Indonesia, the Korean war, ghe Vietnam war, the Malayan
emergency this is what we have done. i. just as we have joined
in joint programmes seeking to improve material standards for
peoples of the world and as we have in our own bilateral programmes,
we'll be there. And that is what I meant.
As you leave Washington after your talks with the new
Administration do you feel reassured that the Nixon Government will
have a continuing interest in our part of the world?
Yes, I believe it will.
And in terms of the President himself. You said last
time you liked the guy. What is your assessment this time, having
got to know him better?
That the likL. ing had increased and the respect had very
greatly increased. Australia is a close friend of the United States,
and is a focus of special interest here.
Have you felt that in this trip?
Yes. I felt that there was a special relationship
between the United States Administration and Australia. The feeling
towards Australia was something rather special.
Do you feel that they may take us for granted?
I don't believe there is any risk of that at all.
Laird.
F-1ll? You've just come from the Pentagon. You met Mr.
Gould you tell us anything about your talks regarding the
They were designed to get full data on the intentions of
the United States Air Force itself as to how long they would have their
F-ills in operation, the logistic backing for the spare parts, as to
performance, matters of that kind, in order to discover whether there
was a chance of a problem arising. Not to discuss a problem which
had arisen but to get further information in order to, as I say, be able
to make sure that no problem is likely to arise.
So at this stage it looks as though we would go ahead
with our decision to
Well, I want to go fully into all the data we've got. But
I would say that at this stage it does look that way.
Thank you, Sir.
I1 PM. Q. PM. 



BBC " MONEY" PROGRAMME
TV INTERVIEW WITH THE PRIME MINIST
THE KTM90N7JHN. ,, T
Interviewer: Mr. John Tusa r
Recorded on 24 April 1969 for screening on 8 May 196
Q. What do you see Prime. Minister as the dangers from a
completely " open door" policy towards foreign investment?
PM. I suppose a possible danger would be something which
was, in its effects even greater than the effects, say, of American
investment in Canada. Those, I suppose, one could indicate in this
way. First, I think it is true to say that in Canada about fifty per cent
of the earnings, or dividends at any rate, made by companies leave
Canada. And, secondly, there is a possible danger in the control by
some headquarters company outside a country of companies operating
inside a country. An example of that sort of control and I am not
saying it is a bad thing that happened but an example, I think, was
the instruction, as it were, given by a motor car company in the United
States to a motor car con-pany which it owned in Canada that its
products were not to be sold in a particular area. That is the sort of
problem that one might run into and I say might.
Q. What made you raise this sort of storm warning about
the dangers of foreign investment at this particular time?
PM. I don't think I raised a storm warning so much about
the dangers of foreign investment because we must have foreign
investment we must have it and we must have it in large quantities
in order to develop at all. What I did raise was the desire of the
Australian Government that Australians should be allowed to participate,
and be given an opportunity to participate, in the enterprises which
foreign investment made possible. I flagged that desire quite strongly.
Q. But do you think that even doing this has scared off any
foreign investment?
PM. No, I don't think it has scared off any at all. I've seen
no figures to indicate that the foreign investment has dropped or foreign
interest in investment has dropped. And I draw your attention to the
announcement made just the other day of this huge investment in the
Robe River development project, which I am glad to say is to be at
least 25 per cent in regard to equity offered to Australians.
Q. Could you define your Government's attitude to the
question of foreign takeovers of existing Australian companies? What
would you like to see happen there? / 2 
72-
PM. Well, the first thing I would like to see happen is for
companies to know whether in fact they were in the process of being
taken over by foreign companies. In other words, I would like to see
that shares in Australian companies held in the -names of nominees,
once they reached a certain percentage of the total shares, had by law
to be openly described as being in the beneficial ownership of the
particular overseas company, or indeed the internal company that
owned them. This, think, is in line with what is done in the United
Kingdom and in the United States. That is one of the first things, so
one would know what was going on, so that the companies would know
what was going on. Secondly, one would want to see that an approach
to take over an Australian company was properly made and was not
made on a basis of " first come first served" offers, but made on the
basis which . all the shareholders would know about and. all the shaxeholders
could consider and all the sh~ treholders could decide upon. Those are
a couple of points.
Q. But you said you were concerned about efficient
Australian companies being taken over just because they were a good
going concern. Is there anything you can do about this in practice?
PM. Well, I am not sure whether legally at the moment there
is anything one can do about it in practice. Also, of course, one has
some difficulty obviously in saying, " Well, this is efficient. This is
inefficient". In the broad, it is easy enough to see in particular cases.
It is also possible to imagine that even efficient companies could, by
partnership rather than takeover I would sooner see it done by
partnership with some other company bring in more technological
expertise, more managerial expertise. So it is very difficult thoroughly
to define. But there is in the United Kingdom power, at any rate. under
I think the Exchange Control, for a government to say, no matter what
the shareholders may want, " This particular company is so important
to the United Kingdom nationally that we would not allow it to be taken
over. We will use our Exchange Control". We, to some extent, do
this in Australia now. We do not allow foreign banks to come into
Australia. We do not allow civil aviation companies from abroad to
operate in Australia or to take over Australian companies. I think
the same applies to our television companies. So there are areas
already where the Government has said, " Well, we don't believe that
these areas should be allowed to be invaded". I don't see us extending
areas but it would be worth looking at, and is being looked at to see
whether there should be some legal capacity for a government to say,
in a case of a particular company let's, for example, take BHP, an
enormous Australian company to say, " Well, we wouldn't want this
company to be taken over. We would wish to be able to stop it". It
would have to be an ad hoc decision in each case and very rarely made
and publicly known. / 3 
3-
Q. Now, what about the question of equity participation in
new developments. You say you want a greater Australian equity
participation. Now, how are you going to get this?
PM. Well, I think that in the case of any reputable company,
clear statements of the government's requirements do have an effect.
Indeed I believe they have had an effect, since we have been making it
clear that this is what we want. We have some examples even before
saying so strongly what we would like of the sort of things that
Australia would wish to see. I believe that the fifty per cent partnership
between ESSO and BHP in discovering oil is one example of that. I
believe the sixty per cent ownership by Australia of Mt. Newman is an
example of that. The participation in the Robe River, which, I
understand, is going to be 25 per cent. There does seem to have been
a realisation by foreign companies that a government, having expressed
a desire for an offer and I stress the word " offer" of Australian
equity ( because we are not going to make the development of some
great industry dependent on Australians taking up what is offered;
Australians might not have enough money and might not wish to do it),
there does seem to be evidence that this is now being offered in greater
amounts than previously.
Q. But you aren't going to lay down say a firm figure of
say 25 per cent of Australian equity participation as a condition of the
development starting?
PM. I don't think you could. I don't think you could lay that
down for a thing like that because there would be so many enormously
differing propositions. There might be one proposition for a billiondollar
development. Another proposition for a $ 200, 000 development.
Well, clearly, trying to lay down there must be 25 per cent Australian
participation or that that must be offered would be so different in each
of those cases that I don't think you could definitely lay it down. But
there is something one could call a code of good corporate behaviour
which one could say that one expected foreign companies to follow.
That originated, I think, in Canada, and is well known to the significant
and reputable companies who want to work with governments. It
includes participation in management by, in our case, Australians,
it includes the offering of equity initially and the indication that further
equity will be offered, and indeed it approaches a partnership which is
really what one wants.
Q. Now, when it comes to starting developments like the
exploitation of mineral resources from scratch, is there a larger
part that Australian institutions especially insurance companies can
be persuaded to play, and this is what the Labor Opposition wants,
isn't it? / 4 
4-
PM. Well, I don't think from listening to the Leader of the
Opposition I would agree that what he said was that they should be
persuaded to play a greater part. I rather understood him to say that
they should be compelled to play a greater part. And I would not by
any means wish to say to an insurance company, which is after all
holding the premiums of people from all over Australia who are
expecting to be paid if they have to make a claim, I would think it quite
wrong to say to them, " We will compel you to invest in this enterprise
whether you wish to or not or whether you think you will get a good
enough return or not on your income".
Q. But what about persuading the insurance companies to
play a more positive role not to be investing in city centre buildings
but in mineral resources?
PM. I wouldn't think that insurance companies would need
to be persuaded to invest their funds in areas where they were going
to get a good return. They are being run by their hardheaded business
directors, and I believe that the opportunities for investment are ones
which they will judge and into which they will channel the funds they
hold.
Q. You said earlier, Prime Minister, that you were
worried about the question of excessive dividends leaving the country.
Have you considered or are you considering limiting the rights of
foreign companies to repatriate dividends?
PM. No.
Q. Would you say that you are an economic nationalist?
PM. I would like somebody to define " economic nationalist"
before I felt I could properly answer that question. But if wanting an
Australian participation of the greatest possible amount is being an~
economic national ist, then I would say I was an economic nationalist.
On the other hand, if wanting the greatest possible amount of overseas
investment, without which we can't develop as quickly as we need to
develop, is not being an economic nationalist, then I am not an economic
nationalist. I want we must have this overseas development. We
must have this development and we must have overseas capital. But
I want Australian opportunity to participate at the beginning, if possible,
of new enterprises, and to continue to participate as the enterprises
grow.
Q. Haven't you modified your views on this since the
controversy first started over the MLG about six months ago? 
PM. No, I don't think so. You see, the MLC matter was
this that large numbers of shares ( from memory something over
per cent) were being held in the names of nominees and nobody
knew who was holding them and nobody could find out who was holding
them. But we suspected they were being held by an overseas company.
It appeared that still more shares were being sought. Now the first
thing one wanted to discover was who was in fact seeking to buy control
of the MLC if they were seeking to buy control of it. The second
thing was that this was an insurance company, an Australian insurance
company with enormous assets, with assets which grow very largely
each year, and that is the sort of company which one might very well
wish to keep in Australian hands, and in fact would wish to keep in
Australian hands.
Q. Many people seem to have got the impression that you
started at that time with a wish to be fairly tough on foreign investment
but that you have been back-pedalling ever since?
PM. Well, I don't quite know what you mean by being fairly
tough. Do you mean that it is tough to say we want Australian
participation? To say to companies who are seeking to come here
from abroad, " The Government wants you to do this; the Government
wants you to follow a code of good corporate behaviour; you will be
operating in this country for a very long period of time and you don't
need to be told that it is to your advantage to co-operate with the
Government?" If that is tough, then I was and am being tough. But I
don't believe I ever indicated that I was going to legislate for a
particular percentage, because one can't do that. One flags the course,
one says what one expects and in some instances, such as companies
who are holding shares in the names of nominees, I think we must act
and must see that beneficial ownership is disclosed when it reaches a
certain percentage.
Q. In the last resort, Prime Minister, you are saying that
for a Government to express its wishes that this is going to be an
effective enough way of getting the policy that you want? It looks as if
you are not going to legislate on any of these matters. Now do you
think it is going to be effective?
PM. I didn't say I wasn't going to legislate on any of these
matters. We have discussed the question of the nominee ownership
of shares. We have discussed the question of methods of takeover.
We have discussed the question of whether there could be some ultimate
reserve power for a government to protect some very significant
Australian company. All those matters we have discussed, and I
haven't said that we wouldn't legislate on those. What you may be
asking about was were vie going to legislate to insist that something
couldn't go ahead unless there was an offer to Australians of a
particular percentage of equity. And I have indicated I wasn't going
to legislate on that.
Q. Prime Minister, thank you very much.
1 16 



% IEW8 DEf4A.
4BR A V0 SECOND VISIT TO US 1969
SYDNEY
RETURN PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, ON ARRIVAL AT MiXC OT
AIRPORT. 14 MAY 1969
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to be able to tell you anything much. You
realise that, of course, because I will be making a statement to
Parliament and I won't be answering questions concerning the trip
until I have made the statement.
Q. Will there be any surprises, Sir, in your report to
Parliament?
PM: Oh, I don't think so. I hope it will be of interest.
Q. When will you be making your report, Sir?
PM: I am going to try to make it tomorrow night.
Q. How would you describe the visit, Sir?
PM: Well, it was hectic but I believe it was well worthwhile for
a number of reasons which I will be putting before Parliament.
Q. Is it too much to expect an explanation of your Waltzing
Matilda statement?
PM: Why, does it need an explanation?
Q. Well can you tell us what the thinking was at the time
you. made that statement?
PM: My thinking is that Australia has always supported a
resistance to armed aggression, has always supported attempts to
raise material standards of living of the people in the world and 1
would be surprised if anybody thought we shouldn't continue to support
that.
Q. Sir, can you tell us the topics you discussed while you
were with President Nixon? 
-2
PM: No. I don't think I should do that either at this point of
time. This is' really a bit awkward because after all I have only
just got back. I have to report to Parliament and I will list all the
topics we discussed and what we said about them and then it will be
a subject for debate.
Q. I am certain Parliament wouldn't mind if you told us how
you wrenched your back horse-Wiing?
PM: I didn't wrench my back horse-riding. . I will tell you
exactly what happened. I had a couple of pressmen up there. Of
course they are all very good men pressmen but there were a
couple of pressmen up there who said " Can we come and have a
drink with you before dinner one nigheand I said, " Yes So they
came and had a drink before dinner and I said, " I've got a bit of a
stiff back. I was riding a rather rough horse today. The next
thing I know I had fallen off the horse and broken my back. and
whatever it is, you've read it:
Q. Sir, while you were away, Senator Fulbright said that
he had no doubt that any US Sena tor would be able to get into either
Woomera or Pine Gap bases. These bases have been denied to
Australian MPs. Have you any comment on this?
P M: No comment.
Q. What was your opinion of this man who is so critical of
the Vietnam war?
PM: Well, I had met him before and I like him. He is a very
forthright sort of a man and it is a pleasure to be forthright back to
him.
Q. Sir, will any US Senators be able to get into these bases?
PM: I couldn't tell you ' that at this stage.
Q. Did President Nixon tell you what he is going to tell the
nation today, Sir?
PM: No, but he will be doing this today, I believe.
Q. Before your official statement?
PM: Yes.
Q. H-ave you had any advice, Sir, of anything he is going to
say in it? ,3 
-3
PM: Oh, I think it miould interest Australia but 1 don't believe
it would be anything terribly significant at this point, but I haven't
yet seen it.
Q. Prime Minister will your report to Parliament cover only
your discussions with President Nixon or also, for example, your
discussions with Mr Laird on the Fill?
PM: The Fli will form~ a part of the statement.
Q. Broadly, Sir, how would you sum up your tour as
successful or more successful than you had hoped?
PM: I don't know that it is for me to sum it up. I believe it
was successful. It is for other people to assess it themnselves. I
think it was successful. Indeed, I believe that the statement issued
by the President alone was a fairly successful outcome in the
reaffirmation and underlining of the ANZUS Treaty.
Q. Did you have any disappointments, Sir?
PM: No, I don't think so.
Q. Were there any ma tters that will have to be followed up
in subsequent talks with the President? Were there any things
that were left incomplete by these talks?
PM: I think probably not followed up in subsequent talks with
the President. There are obviously technical matters vmh ich will
have to be followed up.
Q. Any indication when President Nixon might be able to
tour Australia, Sir?
PM: No definite indication, but I hope next year.
Q. Any plans at this stage for returning to the White House?
PM: Gosh no. Listen, I think in this last year approximately
a year I've been to New Zealand, I've been around Asia, I've been
to America, I've been tp England, I've been to America, I've been
to America again. I have just had thirty hours flying back. I would
just as soon stay here for a while.
Q. Sir, to get back to this question of visits of US politicians
to these bases. You said you were unable to tell us at this moment.
Is that because the whole thing was / 4 
-4-
PM: No, I can't tell you at this moment.
Q. Sir, do you believe the W altzing Matilda statement will
be politically damaging to you as it was with Mr Holt with his " All
the Way with LBJ"?
PM: No. In fact I would be quite pleased if somebody from
the Opposition, for example, got up and said they didn't believe
that Australia ought to resist aggression, and they didn't believe
Australia ought to go along with people improving material standards
of living. Australia has never reneged from doing this sort of thing
before and I don't see why it should now.
Q. Did it come as a shock to you, Sir, that there was another
major fault with the Fill?
PM: 1 don't know which one you are talking aboutl 



E MBA RGO: Not for publication, broadcasting or telecasting before
midnight Monday 19 May 1969
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 40/ 1969
DIRECTOR-GENERAL FOR ROYAL VISIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Lieutenant-General Sir Reginald Pollard, K. B. E.
C. B., I D. So. 0., has been appointed to take charge of the planning
of the visit to Australia next year by Her Majesty The Queen and
His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh. Sir Reginald Pollard
will be the Director-General.
Arrangements are being made with the Premiers
for an early meeting with the State Directors to discuss the
preparation of a detailed programme for consideration by Her
Majesty. As announced on 28 January The Queen and The Duke of
Edinburgh will visit Australia in March and April of 1970. They
will take part in the celebrations of the bi-centenary of Captain
Cook's voyage, and will visit the Australian Capital Territory,
New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania.
Sir Reginald Pollard retired from the Army in 1963
after a long and distinguished career which culminated in his
appointment as Chief of the General Staff in 1960. Sir Reginald
Pollard held the appointments of General Officer Commanding
Eastern Command 1957-1960 and Quarter master -General
1954-1957.
CA NBERRA
19 May 1969 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO THlE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA
Ministeria Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 15 May 196R]
, Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
leave-Mr Speaker, the House
will recall that I was to have had discussions
with the President of the United
States and members of his Administration
on the 1st and 2nd of April, but because
of the death of General Eisenhower the
discussions which were to have taken place
assumed the nature of preliminary discussions,
and it was agreed that these
should be continued on the 6th and the 7th
of May. I now take the opportunity to
report to the House on those discussions.
They took place with the President, with
the Secretary of State, the Honourable
William Rogers, and with the Secretary of
Defence, the Honourable Melvin Laird. I
also took the opportunity to meet the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee and
some members of the Senate Armed
Services Committee.
The purpose of my visit was not to deal
with any one specific subject. It was, in
one sense, a practical expression of the
close, frank and continuing relationship
between two good friends-Australia and
the United States of America. And it was,
too, a visit designed to get to know the new
President personally, to understand his
thinking and to let him know my own. The
ties between our countries, the common
objectives of peace and progress and
16447/ 69 human dignity transcend the personal
relationships of any two individuals. But
I believe these ties are reinforced, and
practical working between two countries is
made smoother, if two individuals-one a
President and one a Prime Minister-have
discussed common problems, have come to
know one another, to understand one
another, and to trust one another. And I
believe that * this understanding was
attained, and one result which has some
value for us was the arrangement made
between him and me for direct communication
on matters of concern to both our
countries during the formative stages of
policy and prior to major announcements
of policy.
The subjects covered in the various discussions
were the situation, and the courses
open to us, in Vietnam; the importance
attaching to the ANZUS treaty; the question
of the continuing interest of the United
States in Asia post-Vietnam; the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty; and such matters
as defence procurement in Australia and
the present plans of the United States Air
Force regarding the Fill aircraft. Through
all these discussions there was a deep feeling
of warmth towards Australia, a feeling of
a special relationship, a generous acknowledgement
of the part Australia had played 
and was playing to achieve common objectives.
And I felt this to be so not only in
the Administration but amongst the Senators
I met on Capitol Hill.
-Sir, it is understandable that my discussions
with the President should have begun
with Vietnam. We both wish ardently for
peace in that country-but we both believe
that peace can only be secured on any just
or lasting basis by guaranteeing to the
people of South Vietnam the right to choose
the government they wish without the fear
of terror or intimidation; the right to live
without the ever present threat of murder,
kidnapping or extortion. The President
has today spoken publicly along the lines
on which he spoke to me, and his speech is
clear and unambiguous. We must now
await the response of North Vietnam. But
this Government agrees completely on the
objective of free, internationally supervised
elections, at which candidates of all parties
could stand, as the objective for which the
struggle is waged. This was discussed both
during my original visit in April and during
the visit just concluded.
As a result of our discussions, and of the
President's speech today, there are three
things which I firmly believe to be true.
Firstly, I do not believe that America
will accept any fake peace or disguised surrender,
nor will she retreat from the requirement
that the South Vietnamese people
should themselves choose their own
government. Secondly, if in the future and before
there is any agreement on the proposals
made by the President today it is decided
to, withdraw some United States troops
unilaterally-and I do not say that this will
happen-this should be regarded as a sign
of strength. It should be so regarded because
it would indicate a belief on the part of
the United States that the South Vietnamese
had so strengthened their own forces, and
been provided with equipment for those
forces, that they were themselves able to
remove from the United States some of
the burden which -that nation has borne.
It would, I believe, be a tragic mistake on
the part of North Vietnam or anyone else
should they interpret any such move as a
prelude to a general withdrawal or as indicating
any retreat at all by the United
States from their determination to persevere
until the attainment of the objective of a
free choice by the South Vietnamese. There will be those who will say, should
there be such American reduction of force,
that Australia too should at once reduce its
forces. I believe that would be a wrong thing
to do. For one thing, the Americans have
greatly increased their forces since our contingent
was committed; and for another it
would be a shabby thing, the Americans
having built up the South Vietnamese
forces, to take some of the burden that is
borne by half a million Americans, for us
to withdraw our own forces and, to that
degree, impose a further burden-or at
least, to that degree prevent a lessening of
the burden borne by -the United States.
Thirdly, I believe that President Nixon,
as his speech showed, and subject to the
requirement for a free choice by the South
Vietnamese people beinZ attained, will be
flexible, untiring, and persistent in seeking
to bring the fighting to an end. In this he
will have our full support and our prayers
will go with him as he tries to achieve
this end.
Mr Speaker, perhaps the strongest
guarantee of Australia's future security
against physical attack is the ANZUS treaty.
It was first concluded under Mr Truman
in conditions prevailing after the close of
the war with Japan. But recently it has
appeared that there was in some quarters
a tendency to question whether the provisions
of the Treaty still apply with the
same force and certainty as at the time of
it5 conclusion. Any grounds for such questioning
should surely now be removed. The
new President and the new Administration
have strongly underlined the importance
and the significance which they attach to
that treaty. To quote from the public statement
issued by the President:
Australia is a member of Anzus and Seato,
-two alliances which are fundamental to our--
That is Americanstrategy and position in South East Aaia. As
between us-
America and Australia-
Anzus with itz provisions for mutual aid in
developing our individual and collective capacity
to resist armed attack, and its declaration that
, no potential aggressor should be under the illusion
that any of them-
That is, Australia, New Zealand or the
United Statesstand
alone in the Pacific area' is of great importance
to both our countries. 
And again:
All things considered I think Australia and the
United States can both be proud of the contribution
we are making, as partners, to the security
and progress of the Pacific region to which we
both belong. That partnership and that contribution
will continue.
Mr Speaker, those two extracts are a strong,
forthright and unambiguous re-affirmation
of the application of the Treaty-and rather
than weary the House with the statement
as a whole, with the concurrence of the
House I incorporate it in Hansard.
THE WHITE HOUSE
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
It has been a great pleasure to welcome Prime
Minister and Mrs Gorton to Washington. Mrs
Gorton is of course returning to the land of her
birth, so we always have a special greeting for
her. Prime Minister Gorton is no stranger to our
shores either, and he has come as -the Head of
Government of one of our closest friends and
allies in the world. We will always be delighted
to see them both. This visit has been most useful
for me and, I think, for other officers of this
Government. It has given us a chance to get
acquainted with an outstanding statesman with
whom we expect to be working very closely in
the future.
Australia is a member of ANZUS and SEATO,
two alliances which are fundamental to our
strategy and position in South East Asia. As
between us, ANZUS, with its provisions for
mutual aid in developing our individual and
collective capacity to resist armed attack, and its
declaration that ' no potential aggressor should be
under the illusion that any of them ( Australia,
New Zealand or the United States) stand alone
in -the Pncific area,' is of great importance to
both our countries. Australian troops are fighting
beside ours and those of other free world nations to
help South Vietnam preserve its independence.
Australian forces are stationed in Malaysia and
Singapore as part of the Commonwealth Strategic
Reserve, and Prime Minister Gorton has recently
announced that these forces will remain after the
British forces withdraw in 1971, to continue
making their important contribution to the security
of that area. This is a historic and far-seeing
decision, and needless to say, it has our full understanding
and the decision has our support.
Australia is also making an outstanding contribution
to peaceful co-operation and economic
development in its part of the world. It participates
wholeheartedly in the Colombo Plan, the Asian
Development Bank, and many other regional
activities. In percentage of national income devoted
to foreign aid, Australia ranks second in the
world. This is a record of which any nation can
be proud. All things considered, I think Australia
and the United States can both be proud of the
contribution we are making, as partners, to the
security and progress of the Pacific region to
which we both belong. That partnership and that
contribution will continue.
These two days have provided opportunities for
us to discuss a whole range of subjects, including 3 of course, Vietnam and regional security generally,
but including also a number of topics outside the
security field. Australia is geographically closer to
some of these problems than we are, and Prime
Minister Gorton has been in office a year longer
than I have, so I have very much appreciated
he opportunity to exchange views with him. I
have obtained a number of new insights, but
fundamentally, I find the perspective from ' down
under' is very much the same as it is from
Washington. This visit has been both profitable
and enjoyable for us. I hope that you can say
the same, Mr Prime Minister, and that you and
your charming wife will come and see us again.
It may be said that this statement affirms
nothing new since the ANZUS Pact already
existed-and in one sense that is true. But
I believe that for a President just come to
office newly to re-affirm, in such strong
terms, the importance of the Treaty is of
considerable significance to us, and to our
future-and that that in turn is of significance
to the United States and other free
nations of the world.
One further outcome of the talks on
ANZUS is that it has been decided to hold
a meeting of the ANZUS Council in Canberra
in August. The United States will be
represented by the Secretary of State, the
Honourable William P. Rogers. We have
also agreed that meetings of officials of the
three countries should continue to take place
from time to time, and for this purpose there
will be a meeting in Washington later in the
year. But the ANZUS Treaty does not merely
provide that we shall be assisted if our
forces or our country is attacked in the
Pacific. It also provides that we shall
co-operate in the establishment of installations
to help our joint defence. Under
Article II of the Treaty we have an obligation
jointly to maintain and develop our
collective capacity to resist armed attack. To
say we have this obligation is not to sayas
some falsely pretend-that we must
accept any and every proposal for any
establishment for any purpose.
The Australian Government must and
does retain the right of decision on any
proposal. Just as it must be, and is, provided
with full information concerning any proposed
base. But we have signed a Treaty
much to our advantage, and this imposes
obligations on us if we are to live up to its
spirit. A responsible Australian Government
would therefore need to be convinced that
there was good reason for rejecting a
proposal, as, of course, it could. 
There are some who argue that there is
good reason to refuse any proposal for a
joint defence establishment because such an
establishment might become the target of
attacks in nuclear war and might therefore
endanger us. My Government rejects this
argument. I cannot assert that in nuclear
war there would be no possibility at all
that such installations might be subject to
attack. But I will deny that this is reason to
reject such establishments. They contribute
to the military effectiveness and protection
of that power on whom the safety and
independence of Australia might, in the
future, depend. They assist that power on
whose capacity for military defence the
peace of the world may well depend.
In my judgment Australia is subject to
less danger, nuclear or otherwise, having
these bases and a joint defence treaty than
she would by not having these bases and
not having a joint defence treaty. Furthermore,
as a nation we expect to be given
protection in time of danger: and we must
therefore expect to give assistance in return.
What sort of a pusillanimous, unworthy,
nation would it be that said: ' We rely on
you to protect us-but oh no we won't
incur the slightest risk to help you protect
yourselves, and us, and others'?
This Government will not say that. If
there be those who take a different view,
that is their right. But it is equally their
duty, if they aspire to alternative government,
to state publicly they do take a
different view, and would not have these
bases, and give their reasons for it.
I come now to the question of maintenance
of secrecy about the purposes and
operation of such bases. This has, I know,
caused concern to others as it has caused
some to me, and it was a matter specifically
discussed with the President. In general, one
would wish to give as much information
as possible. But ' as much information as
possible' must mean as much information
as would not impair the effectiveness of an
installation or enable a potential enemy to
discover more quickly or more certainly its
purposes, and if the advice of military
leaders and military scientists is that little
or no information should be given because
it would help a potential enemy then we
should accept that advice in peace as we
would unhesitatingly accept it in war. This
we have done, and will continue to do. The President, however, agreed with me
that if any information is given, or is
intended to be given in the United States
in such a way that it becomes public, then
such information must at the same time be
given here. And if selected members of
the United States Congress under pledge of
secrecy make any visits to installations, so
too, provided they take the same pledge of
secrecy, must comparable members of -this
Parliament be permitted such visits. To use
the President's own words, in this matter:
' The same ground rules will apply to both
our countries'. The restriction of information
on defence establishments is nothing
new. To a greater or lesser degree it is
a practice of all administrations in all countries
at all times, and for reasons I have
stated, and subject to what I have just said,
we will continue the practice. But again, if
there be those who would depart from this
practice, who would insist on disclosure of
information before agreeing to a joint
defence project, it is their duty to Australia
clearly to say so now even though that
course might assist a potential enemy.
The question will be asked whether or
not provisions of the ANZUS Treaty, so
clear in relation to Australia, New Zealand,
and New Guinea, apply as clearly to Australia's
forces stationed in Malaysia and
Singapore. It would be misleading of me
to say that this was so in all the variety of
, hypothetical situations which might arise,
for while the Treaty is quite specific as to
certain areas it is not specific about those
of which I now speak. Yet I think it would
be equally wrong to assume that in certain
circumstances United States assistance
would not be forthcoming either under the
ANZUS Treaty or in some other way.
Indeed any attempt now to codify in advance
those situations in which ANZUS
might apply and those in which it would
not apply could well be restrictive, and,
being restrictive, do harm.
Answers to questions about our forces in
these areas are to be sought not in the
ANZUS treaty alone but in the whole complex
of actions and undertakings -by Australia,
New Zealand, the United States, the
United Kingdom, and the countries of the
region. These actions and undertakings may
be summed up as follows: Australia has
decided that it will maintain forces in
Malaysia and Singapore after the British
withdrawal in 1971, for purposes and under 
conditions already stated to the House. The
President of the United States, publicly and
privately, has backed, supported, and
applauded that decision. What we seek to
do is to prevent a threat arising against
Malaysia or Singapore or the region, and
we seek this by showing a willingness to
assist militarily in stated circumstances to
maintain security-and we see this only as
a means to the end of advancing economic
development in the area, strengthening the
capacity of the countries in the region to
defend themselves, and encouraging
regional co-operation, peaceful change, and
progress. The United States shares these
objectives and is contributing to these ends.
I am sure she will continue to share the
objectives and contribute to these ends in
Asia generally and in the region of Asia of
which I speak.
-Indeed President Nixon, during our
private talks authorised me to express his
own attitude as outlined now. He said that
it was the purpose and the determination of
the United States to continue to participate
in the Pacific and to strengthen the forces
of freedom and progress in Asia. He said
that he recognised fully the United States'
continuing role and responsibility in that
part of the world. He said that by birth,
by experience and by belief he knew that
the stakes in Asia went far beyond what
happened in Vietnam and that what happened
in Asia in the future could well
affect the future history of the world. He
had, he told me, always been Asia-oriented
as his history during 14 years in Congress
would show. He had been born on the
Pacific Coast, had gone to war in the
Pacific, and he would continue to be Asiaoriented.
The House may like to know that before
being said publicly here this paraphrase
which I have just given was confirmed with
the President as an accurate paraphrase of
his views.
Mr Speaker, I think it is not without
significance for Australia that such a firm
statement should be publicly made by the
new President at this time, and following
so soon on our own decisions. In the course
of our future history there will be many
situations which cannot now be clearly
foreseen, and as they cannot be clearly foreseen
it is idle to speculate about them. But
given the approach of the United States
as I have jus: expressed it, given the shared objectives, and given the close working
arrangements that already exist, I think we
can be confident that should -a threat
develop then there will be the closest consultation
and co-operation as to the means
of combating that threat.
I shall, moving on, touch only briefly on
the other matters discussed. I set out to
the Administration and to the President the
Australian Government's reservations as to
signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty at present. Reasons for these reservations
have been stated in -this ' House
before. Our questionings include anxiety as
to whether the Treaty offers an effective
safeguard to a threatened country; the
number of countries which have stated they
will not sign it; the other coun'tries which
have not ye" decided whether to sign it or
not; the terms of the inspection clauses, and
so on.
I found the President fully appreciative
of our position. He understood why the
Australian Government was not signing the
Treaty until our questionings were resolved
to our satisfaction. I am satisfied that no
pressure at all will be applied by the United
States Administration to induce us to sign.
I also took the opportunity, at the request
of the Minister for Defence ( Mr Fairhall),
to seek from the Secretary of Defence, the
Honourable Melvin Laird, and from the
Chief of Staff of the United States Air
Force, General McConnell, further information
as to intentions of the United
States Air Force regarding the Fl11 aircraft,
and general information regarding the
aircraft itself. The original intention to purchase
some 1,500 aircraft for the United
States Air Force and the United States
Navy has, as the House well knows, been
very considerably reduced and I understand
that the existing order is for 493 aircraft
of which 141 are FlIlAs which are comparable
with our own FIICs. The Chief
of Staff was emphatic that the United
States Air Force regarded the Fl111 as an
exceptionally good aircraft and that it
would be in service at least until 1980 and
probably much longer. The United States
Air Force expects the wing carry-through
box to be tested to 8,000 hours, or two aircraft
lifetimes, by July and intends then to
remove current restrictions on the operation
of the aircraft. However, the original
contractual arrangements called for testing
for 16,000 hours and I made it clear that 
we would not wish to take delivery of our
aircraft ourselves until that period of testing
had been satisfactorily completed. It was
again confirmed that the arrangements for
the ceiling price for our planes remained
in effect.
These general matters were the subject
of our discussion, but I understand there
are many technical details and matters still
under study by the Defence and Air Departments
of Australia and that these will
still need clarification and study by the
Minister for Defence and -the appropriate
specialist officers at a later stage.
Mr Speaker, most of what I have said
has dealt, in one way or another, with
matters of defence. This is natural, for our
own security in a changing world depends
to a very great extent on our relations and
arrangements with the United States-and
on the credibility of United States power
being maintained. I believe the President will be resolute to see that this power is
maintained. He believes that if it is not, the
peace of the world will be jeopardised. He
will pursue an American position of strength
and that strength will not be reduced until
the world becomes a more secure and
peaceful place.
But defence is only a means to an endthe
end of preserving the national independence
of peoples so that they can pursue in
freedom prosperity and the provision of
opportunity for the individuals who make
up nations. We, this Government, will do
what we can to help in these objectives.
I present the following paper:
Prime Minister's visit to the United States of
America-Ministerial Statement, 15th May
1969.
Motion ( by Mr Erwin) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Whitlam)
adjourned.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MuRA at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 41/ 1969
COMMEMORATIVE AIR RACE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government will give its support to
a proposed air race from England to Australia to commemorate the
anniversary of the historic flight by Sir Ross and Sir Keith Smith
in 1919. We have offered a grant of $ 25, 000 towards the cost of
the project, which the Royal Federation of Aero Clubs of Australia is
planning to stage at the end of this year. The Commonwealth offer is
made subject to the Federation demonstrating that it can raise
sufficient finance from other sources to carry the project through
successfully. The Government would also provide a trophy for the
, Winning crew. Arrangements are being made to associate the air
race with the celebrations of the Captain Cook Bicentenary.
The a ircraft would, a s fa r as pract icable, foll ow the
same route as the Smith brothers, touching into their home town of
Adelaide, before going on to Sydney.
CA NBERRA
22 May 1969 



(/ 061
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 62/ 1968
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Arrangements have now been completed with State
Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the Australian
Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Thursday 27 June and
continuing, if necessary, on Friday, 28 June.
I will preside at the Premiers' Conference and
Mr McMahon, as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the Loan Council
CANBERRA, 23 May 1968 



BENDIGO BY-ELECTION
TV Message from the Prime Minister
( Recorded 23 May_ 1969)
On June the 7th you will elect a representative for
Bendigo to the Federal Parliament. I ask you to elect Warren
Cambridge, the Liberal Party candidate, to help me and my
Government. He's Bendigo born and bred, active in community
service and, of course, was Mayor of Bendigo last year. He knows
Bendigo's special problems and can raise those problems where it
counts as a member of the Government ' s team. But he also has a
vision of Australia's future as we do a developing land, a growing
land, a land where the ill and aged are cared for, a land which
helps its neighbours and which builds its defences. For effective
local representation and for the good of Australia's future bring
Bendigo into the Government and send us Councillor Cambridge on
June the 7th.
Note: This message will be broadcast 12 times by BCV-8
during the campaign. It will be used for the first
time at 8. 15 p. m. on Monday, 26 May. 



LIBERAL__ PARTY RALLY Y
KING'SSCHOOL, PARRAMATTA, N. S. W. 24 MAY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Bowen, Parliamentary Colleagues, Your Grace the
Archbishop, and Distinguished Guests:-
The main object which I have in mind today is to have the
opportunity later for my wife and I to meet as many of you as it is possible
for us to do. But before we can arrive at what I hope will be the mrost
enjoyable part of the afternoon, and what I know will be for us the most
enjoyable part of the afternoon, I should take some time, I think, to
discuss with you my beliefs as to what politics is all about. Because
after all, you are all here as members and supporters of the Liberal
Party, and as members and supporters of one of our best members of
the Liberal Party in Nigel Bowen.
But why is it that you are prepared, as I know so many of
you are, to go out at election times and to man polling booths when it is
120 degrees in the shade or raining cats and dogs and on every election
I can remember it has either been one or the other. Why is it that you
are prepared to do that, to give of your time and of your effort to address
envelopes, to attend branch meetings, to go out from your own fireside
and divorce yourselves from your own desires to play golf or to do
whatever it is that is of greatest interest to you? What is the motivation
behind it? It is not, I am sure, just to get Mr. Smith or Mr. Brown
or Mr. Jones in some particular position. It must be more than that and
I know it is more than that.
It is, I think, because you have a vision of what this country
can do under proper leadership, of what this country can become for
yourselves and for your children if the proper measures are taken. And
because you have this vision, I believe that what it is that motivates you
is the desire to participate in achieving the end that your vision says is
possible of achievement. And that is what politics, basically, is all about.
I suppose that the most important thing in politics, though
it is not a pressing burden on us now, but still the most important thing,
is to see that within a country there is retained that freedom of expression,
that capacity to express dissent, provided it is not expressed by violence;
that ability to disagree with governments without fear of retaliation; / 2 
-2
that chance to cast a secret ballot, knowing it will be secret and that no
retaliation can result from it; that ability to choose and change
governments, that freedom and democracy which we take for granted
but which is, when we look at the world, the prerogative of only a small
part of it. And basically that is the first requirement to be kept.
I am bound to say that I think that the side of politics which
you support is more likely to retain those basic freedoms than are any
other kinds of politics in this country. For after all, it is not the Liberals,
if they disagree with something, who seek to resort to violence because
they cannot win majority opinion. It is not the Liberals who attack
physically those who disagree with them. It is not the Liberals who pelt
missiles at distinguished citizens of Australia because they don't like
what those distinguished citizens are doing. It is rather people supporting
the other side. But after that, what is politics about? I think it is to keep
the security of this country against attack from abroad so that these basic
freedoms can be retained, not only within against attack but against
attack from without. And I believe that that side of politics which you
support is more concerned in times of peace with preparing against attack
from without, with preparing for the security of this country, than is the
other side of politics. We have, as you know, and not without some agony of spirit
and some time spent examining all the possibilities, decided to accept the
challenge to our north posed by the withdrawal of British forces. We have
decided to involve ourselves in the region to which we are contiguous and
to help it economically, to help it financially, to help it technically and
to provide a visible token of our willingness to assist it to defend itself.
And this in a new era was a great and momentous decision.
We did not adopt that course proposed by our opponents of
sending some Australian forces in and out in a kind of a jack-in-the-box
approach of " Now you see them now you don't", which is as psychologically
inept as it is logically and logistically absurd. Rather we have decided
that our security is helped by helping the security of the nations to our
north, have adopted that principle and I believe in that way have greatly
helped our future security and that is another and most important thing
that politics is all about.
just as it is of the utmost importance for us, a small
country in a dangerous world, to be sure as sure as one can be in the
world that in times of stress and danger should they come, we will be
able to call upon the assistance of a great power, knowing that we deserve
it because we will know that we have lived up to the spirit of the treaty
we formed with it, and are not seeking only to take but are willing to take
and to give for our own security and, as I believe, that of the free world
generally. / 3 
3-
Having achieved the proper processes of democracy inside
a country and guarded them, having guarded the country itself these,
important as they are, are only the foundation for what we do with what
we have gained by those measures. It is essential that we should provide
for the people of this country an opportunity for work if they are prepared
to work and this has been and will be done; that we should bring into
this country new manpower without which the development of this country
would languish; that we should marshal for the development and growth
materially of this country capital resources and technological know-how,
not only from within ourselves but from abroad. Because if there was
ever a country that needed quickly to grow materially, that needed quickly
to grow in manpower, then that country is Australia at this moment in the
world's history. And these are things, I believe, that we can do with our
team better than any of our opponents can do. And you must believe that
too and that must be another reason why you are prepared to give of your
time and effort and thought to help us continue a path, and continue an
upward path which for the last two decades has been unparalleled in
Australia's past history.
Now these are material things of which I spoke, but you
must wish too, I am sure, that in a country defended, insofar as its
strength will enable it to be defended, growing insofar as its resources
will al'low it to grow, there should also be more than a mere material
approach. You must, and I know you do, want to see that within such a
community there is a real attempt, a real effort made to look after the
ill, the unfortunate, the aged and the handicapped amongst us. And you
must and I am sure you do want to see provided for the people and the
young people of Australia not merely an opportunity for a job, not merely
an opportunity for material advancement, but an opportunity to choose the
kind of job, the kind of work which an individual feels he is most fitted to
perform, to try and train an individual, whether they wish to be an artist
or an artisan, a captain of industry or a captain in the merchant navy,
whatever field of endeavour an individual feels he should be drawn towards.
A country which is great will help such an individual to develop in the way
in which his own internal urges seek to make him develop, and in that way,
as I believe, will give him a feeling of participation, a feeling of wishing
to give rather than demanding to be given to. Because no great country
can continue to be great if the citizens who make it up clamour only to be
given to and do not have a wish, an urge and an opportunity to give in
return. And this, though perhaps it is one of the hardest tasks, is still
a matter of what politics is all about.
So I believe at this juncture in our history is the fostering
of a spirit of pride in being Australian, a fostering of an Australian
nationalism, no matter whether one lives in New South Wales, Victoria,
Parramatta, Malvern or wherever it may be; an elation at some advance
in this nation of ours, whether that advance be Cove, Bass Strait, Sydney,
Mt. Newman, wherever. A feeling that this, wherever it is situated, is
something which helps our nation as a whole, and that should attract our
first and greatest loyalty. / 4 
-4-
I do not mean that we should foster or seek to foster a
feeling of chauvinistic pride. I feel that we should seek to foster a feeling
of pride, an acknowledgment of the great challenges that face us and a
willingness to overcome them, and should join with that a feeling of
humility at the tasks in front of us, at the luck this country has had and
has exploited, at the requirement to help our neighbours because of the
luck which we have had and which, with hard work, we have exploited.
These approaches to the life of a nation are the very basic
fabric of which politics is made. If it were just a matter of who is in and
who is out, if it were not a matter bound up with philosophies, if it were
not a matter bound up with approaches, if it were not a matter which over
the centuries has led communities to, in many cases, physical fighting,
then it would not matter much. But in fact if what I have said is true
and I believe it is then it matters greatly, and so it matters greatly,
I believe, that you are prepared to work as you are, that you are prepared
to come here today as you have, because in so doing you are contributing
greatly to the achievement of that vision, to the advancement of that nation
to which you belong, and I belong, and which I think can only I will not
say " only" and which I think can best be advanced by the application of
the beliefs which you and we have in common. 



REMARKS TO PRESS AT LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
MT. BARKER, S. A. MAY 1969
Q. PM. / 2
If you were asked questions about why you haven't
told them about Pine Gap or the F-Ills, why they are crashing, how
will you answer them?
If they ask me why are the F-llls crashing, I will say
all aeroplanes in the course of development have a number of crashes.
The F-ills at this stage of their development have had less crashes
than any other aircraft. As to when we are getting them I can only
answer by saying not until we are thoroughly satisfied that they are
completely safe and will meet the specifications which we expect them
to meet. Why haven't you been told about Pine Gap? Well, I
think I answered that the other day. If yourmilitary advisers and
your scientific advisers say that the giving of any information might
be of assistance to an enemy just as in war you wouldn't give that
information, so in peace you don't give it either.
But there is a lot of unrest and a lot of feeling about
Pine Gap. It is said we could become a prime nuclear target. We
are being kept in the dark. Is this true? Are we being kept in the
dark purposely? No. We are being kept in the dark because of the
advice tendered that to say anything about the station would be of
assistance to a potential enemy. It would help them to know sooner
than they otherwise would. They will probably find out in eighteen
months or a couple of years. But it would help them to know sooner
than they otherwise would just what particular purposes the station
is designed for. In the case of the North-West Cape station, of course,
it was different because everybody knew what it was for anyway. It
had been built in other parts of the world. It was a low frequency
communications station. But these ones, for good and proper military
security reasons, we are advised should not be spoken about.
It seems almost out of place talking about this sort of
thing at an LCL rally, but about this student unrest and the meeting
on Tuesday. Can you predict any likely outcome of this meeting?
What meeting on Tuesday?
There is a meeting in Canberra on Tuesday discussing
the student unrest. We were just wondering whether there were any
possible outcomes regarding heavier penalties against student
demonstrations.
Q. PM.
Q. PM. ( 0/ 063 
-2-
PM. Well, I don't know what meeting is being held on
Tuesday. It is not a governmental meeting, so I don't know quite
what meeting you are talking about, but I think our own approach
is the one which the Minister for Science and Education, Mr.
Fraser, had the other day. This is primarily one doesn't
object to dissent as such. This is good. This is questioning. This
is putting forward different ideas. This is fine. But if it erupts into
violence or the organised takeover of buildings in a university or
something of that kind then that is in effect a negation of democracy
because it means that people who can't get majority opinion are
prepared to take action by force. And that, I believe, is quite
wrong. But it is primarily a matter for universities to take action,
and secondarily a matter for State Governments to take action
because the universities are set up under State Government acts.
If something boils over into the street and there is a riot of some
kind or other then that clearly must be prevented and I hope would
be prevented by State legislation. 



66
VICTORIAN JEWISH BOARD OF DEPUTIES DINNER
MELBOURNE, VIC. 26 MAY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Ashkanasy and all those here assembled:
You do my wife and I a very great honour tonight and we
are touched by what has been said and by the welcome you have given
us. We find it quite heartwarming and we thank you for it.
You, Sir, mentioned the espousal or somebody
mentioned the espousal of Jewish causes. I do not think that what
motivates me or what motivates most Australians is a desire to espouse
Jewish causes as such. I think that it is a belief that at this present
time in history Jewish causes and the causes of Israel are right causes
and are just causes and are honest causes, and are espoused by us for
that reason rather than that they are the causes of some particular
group. And you, Mr. Ashkanasy mentioned what are almost
' half-forgotten things and battles long ago' the years of 1937, 1938 and
1939 when, to our great advantage, we opened the gates of this country
to those who were threatened in Europe. Sir, I can only assure you of
this: that there are countries today who oppress citizens of the Jewish
race living within them. There are countries today which conduct public
executions, and we have taken such measures as we can to ensure that
if those countries will open their gates to allow those who wish to
emigrate from them, then we will again open our own gates to allow
those immigrants to come in. And to this end we have already appointed
Immigration Officers. We have already called upon Great Britain to
act for us so that should these gates be opened for egress then we will
be able quickly to make provision for ingress to ourselves to our
great ultimate advantage, as I think has been demonstrated since 1938
by those who came from abroad to be Australians and have so contributed
to the Australian culture and the Australian way of life.
I am privileged to be with you here tonight and the guest
of such a representative body as the Victorian Jewish Board of Deputies,
and particularly perhaps privileged because all of us here in this room
have a special interest in two very vigorous, very sovereign, very
independent countries Israel and Australia. There is a bond between
us which does stretch back over the decades, which does stretch back
to battles shared. But It has been strengthened, I think, by increasingly
close relationship in recent days. / 2
0 
-2
It is my hope tonight that this year Israel's 21st
Ianniversary as a nation may, God willing, see a permanent settlement,
a real peace in the Middle East and in the Holy Land. It is magnificent
to win a Six-Day War, but it is not the solution to the problems which
face Israel, because that Six-Day War was won and yet those problems
still press in upon her borders.
What surely must be required, what surely must be
sought by the great powers of the world is that Israel and the other
countries of the Middle East should sit down together, should discuss
how they can live together, should and I think in the words of your
own President draw lines on a map so that the Arabs say " This is the
border" and the Israelis say " This is the border", and then there is an
argument and a discussion about it. As long as it can finally lead to an
0 agreed border and to a real enduring peace so that the people of Israel
do not have continually to live with a plough in one hand and a rifle within
their grasp, so that the country of Israel can contribute the savings it
W can make to the development of the desert and to the increasing of its
industrial capacity instead of having to divert so much to the very very
necessary present requirements of armaments and defence.
It is almost beyond my understanding that in a region where
so much can be contributed by the example of Israel and the technology
of Israel and the development of the desert which Israel has shown is
possible that this should not be availed of by its neighbours; and where
its neighbours equally with Israel contribute so much of their effort to
tanks and guns and aeroplanes and shells instead of to education and
advancement of their own people.
I can only express the deepest hope that for the benefit
of all those in the Middle East, there will be this year or soon an end
to this strife, a beginning of a living in brotherhood, a beginning of a
joint attempt to develop that area for the good of all. And this must
come about by peace talks, by peace conferences, and small though we
are in the councils of the world, our voice will always be raised to seek
that end. I speak to you tonight, too, as fellow Australians because
I believe that all those here in this room are concerned in this country
with providing a better life for those who are born here and for those
who, for one reason or another, have come here or may in the future
come. In our beginnings, our pioneers had to tame a harsh country, a
dry country, an unfriendly country. And is it not true that this has been
and is still true of Israel that the desert had to be watered, that the new
towns and cities and kibbutzes had to be built where previously there
was nothing but desolation? We can claim, I think, as Australians, some
success in battling with a harsh environment. So, too, can Israel, and
here again is a bond between our countries. o / 3 
3-
But there are differences. Here we sleep easily at night,
as you, Sir, have said, and here we go about our work without threat,
without danger, without the risk of grenades being thrown into our
market-places, without the chances of buses carrying schoolchildren
being blown up by landmines, without the possibility of plastic
explosives being placed where. they will damage innocent civilians. In
Israel that is not the case. And all along the frontiers, until that peace
of which I have spoken and for which I will work and for which we must
all hope will come, that will be the great division between Australia
and Israel that here there is an opportunity to live without fear while
in Israel there Is not.
I hope that we can help to abolish this fear. Insofar as
we can, we will. But in the meantime we can, and I believe we sho4ld,
express our admiration and respect for the fortitude that the people of
Israel are showing at the moment.
I like the symbols of the friendships between our countries.
We both, as I have said before, have stars on our flags. We both have
some affinity towards the eucalypt and the gum trees. I have some
affinity for it because you gave me a grove, although I am not quite
sure that it really belongs to me, but nevertheless you gave it to me.
Somebody I think my wife told me that you are now exporting back
to Australia gum tree seed, which I think is going just a little too far:
And you have there, in Israel, these finite examples of the ties between
us in Nachiat Victoria which has been established in the desert with
funds subscribed no doubt by many in this room and by many whom
you represent outside this room. All these things remind us of the links
we have with Israel. You, Sir, in your opening remarks, were kind enough
to say something about what my Government is trying to do. What we
are trying to do here can come under three broad heads. We are trying
to ensure our security against attack from abroad in the future, and who
could understand that better than people close to Israel. We are trying
to push forward our development and strength, and who would know about
that better than the people of Israel. And we are trying to see that with
the material advancement this will bring, we also have the spiritual
belief in a requirement for the welfare of the ill, the unfortunate, the
maimed, the handicapped amongst us. And isn't it true that Israel
opened her borders to all, however unfortunate, from whatever part of
the world they came, in order to provide what is the ultimate objective
of welfare, a better life and a happier life.
These three things again are things which motivate this
country and Israel, and these three things are of the essence of safety
and of progress. / 4 
-4
I would like to take this chance to acknowledge what the
community of the Jewish race and the Jewish faith have done in Australia
over the years. It is, of course, to the lasting credit of the Jewish'
people that they have maintained their spiritual values, that they have
maintained their religion, that they have maintained their standards of
conduct against the world ever since they were by the Romans thrown
out of what was the first State of Israel. This has been true no matter
where they have been born or no matter where they have lived. And
they have done this in Australia too, although most were born here and
although their integration into the Australian community has been, as
I believe, total. What have they given us? They have given us great riches,
I think, as have other races who have come here. They have given us
great advantages in developing our own culture and in bringing in and
infusing and diffusing amongst us their rich culture which many Australians
now think is their own and which in fact has become their own. I know,
Sir, that this will go on.
You have all won an honoured and respected place in
Australian life, and I am proud that even though sometimes it gets a
little lonely, I am Prime Minister of a country where bigotry is at a
discount, and where Australians accept each other for what they are.
And I believe that you will all agree with me that we in this room as
Australians are not troubled by what each man's faith might be or what
form the worship of his God might take. We are interested only in
" Is this man a good man or a bad man? Does he contribute to the
community? Or does he uot?" This is the way it should be. This is the
way it is and this, please God, will be the way it always will be in
Australia in the future.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and all those in this room
for the evening that you have tendered to my wife and 1. It is a night
that we will always remember, and the things of which we speak and
the things for which we stand are eternal things and they will overcome. 



E Re, Q
6 JUN 19690
SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, THE KT. HON. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE SITE
29 May 1969
The debate on the siting of the new and permnanent
Parliament House has now proceeded over something like the last
9 months. It resulted initially from the Government's decision
of last August to have a free non-party vote on the question of a site.
That debate provided a full opportunity for members and senators
to express their views, and most of them did.
The original proposal for the lakeside site was clearly
unacceptable to the majority of the members in each House, and that
site was abandoned. Subsequently, the joint Select Committee,
representative of all parties and both Houses, after hearing and
studying public and expert evidence from all those wishing to come
forward, overwhelmingly recommended to Parliament that the new
Parliament House should be sited on Camp Hill, as was originally
planned by Burley Griffin, the designer of Canberra. In the resultant
debate the House of Representatives voted to agree with the
recommendation of that Committee while the Senate voted to disagree
with it, and the Senate has also voted against the proposal for a joint
sitting. The position therefore remains quite unresolved.
It should not be allowed to remain unresolved because
of the need for planning and construction of other works, both road
works and construction which depend on the making of a decision as
to the site of Parliament House. Therefore the Government, feeling
that a decision must be made, has decided to inform the National
Capital Development Commission that Camp Hill will be the site of
the new and permanent Parliament House. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 42/ 1969
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Arrangements have now been completed with the
State Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and
the Australian Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Thursday
26 June, continuing if necessary on Friday 27 June.
I will preside at the Premiers' Conference and
Mr. McMahon, as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the Loan
Council. CANBERRA May 1969 



OPENING OF CASEY WING AT ROYAL MEL-BOURNE
INSTITUTE OF ' TECHNOLOGY, MELBOURNE 2 JUNE 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:
You were kind enough, Mr. ' Chairman, to mention an early
association of mine with this concept of Colleges of Advanced Education.
And indeed it was, I think, a bold and new experiment to start such colleges
and to make them not competitive with universities, not on a collision
course with universities but turning out people with the same graduate
W standards as the university could turn out, and with a slightly different
motivation in their education. So many of them, unfortunately, ( because
I heard what some had said in the back previously) destined, I am afraid,
to become bourgeousie. And, indeed, Mr. President, the time had come in Australia
when this new experiment should be begun. We are going to have, between
11967 and 1972, 50 per cent more students staying in matriculation forms
at secondary schools and then coming on to tertiary education. And what
we see here in this building is not only the beginning of a ten-year plan of
great significance for this RMIT College of Advanced Education, but is an
example of what is happening through the length and breadth of Australia
in these kinds of institutions. So that in Ballarat, in the Gordon Institute
of Technology, in Bendigo, in every capital city from Rockhampton to
Kalgoorlie, these buildings are going up to serve the requirements of
students who want practical education as well as liberal education and to
serve the requirements of this nation now and in the future.
Mr. Chairman, I think that in the last four or five years or
so, there has been a great advance in the provision for education in Australia.
We have, for example, taking the Commonwealth Government alone, reached
~ astage where we are providing $ 17 a head of population for education,
whereas some years ago it was
The capital requirements alone for buildings such as this,
for universities, for science laboratories in schools, for libraries in schools
totalled some $ 248 M. and adding in all the scholarships that have beer,
brought newly in or expanded, the Australian Government, without
mentioning State Governments, is spending some $ 210 M. a year on
education. Indeed, Mr. President, I can say with some pride to quote
a phrase I seem to have read some time ago that the Australian
Government is " poking its bib into education" in quite a significant way
and to the good of the nation as a whole. / 2 
-2
Mr, President, it was some eighty years ago, I believe, that
~"~; Francis Ormond started this College and set the ball rolling, and at that
tietrade unionists subscribed half a crown a head to the capital required
to begin what has now grown and is now growing into a magriificant institution.
And half a crown a head i those days for a trade unionist was no small
Isum of money. It must be as much satisfaction to you, Sir, as it is to me
to see that on the Representative Council of this College the Trades Union
Council is still represented, and may it continue to be so represented.
We will not really know in Australia what the end results
of this will be for some few years. We must wait to see what the reports
are, coming back from industry in Australia. But that there is a requirement
for this kind of education cannot be argued against. Let's take 6ne example
only. The Mining Industry Council just recently pointed out that there would
be a need for twice as many engineers in 1972 in Australia as there is today,
and these, these practical engineers must come from colleges such as this.
iThat is but one example of the requirements of technical education which
V must be allied with a liberal education at the same time.
Sir, you are not, as I said before, embarked on a competitive
or a collision course with universities. Rather you are developing an
alternative system, and I believe it is up to everybody sitting here today,
and indeed everybody standing here today, particularly if they come from
this college and not from outside, to endeavour to sell as hard as is possible
the great requirement for graduates from this kind of college and the great
contribution they can make to our national life.
But it does not, it must not mean that the education here
provided is narrower than the education provided in established universities.
All it means, and what it must mean is that the twig, as it were, is being
bent so that it grows into a great strong tree of as great significance and
able to contribute as much as can any tree grown on any established
university campus. This is something new and an example of progress
that is happening. But it is only a beginning. It is, of course, only a
beginning in the active development of educational systems in Australia
Igenerally. We are here, I think, breaking out with this concept from
the conventions of the past, from the conventions applying to education in
the past, good though they were, strong though they must continue to be.
* Nevertheless, new times demand new thinking and new ways, and from
these colleges new thinking and new ways will, I believe, come. This we
are trying to provide but its success will depend on those going through
the colleges and what they get out of them and what they will contribute to
the nation after they have finished. / 3 
-3-
Mr. President, I believe that this college can do a great deal
to see that the concept is successful. And I am delighted to see that your
Department Advisory Committee includes representatives of all branches
of industry, because this will help to spread throughout Victoria what the
Victorian Government, our own Government and you are trying to do.
Sir, I believe this that from this new concept will come
students with the skills we require, the more highly developed skills we
require and the cultivated minds that individuals require so that they will
be able to go out into the nation and work in a field they wish to work in,
in which they can develop their own personality, in which they can contribute
to their own satisfaction and to the growth of this country to which they
belong.
b I now declare this building the Casey Building open. 



( Q/ 0 69
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 43/ 1969
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Invitations have been extended to representatives of national
organisations to meet with Ministers in Canberra next month.
Ministers will meet three groups of representative
organisations on 9 July primary industry, manufacturing industry and
commerce. Invitations have also been extended for representatives of
the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and of the Export
Development Council to have separate discussions with Ministers on the
morning of 10 July, and for representatives of the Australian Council of
Trade Unions to meet Ministers that afternoon.
The talks will, I am sure, be most useful in providing
Ministers with the first hand views of those directly involved in commerce
and industry before the Budget discussions begin.
Below is the list of the national organisations invited to tak~ e
part in these talks.
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS INVITED TO BE REPRESENTED AT
E CONOMC CONSULTATIONS
9 July 1969
Primary Industry Group
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian Wool Growers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers' Federation
Australian Mining Industry Council
Manufacturing Industry Group
The Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Commercial Group
The Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers
CANBERRA 2 June 1969 



(ø/ 070
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 44/ 1969
MILITARY EQUIPMENT FOR MALAYSIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Government has agreed to provide the additional
military equipment recently asked for by the Malaysian Government.
The supplies requested are of a type already being
provided to Malaysia under the existing Defence Aid Programme,
and include rifles, communication equipment, life jackets and
small boats for patrolling inland waterways.
Supply of the equipment accords with our policy of
helping the Malaysian Government to build up its own armed forces
and it will be charged against the funds already provided by
Parliament for the Defence Aid Programme.
CANBERRA 3 June 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 45/ 1969
BENDIGO BY-ELECTION
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton L~~ i
I congratulate Councillor Cambridge on the results
of the Bendigo By-Election.
It is too early to say who will win the seat, and the
distribution of preferences will decide this.
But considering the Labor Party had an absolute
majority of primary votes at the last three House of Representatives'
elections for Bendigo and that by-elections traditionally go against
sitting governments I believe the Liberal Party and its candidate
have done well. My congratulations go also to the Country Party's
Ralph Hunt for retaining Gwydir for the Government.
CANBERRA 8 June 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. Mlv. No. 46/ 1969
REDUCTION IN U. S. FORCES IN VIETNAM
Statement by the_ Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton C j
It is necessary to draw a distinction between Ameni LIB
force reductions made possible by an increase in size and fighting
capacity of the South Vietnamese forces, and force reductions by both
sides as a result of agreement with the North Vietnamese. We are now
dealing only with the first of these.
The United States decision to withdraw twenty-five
thousand of the half million men they have in Vietnam was foreshadowed
as a possibility in my report to the House of Representatives on 15 May
this year. I then pointed out that if this happened it should be
interpreted as a sign of strength because it would mean that the South
Vietnamese had so strengthened their own forces that they could remove
from the United States some of the heavy burden which that country has
borne. I pointed out also that it would be a tragic mistake for
North Vietnam, or anyone else, to interpret such a move as a prelude
to a general withdrawal or any retreat by the United States from their
determination to persevere until the attainment of the objec~ ive of the
right of self-determination by the people of South Vietnam. I believe
both these observations remain true.
We must continue to hope for a peaceful settlement along
the lines suggested by President Nixon's eight-point plan, and an opportuni
opportunity for the South Vietnamese people freely to determine the kind
of Government they want.
It may be urged that Australia should at once also reduce
its forces. I believe that would be a wrong thing to do. For one thing
the Americans have greatly increased their forces since our contingent
was committed and for another it would be a shabby thing, the Americans
having built up the South Vietnamese forces to take some of the burden
now borne by half a million Americans, for us to withdraw our own forces
and to that degree impose a further burden or at least to that degree
prevent a lessening of the burden borne by the United States.
CANBERRA 9 June 1969 



' THIS DAY TOINiGHT"
Interview given by the Prime Minister, Mr John G#. to6n
on ABC Television 7.'
Interviewer Philip Koch 9 JUNE 1969
Q. Prime Minister, could this American withdrawal of
troops point the way to you bringing home some of our own
soldiers?
PM: I don't t ' hink sD. As I said in the House on the 15 May,
this unilateral withdrawal was quite possible. But I think it
would be wrong for various reasons to think of bringing home
Australian troops at this time. For example, since our Army
was built up to its present strength our Army contingent
the Americans have increased their forces by some 50, 000
and what they are doing now is taking away some of the increase
that was made since we made our commitment. They have got
540, 000 troops there. Secondly, I think it would be rather shabby
to withdraw Australian troops at this stage because the Americans
have built up the South Vietnamese to try and take some of the
burden off the half million troops they've got. We wouldn't want to
add tO the burden, or at least stop the burden being reduced.
Thirdly, our force is a self-contained force and unless it wais
all withdrawn, withdrawing parts of it would be militarily quite
ridiculous.
Q. Did President Nixon consult with you in any way on. what
he might or might not do at the midway talks with President:
Thieu?
PM: Yes, I had a personal letter from him yesterday about
it, but I had discussions with him in the United States as well
and we had previous correspondience, and indeed, we have
expressed a view ourselves. But it was because I knew this
kind of limited unilateral withdrawal was a possibility that I
made my statement in the House on the 15 May, pointing out that
it was possibility and that if it took place it should be taken as
a sign of strength and not in any way as a sign of weakness.
Q. Well, then how do you feel about the pressure on
President Nixon at home to end the Vietnam war. Do you think
he might be forced into making poor concessions which would be
less than satisfactory to South Vietnam and Australia? a. / 2 
-2
PM: I don't believe so. 1 believe he realises there will be,
as there are, quite strong pressures from various quarters in
the United States to end the wars that he recognises this and he
accepts that it would be the wrong thing to do to end it other than
by attaining the objective of giving the South Vietnamese people
the right to free elections and to choose the sort of government
they would wish. He made that clear to me and I believe his
communique from Midway makes it equally clear.
Q. Now, before the Midway talks, President Nixon put
forward a peace plan in which he called for a mutual withdrawal
of American and North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam..
Do you expect Hanoi to reciprocate now in any way?
PM: I would be surprised if they did as a result of that
gesture by the United States. This must not be confused, this
unilateral withdrawal of some 25, 000 troops who are going to be
replaced by South Vietnamese troops. This must not be confused
with a mutual withdrawal such as was suggested
Q. I was thinking more in terms, Prime Minister, of later
on. This is the first 25, 000 and President Nixon has indicated
that he might withdraw more. If he did, would you expect Hanoi
to come to the party?
PM: I would again be su rprised if Hanoi took any note of
anything except an agreement for mutual withdrawal. I think the
President has made it clear that though in future he is going to
examine further possible unilateral witharawals and replacement
by South Vietnamese troops, he would want to be sure if he did
that, it didn't weaken the Allied po. nition and he has also made it
clear that he is adhering firmly to the objective of self-determination
for the South Vietnamese people.
Q. So then you don't feel any concern that perhaps there
would be too many American concessions at Paris in this regard?
PM: I don't think we should confuse the Paris peace talks
with what is actually happening now in South Vienam, but I myself
believe that the United States President would be quite firm
flexible but quite firm in attaining what he stated over and over
again to be the objective, that the South Vietnamese people should
be able to choose a government of their own free from terror and
at free elections, at which anybody could stand. 
3-
Well what would happen if the North Vietnamese Hanoi
launched an all-out offensive later on this year in South Vietnam
in which the South Vietnamese forces broke down,? Could you
envisage President Nixon sending back troops to Vietnam?
Well, in the first place, I don't see that the withdrawal
of 25, 000 troops out of 542, 000 is going to lead to a situation
where the whole thing can break down. That doesn't appear
reas onable. I believe if there were a general offensive by North
Vietnam, it would be a tragic misinterpretation on the part of
North Vietnam. They would be interpreting this as weakness when
it isn' 1t a sign of weakness at all.
Thank you, Prime Minister.
I
.1
Q.
PM 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 47/ 1969
APPOINTMENT TO NATIONAL RADIATION
ADVISORY COMMITEE
Statement by the Prime Minister,_ Mr. John Gorton
Dr. J. M. Rendel has accepted an invitation to
become a member of the National Radiation Advisory Committee.
Dr. Rendel is Chief of the Division of Animal
Genetics of the C. S. I. R. 0. and Chairman of the Animal Research
Laboratories. He will fill the vacancy created by the resignation
of Mr. D. A. Gill. Dr. Rendel, with his background in animal health
and production, is well qualified to assist the National Radiation
Advisory Committee, which was established in 1957 to advise the
Government on the effects of ionising radiation on the Australian
community. CANBERRA June 1969 



f/ q
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 48;, 1969
NUCLEAR POWER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Federal Government has invited New South Wales to
collaborate in a study of the feasibility of the establishment of a Commonwealth-
owned and controlled 500 megawatt nuclear power station. It is
also inviting all State Governments to work with the Commonwealth on a
National Consultative Committee on Nuclear Energy.
Announcing this today, the Prime Minister ( Mr Gorton)
said that the Commonwealth would prefer the station, which would be a
pilot project for Australia, to be sited in the Australian Capital Territory
or the Commonwealth Territory at Jervis Bay, although this would be
subject to technical considerations. Mr Gorton emphasised that at this
stage the Commonwealth is only prcposing a feasibility study and had not
yet made a decision to build a reactor.
If the project were to go ahead, all States would be invited
to send teams of officers to gain experience in pre-construction procedures,
construction, and commissioning of the station. Power surplus to the
needs of the Commonwealth Territories would be sold to New South Wales
on agreed terms. Mr Gorton said that the proposal for a National
Consultative Committee on Nuclear Energy followed recent discussions
between the Minister for National Development ( Mr Fairbairn) and State
Ministers responsible for power and that it would consider such matters
as The use of indigenous fuel in Australian reactors
* Licensing reactors
* International obligations on safeguards on nuclear
materials
* Disposal of radio-active waste
* Liability for injury to civilians in nuclear accidents
" The Government has taken the initiative to establish such a joint
Commonwealth, State consultative organisation because we feel that this
is the time to lay the foundations for a sound administrative and legal
framework for the introduction of nuclear energy in the power generation
field, Mr Gorton said. " Other countries have found that the building of
such a framework takes years and a late start can hamper the establishment
of a nuclear industry.
CANBERRA, 12 June 1969 



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 49.1969
PATROLLING OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton.
Patrols by the RAN and the RAAF along the Great
Barrier Reef are to be increased.
For some time now, the RAN and the RAAF have
been regularly patrolling Australia's major fishing grounds.
The increased range and frequency of these
surveillance missions along the Great Barrier Reef will provide a
further deterrent to breaches of Australia's fishing laws.
Action will be taken to apprehend any unlicensed
fishing boats found operating in the area in contravention of those
laws. CANBERRA, 13 June 1969 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 50,1969
NEW CHAIRMAN OF ART ADVISORY BOARD
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
I have agreed to a request by Sir Daryl Lindsay, made
some iu. e ago, that he be permitted to step down as Chairman of
the Commone alth Art Advisory Board. He wishes to concentrate
his energies as Chairman of the Interim Council of the Australian
National Gallery, but has agreed to continue to serve as a member
of the Board.
Board and a
of the Board
a member.
appointment Mr W. A. Dargie, CBE, at present a member of the
distinguished artist, will become its Chairman.
Sir Daryl has given distinguished service as Chairman
, and I am glad his services will still be available as
I am delighted that Mr W. A. Dargie has accepted the
as Chairman.
CANBERRA, 13 Jupe 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 51/ 1969
FLOREY MEMORIAL FUND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government is to make a
contribution of $ 10, 000 to the fund which is being established
to perpetuate the memory of Lord Florey.
The Florey Memorial Fund is being sponsored
jointly by the Councils of the Royal Society and the Australian
National University, with appeals in Australia and Britain.
It is proposed that the memorial should take
the form of post-doctoral visiting fellowships between Australia
and the United Kingdom, to be known as Florey Fellowships.
The awards will be made for investigation in the biomedical
sciences in fields related to Florey's own work.
Lord Florey, who was born in Adelaide in 1898,
will be best remembered for his pioneering research in the
production and use of Penicillin, for which he shared the Nobel
Prize for Physiology and Medicine in 1945. Lord Florey was
President of the Royal Society from 1960-65 and Chancellor of
the Australian National University from 1965 until his death in
1968. Although Lord Florey spent most of his working life in
England he took a great interest In science in Australia, in
particular in the establishment of the Australian National
University. It is fitting, therefore, that the memorial to Lord
Florey should be in the form of scholarships to enable an
interchange of young scholars between Australia and the United
Kingdom. CANBERRA 17 June 1969 



FIVE POWER CONFERENGJ! ." C
Parliament House, Canberra. K
19 june, 1969
OPENI: NG ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MiNISTER-, MIR jOIN GORTON
Gentlemen: What am doing now is outside the Conference proper but
it is something which gives me great satisfaction to do. That is, in the
first place, to have the opportunity to welcome here in Canberra, the
capital of Australia, distinguished Prime Ministers, Foreign Ministers
and Defence Ministers and those who have come with them, and to say
that we are fully conscious of the honour which is done us by your travelling
to confer in our country.
1 think we have come together because we have a common
interest a common interest in the economic progress of the region
in which we live and in which we ha-ve been, and I trust will continue to be,
interested. I believe we all think the economic progress of this region
must be reflected not only in bank statistics or statistics as to the
holding of foreign exchange or matters of that kind, but must be reflected
in an improved standard of living of the individual citizens who make up
the countries of the region.
And 1 believe that all of us think and I certainly think that
this kind of progress can best occur ( now that the situation is completely
changed from what it was previously because of the British decision to
withdraw), that this progress can best occur as a result of continuing
stability within the region, and as a result of all countries present,
including Britain, contributing to military forces which can help to defend
the region against external attack.
Stability within the region, that sine qua non, that requirement
for the proper progress of the region, will depend on the absence of
attacks or threatened attacks by any nation within or close to the region
against any other nation within or close to the region. It will depecnd on
the dim-inution and ultimate elimination of racial tensions in nations
within the region. It will depend on the creation of communities in each nation
in which all citizens have, and are seen to have, the same opportunities
for advancement in any chosen field of endeavour which the individual
may wish to enter. And it will depend on growing and more widelyshared
prosperity. 2 
-2
The defence of the region against outside attack external
attack will depend, I think, on the full acceptance of the fact that the
defence of Malaya and Singapore is indivisible, and on the acceptance of
the requirements the general planning, the provision of assistance, and
the acceptance of the req uirements which flow from the acceptance of
that basic fact. Our own approach, our Australian approach is, I hope and
believe, well known. We wish to co-operate with countries in our region
and to help when we can in all the ways in which we can*. I believe that
in fact we are doing so, though there is always room for argument as to
whether we are doing so to the extent which others might wish. Still, . we
are doing so, and for the reasons I have given.
One of the ways in which we decided to do so is by the ret ention
of some Australian forces in the area, a visible presence, a continuing
visible presence, a presence which has been described not by me but
I see the validity of the description as something which may appear to
others -at any rate to be the tip of the iceberg. We are retaining ground
forces which will, for the best military, logistic and financial reasons
and for great reasons of commonsense, be based in Singapore, provided
Singapore wishes them to remain in the area; forces which will not,
however, be confined to operations or exercises in Singapore, forces
which are there under the concept that defence against external attack
is, as far as Singapore and Malaya are concerned, in our view indivisible.
And we are retaining, as you know, air forces which will be
based in Malaya, provided the Malaysian Government wishes us to
remain in Malaysia, and provided, in the case of our ground forces tha
the Government of Singapore wishes us to remain ! u the best place to
base our troops, namely, Singapore.
These forces have the objective of assisting and I emphasise
the word assisting in defence against external aggression or subversion
which can be clearly seen to stem from -without the region and can be
clearly seen to be supported by external regimes. And our forces are
there for no other purpose. The maintenance of i ' nternal order in any
country or the involvement in internal quarrels in any country are not,
and will not be, our business.
I don't envisage that this meeting will arrive at the acceptance
of firm m-ilitary plans for operations or that it will attempt to lay down
firm conditions, and spelt-out circumstances under which the various / 3 
-3
forces which are available to assist against external aggression will
be used, Indeed, I think it will be better for this not to be done and
not to be attempted to be done,' but rather that general understandings
will be reached and actual decisions on the use of forces left to be made
on each country's judgment of circumstances as they may . arise in the
future. But I do believe and hope that this meeting will advance
further the general concept of Five Powers being interested in providing
assistance for a most significant region against attacks which may
develop against that region from outside. I hope this meeting will
advance planning on such things as radar control of aircraft; advance
planning on such things as the joint exercises which may, and I sincerely
hope will, continue to take place after the end of 1971.
1 also hope this meeting will advance still further the idea
that not from Australia, New Zealand or Great Britain alone, but that
from Singapore and from Malaysia as well, there will be a capacity
for joint opposition to any external threat which may arise and a full
acceptance of the fact that the countries in the region I include
ourselves and New Zealand in my mind will jointly exercise; will
jointly be prepared to resist ( again in each case subject to the judgments
of each individual around this table or rather of each government
represented by the individuals around this table) any external threat
which may arise. I do not think that I should, in making brief opening comments
at this meeting, make any long speech. But given conditions of
brotherhood inside the countries of the region, given conditions of
progress because of stability inside the countries of this region, then
we, all of us, have a duty to try to see to the best of the ability of
each of us, that this progress and this stability is not endangered from
w itho~ ut. If the task, as is possible who can tell what the future
holds if the task, as is possible, might at some future time become
great, greater than the resources all of us are able to put together to
counter, then we would hope and expect that there would be others that
would come to our assistance. But whether that be so or whether it be
not, if this conference does advance further concrete practical plans for
how to operate, how to command, how to control joint forces, then I
think it will have made a step forward. Not the only step because the
protection of existing regimes or the protection of governments of individual
countries, including mine, is not dependent in the last resource on 4 
-4-
force but rather on the judgment of all the individuals that make up
those countries that they are well off comparatively and are therefore
prepared to fight to retain that comparative position if it is threatened
but one significant step.
This, I think, is what this meeting is about, and I wish it
God-speed in its deliberations. I believe that because of the calibre
of those sitting around this table, either leading the countries which
they represent or playing the most significant part in the defence
plans of the countries which they represent, that there is every hope
that this conference will achieve what it sets out to achieve That in
great degree is up to you.
And the measure of the success which you achieve in the next
two days will be shown by events which occur in the next ten or fifteen
years in the countries to our North and be shown by the effect on the
world because there will be a significant effect on the world, including
Europe of what happens in the next ten or fifteen years in this region.
I wish you gentlemen the best of luck and I believe that not
only my own prayers and the prayers of Australians, but that indeed the
prayers of all whether they be Moslems, whether they be Buddhists,
whether they be Christians, whatever they be, are with you in your
deliberations, and I trust will sustain you ii them. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 52/ 1969
FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR DARTMOUTH DAM
The Prime Minister and Treasurer met with representatives
of the Governments of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia in
Canberra today to discuss the financial arrangements for the building of the
proposed dam near Dartmouth on the Mitta Mitta River.
Agreement had been reached by the responsible State Ministers
earlier in the year regarding other conditions that would apply in relation
to this proposal. But agreement to proceed with the project was subject to
the availability of some Commonwealth financial assistance over and above
the usual provision with River Murray Commission Works whereby the
Commonwealth pays one quarter of the capital cost.
It was agreed that the Commonwealth would, in addition
to paying its own share, lend to each of the States at the long-term Bond
interest prevailing at the time when the loan was made one half of their
share of the costs. Such loans would be subject to the usual interest
payments, but repayment of capital would be deferred for ten years and
would take place over the subsequent fifteen years.
The Commonwealth and all States also agreed, without
prejudice that, as soon as the cost of the Lake Victoria works is known,
further discussions will be held on methods of financing them.
This arrangement is subject to confirmation by the New
South Wales Government.
CANBERRA, 27 June 1969 



0 JUL W9
GREAT SYNAGOGUE LUNCHEON
SYDNEY, N. S. W. JUNE 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
It is pleasant to be here and to talk to you at this luncheon;
to talk to you as Australians of the Jewish faith. I have long believed
your actions in the past and the present show that your community is not
an alien community any more than those who attend St. Andrew's Day
Dinners, or those perhaps more closely akin to my own forbears on one
side who wear green on St. Patrick Day. Mind you, I'm Church of
England I just want to make that clear:
But rather are we Australians a people who have, over the
years, come together from all corners of the world with differing religions,
with differing cultures, with differing customs, with different histories to
which we can look back but which should not condition all our thinking.
For while history is what is past, in one sense, it also beckons to us to
make it in the future in another sense. And a nation made of those who
come from so many different areas, from those who come with so many
different cultures, from those who have so many different things to
contribute, must be richer, must be more able to bend the course of
future history to its requirements, not as fragmented peoples, but as a
nation and a people embracing all. And because I believe this is your
belief and because I think in this approach lies true greatness for Australia
in the future, this is why I said it was such pleasure for me to talk to you
today. I have been called a nationalist, sometimes by my opponents
who tend to twist this in a way I think it should not be twisted, but I am
proud to admit to being a nationalist. I think that the future of this country
requires we should all have a national identity, national goals, national
aims and national pride. This should not be something shutting out the
rest of the world because of our nationalism, for that would be to wrap
ourselves up in a small parcel indeed and wrap out all the rest of the world.
But rather it should be something creating as a nation, having a national
pride, having something we can contribute to the general community of
nations in our own right and of our own identity for the good of all, much
as those members of a family, each with different capacities, each with
difference approaches, each with different personalities, can contribute
from themselves to the general family, as we can contribute to the family
of the world. / 2 
-2
But to do that there is a need to meet requirements inside
this country competing requirements, all of which cannot be met, or at
least all of which cannot be met at once. It is easy enough seeing the needs
that lie before us in all the various fields, it is easy enough to promise
that they will all be done and they will all be done at once, but it is impossible
to deliver on that promise and all men of sense known that this must be
true. Let me sketch out for you some of the problems lying before
us, calling for manpower, calling for capital, calling for technological
expertise and you will see what I mean by competing claims.
First, I suppose because this is the rock on which
development and indeed existence must evemrally depend first is the
requirement for our own national security and our own national defence
against possible attack. History shows that no matter what a period may
indicate to people, those who neglect security, those who neglect defence,
do so ultimately at their own peril. And so we must devote a proportion
of our manpower, a proportion of our resources, a proportion of our
thought to building up defence forces ( insofar as a nation of twelve million
can), and to forming alliances with greater countries who, seeing that we
are prepared to help ourselves, will be prepared to come and help us in
time of need. And we must, I believe, become involved in the region in
which we live so that to the north of us, countries will see that we care
about them, that we will help them not only economically, n~ ot only with
aid, not only with training, but also that we are prepared to help them
should they be attacked themselves.
But here I want to make some qualifications. Up until now,
we have been in a situation where we contributed because the defence of
these regions to our north was the responsibility of Britain as, at the
moment and for some short time ahead, it still will be. The responsibility
for the defence was Britain's. She accepted that responsibility and sought
assistance from the local populations. We cannot do that. We cannot take
over responsibility for the defence of these areas and look for assistance
from the local population. Rather is it our task to expect the local
populations to assist themselves and to be ready to contribute to that
joint defence, and this is the great difference between what was and what
will be. In doing that and we have decided to do that we are, I think,
acting in Australia's interests.
But we are not giving blank cheques for the use of Australian
youth by others. Our forces must be under our control. We are not giving
a blank cheque for the use of Australian youth and the killing of Australian
youth unless we are sure that this is done to prevent aggression, to prevent
attack, and not done merely as an involvement in racial conflicts in a
particular area. And it is well, and necessary, that everybody should
understand this, because then there can be no danger in the future of any
breach of faith. This has been made clear. This is one call upon our
resources. 
3-
We have another in a sense a corollary with the first; the
need to develop. We need to see that our mines come into production, that
our factories are stocked with the latest machinery with the latest
technological expertise, and with the latest scientific approach. We need
to see that our factories extend and that we become a nation of industrial
muscle, of strength within ourselves. This cannot be done quickly unless
we attract from abroad large sums of capital and large numbers of people
so that the requirements that I have spelt out can be met. This is being
done, it must continue, it must be another call or, our Government resources
because these things require that governments should put in roads, should
put in power plants, should put in water supplies, should put in the ancillary
requirements for such development should even, sometimes, please God,
put in sewerage: But here, too, it is necessary ( having said this and believing
it completely) to seek to ensure that these new developments will in their
beginning be required to offer to the Australian people some chance of
participation, This offer of some ownership by Australians should be made
at the start, so that as these enterprises grow, as Australia grows, then
the value of that initial participation will remain with Australians unless
they choose themselves to sell it to somebody else.
I used the word " offer". We are not going to be able in
Australia to provide from our own resources all the capital that is
required for all the development we need. I doubt if we are going to be able
to provide from within Australia all the capital that is required for half of
the development we need in the space of time in which we need it. But we
can supply varying proportions to varying industries and we wish, and have
let it be known that we expect that offers will be made for Australian equity
participation in new developments, or in expanded development, and if those
offers are not taken up, then that is Australia's fault and must not be allowed
to inhibit progress. This is another great call on our manpower and on our
resources and on our capital.
I haven't yet touched on many other areas because I do
believe, and you will know that I have said this, that it is necessary for a
great country not only to have industrial muscles, not only to be materially
great but to take care of those within it. In particular, I am speaking of
those who, their own race having been run, having reached a certain age,
ought to be able to live with some peace and some human dignity at the
hands of their fellow Australians. There ought to be provision so that if
some woman loses her husband and has a young family to bring up, that
family has the same chances of education, of clothing, and of food, as they
would have had had that woman's husband not died. / 4 
-4
And there is too an increasingly evident requirement that
if citizens contribute during their working life to their own security, their
own living after they retire, then they should not find themselves in a
situation where they may be no. better off, and possibly even worse off
than citizens existing solely on a pension paid by the State. This, I hasten
to say, is not to be assumed to be any suggestion of abolishing the means
test, because it isn't. It is merely a suggestion that there is an area of
unfairness, an area of injustice, and that area of unfairness and injustice
is one to which we must direct our minds. But this, too, calls for a great
deal of our resources, a great deal of the taxes which you pay.
And so, too, do demands for better education which we all
want at least so do the calls for more money for education, which is not
necessarily the same thing. But more money for education and a
requirement that is directed towards better education call upon our resources,
as do calls for better hospital services, better roads, and for many things
which you appreciate and with which I will not weary you by enumerating.
Another factor is the calls, the heartfelt calls for no higher taxation to
meet all these requirements indeed for lower taxes if it is at all possible.
And there is some justice well not justice, I'm not going
to u--e that word but there is some sense in this because taxes must not
get to a stage where they inhibit initiative, where they prevent the rewards
for extra effort; because in this case we could not meet the other
requirements which I have already mentioned. Wellt these are all calls.
And there is the requirement to see that inflation is not allowed, because
if it is, then we are merely kidding ourselves that we are advancing without
in fact advancing at all. In a nation where less than one per cent is
unemployed, in a nation where our resources and goods are used to their
fullest as they are now, Lhe answer is not just issuing more money but
rather more capital, more people and more effort from all sections of this
community. Well, there will be arguments as to the priorities amongst
the things I have mentioned and the many others you can add. They are
right and proper arguments, but there can be no argument as to what I
said initially that should anybody promise all these things all at once
he will not be able to deliver on that promise. And as it is necessary that
there should be these arguments as to priorities, then clearly they should
be stated and judged by the people of Australia. And this is the course
which we will follow and which, indeed, we have endeavoured to follow.
It may take time it will take time to attain the goals of
full social justice, to attain the goals of proper educational facilities, of
roads which suit everybody, of hospitals which can care properly and
cheaply for all the population, and for all the other things I have mentioned.
But surely the proper course for a nation to follow and this is the one
that we will try to follow is to set the goals, advance towards each one 
and of necessity, realising the constrictions I have spoken of, advance
over a period of time towards each one. This is inevitable, but with the
nation knowing what the ultimate goals are and the steps that are hoped to
be taken to reach them. This is what I regard as a prudent and proper
and honest approach to the Australian people and this is the one we have
been following and will follow. And this is the one, I think, most men of
good sense and judgment will accept as the proper course for an Australian
Government. Indeed, to finish, Sir, where I began, and to add one other
reason for my pleasure in speaking to you this afternoon, it is because I
think there would be within this hall such men of good judgment, of good
sense, of proper approach as would agree with and would support what we
have done and what we propose to do. Sir, we will make mistakes in the
years as we approach these problems. That is inevitable, for no man, no
woman, no government is perfect. But should such mistakes be made, they
will be honest mistakes. They will be admitted. They will be rectified.
And that, I think, is what the nation of Australia wants. At any rate, I
hope so, and I thank you for the chance of speaking to you. 



69/ 102
YOUNG LIBERAL RALLY
Caulfield Town Hall, Caulfield, Victoria 4 JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
It is a great pleasure to be introduced by a President who
is obviously a scholar and a gentleman, and who has very great insight
into my own mind sufficient to enable him to write what I actually fee!
about the activities of the Young Liberals.
And it is nice to be here at a period which was described
by your President as a period of change. Because, you know, " the times
they are a-changing", and how they change is going to be, I suppose in the
first place, up to those of us who are now in the Federal Parliament or in
the State Parliaments. But that is going to be influenced by what you think,
not much influenced by what the Young Labor Movement thinks or the
other people, but by what you think. And the directions that the changes
may take are going to be of enormous importance to you as you get older
and to the children that you want to grow up in a great Australia.
I don't think that I have known a time when change is more
in the air, both in our external policies and in our internal reappraisals
of things which have for so long been taken for granted. It is a time when
statements never previously questioned are increasingly subject to
analysis and criticism. And, if I may say so, this is one of the healthiest
things that can happen in a democracy.
Let's look at some of the ways in which the times are
changing. Let's first take the changes in our relations with the external
world and peoples and countries outside of our own. We all grew up I
grew up and all of my generation grew up and, indeed, our sons grew up
in a world in which we in Australia were protected by Great Britain. We
grew up in a world where countries to our near North which are now
household words, Malaysia which includes a peninsula called Malaya!
and Singapore were ruled by Great Britain. Indonesia was a colony of the
Dutch. French Indo-China embraced Laos, Cambodia, North Vietnam and
South Vietnam. There were no new countries in that region no selfgoverning
countries in that region. Indeed, India itself was governed from
Great Britain, and the protection and the peace of all that area of the world
rested on the might of the British Navy and on that great major power which
Britain used to be. / 2
ILI, 
-2 / 3
We, ourselves, had no need to worry about our own security
because it was guaranteed. We had no need to worry about our relationships
with newly-independent nations because there weren't any. We had no need
to be concerned with the region in which we lived because the region was a
variety of colonial states. And so in those for us fairly easy days, we didn't
have to look to our own security. In between wars, we didn't bother to keep
anything but the sketchiest of a standing army or navy or air force. When
the calls came, when our protector, Great Britain, was embroiled in some
struggle in the world, then we responded responded in the Boer War, in
the First World War and in the Second World War. But in between times,
we didn't bother. We didn't need to. We didn't have to.
And although since the end of the Second World War now
what is it, 24 years away there have been these enormous changes to
our north, it is only recently that the changes have really been brought
home. This is because that power to which we previously looked for the
protection of which I have spoken has said it is going from this area, and
we must look, therefore, more than ever before, to ourselves and not to
assistance from Great Britain. So we look for new allies, we look to build
up our own defences and, above all, we look to participate with the other
new peoples around us with the peoples of Indonesia, of Malaysia, of
Singapore, of the Philippines to try in a co-operative way to improve the
economic growth of these countries. Our aim must be to improve the
income per head of these countries, to see that the improvements which
flow from new technical advances, from new scientific approaches and
from better business management are passed down the line, from the
generals and the colonels and the majors and the captains, so that, if
may so phrase it, the privates, the ordinary people in these countries,
will see each year that there is a little more cloth for their families, a
little more food a window into the future offering hope. This is something
we have never had to do before until the times changed, but something which
is a great challenge and a great inspiration to us, I believe. If we can do
this, then we will not only be helping them but helping ourselves and
helping our region by seeing that there is a stable, progressive, happy
community built up in this part of the world.
And the times are also changing in other ways. In the early
days of Australia's history, it was Britain who sent the migrants to Australia,
sometimes unwillingly in the early stages of our history, but who sent them
to Australia. And it was British business houses that provided the capital
for Australian industry, British business houses which bought the great
cattle stations and which bought the land and which helped to develop our
country almost exclusively. But now we are taking, to our immense
benefit, and have been taking for some considerable time, people from
many countries in the world from Hungary, from Poland, from Greece, 
3-
There is another field, and although you are a long way
from requiring any assistance of the kind of which I am talking, I believe
you are interested in it. There is another field in which the times are
changing. There was a time when, without question, it was felt that
somebody whose race of life was run and who had reached an age of
retirement should be given some assistance from the State. But the
approach was that this assistance should be merely some supplement
to what the family could do for an aged person, or some supplement to
the savings an aged person had been able to make. And this attitude
persisted not only for aged people but for widows or for those who were
*/ 4
JA' fom Italy, from Turkey, from England, from the United States. From
Iaolv er the world new citizens have been coming to us with their different
cultures, with their different histories, with their different aspirations,
with their new ways of cooking food we have gone from the days of steak
and eggs! with their appreciation of a glass of wine with a meal, with
their appreciation of different music, all adding a richness to the texture
of our national life which, twenty years ago, we scarcely knew. And this
is, I think, an essential for the building of any great nation -that there
should be such an amalgam, that there should be so many different strands
in this single strong rope of national existence.
But one of the other changes which is co-existent with this
is that we have begun to feel I think we have all begun to feel that while
we still wish and must have this capital that Britain used to send us from
abroad, we have reached a stage where we want, as a nation, as individuals,
to have a chance to participate in the new developments taking place in
Australia. I don't want to see young Liberals, when they reach the age of
forty, or the sons and daughters of young Liberals, living in a country
where all the major developments are owned by overseas interests, where
the growth that those developments will experience, because of the growth
of Australia, is not shared with Australians. And I think it has become
well known now to those who have the capital and who are prepared to
provide it, that they have a stable place in which to invest, but that we
would like them to offer a chance to Australians to participate at the
beginning of any great new development. And if such people wish to borrow
money here to increase the development in which they are engqzged, then I
think that the opportunity for such fixed interest borrowing should be in
some way related to the opportunity they have given for equity participation
by Australians. That's all. If an opportunity is given for participation
I and is not accepted by Australians, then that's too bad. Let the development
go ahead in any case, but let the opportunity be offered to us. And I am
glad to say that more and more that opportunity is being provided by those
from abroad who can give us the financial sinews from which we can develop
our industrial muscles. But in a sense, this is an indication of change for
this approach, I think, has not been so often enunciated before as it is now. 
yelc -4
in some other way handicapped. I think there is a different approach in
fif Australia now. If there isn't, there ought to be and there will be. The
approach should be rather, not this is just a supplement to what a family
can do, but that there is a requirement in a civ ilised nation and a great
nation to provide adequately for those who have been unable to provide for
themselves so that they can live with a modicum of decency and without
the fear of hunger and cold. This is a change that must be persevered with.
How else are the times changing? Of course they are changing
in the sense that there has never been as great a number of people employed
so little unemployment in Australia as there is today. There has never
been as great a spate of development as there is in Australia today of
course tnat s true. Flow else are they chanig~
One of the interesting facets of change is this question of
0* dissent of which I think, Sir, you spoke. This is quite a fascinating subject
~. J~ And one which must engage our minds. If anybody were to say to me " Are
you in favour of dissent", the first answer I would have to give is, " How
do I know until I know what you are dissenting against?". I might be in
favour of something and therefore I wouldn't want myself to go out and
dissent against it. But if anybody were to say to me, " Are you in favour
of people being able to express dissent?", then there can only be one answer.
That is, " Yes, one must defend the right of people to express dissent".
As Voltaire said, " I disagree with what you say, but I will defend to the
death your right to say it". So one must agree with the right of people to
express dissent. But then if one goes further and says, " Do you agree
that the right to express dissent carries with it the right to violence,
carries with it the right to destruction", then there can only be one answer
and that is, If people come along to a political meeting of any kind
and seek to drown out the speaker and seek to prevent him putting his Views
before the community, then they are not expressing dissent. They are
expressing a fascist approach and they are denying the right of free speech.
And if people congregate together with banners, they may, if they are
peacefully exhibiting those banners, be properly expressing dissent; but
if they congregate together and seek to attack a particular building or a
particular person or to block the right of ordinary citizens to use a road,
then again they are not expressing dissent. They are denying liberty to
their fellow citizens. And this perhaps will be a question which will need
closely to be examined by the community.
We have seen some examples of this kind of violence of
which I have spoken. It can only have two outcomes. Either it leads to
counter-violence, as we saw in Germany, when one group who were
dedicated to preventing their opponents expressing an opinion clashed
violently with those who thought they had that right, and there were armed
clashes in the street something we cannot tolerate. Or alternatively,
4SAr4_ 41-1 
it can lead to the imposition of some kind of fascist, communist or
authoritarian regime. And it is necessary that all our people should clearly
know and clearly believe that dissent does not and cannot be allowed to
extend to the use of violence, or to the denial of freedom of expression.
We have never had this kind of problem in Australia before but that it is
with us now I think there are few of you would deny.
Let's look at another area of change. I spoke a little while
ago of the great development now taking place in this land of ours. I don't
know how many of you in this hall have been to Western Australia, have
seen Port Hedland, Mt. Newman, Mt. Tom Price, have seen the place
where Australians are laying each day a record length of railway line.
Or how many of you have seen or felt the excitement in the air of the new
frontiers, or how many have been to Cove, or how many have been to
Weipa or Groote Eylandt or all the areas in Australia where great new
advances are being made. But I do urge all of you who have the opportunity,
who may have the opportunity in the future, to go to these places, to seize
that opportunity with both hands. You will find it rewarding financially,
because the wages paid there are very great. You won't find it uncomfortable
as frontiers used to be, because now people live in air-conditioned houses
and have supermarkets and swimming pools and they can be quite delightful
places to live. But you will find that they have an air of growth, an
excitement of growth, a general feeling which draws out from the individual,
I believe, this response: " Here is a place where I can contribute. Here
is a place where if I do something it will benefit not only me but the country
in which I live and the other citizens of the country in which I live".
And this brings me to the last subject I wish briefly to
discuss under this title: " The Times They are A-Changing". There was
a time when those who were born in Caulfield tended to grow up in Caulfield
and retire in Caulfield. Those born in Malvern did the same. There was
little travel in this nation of ours. There was little knowledge of the other
parts of this nation. There was some interstate rivalry, some interstate
jealousy but little feeling of national identity, except in time of war. And
how that has changed, with the movement from State to State of those
working for big companies, of those working in the public service, of those
serving in the armed forces, of those who merely want a change. There
has now grown up in Australia a population which spends some time in
Melbourne, some in Sydney, some in Brisbane and some in the country, and
sees the nation as a whole. This change, I think, has brought about a climate
where we are all feeling much more than we have ever felt before, not
that we live just for a municipality or for a city or for a state, but for a
country, a nation which is already incipiently great and which is without
doubt going to be a really great nation. / 6 
6-
And there is a feeling, I think, of pleasure and pride in
Victoria at the great iron ore developments in Western Australia or the
bauxite development in Queensland or the new developments in Mt. isa.
And there is a feeling of pleasure and pride in Western Australia at the
Bass Strait oil and gas discoveries because there is a feeling this benefits
all of us from wherever it may come, from wherever it is found it is in
our country that it is found. It benefits all of us, it gives us all a chance
to be richer as a nation. This is new, compared with twenty years; this
is to be encouraged and I hope will be developed with your help.
We will be a great industrial nation without doubt. We will,
given proper compassion for those who are ill and sick, given proper
opportunities to help others, be not only great materially but greater
spiritually than we have been before. On the way we will need to work.
On the way we will need to put in great effort. On the way, I hope we will
keep a sense of humour and keep a knowledge that while effort is required,
that while national unity is required, while hard work is required, yet
there mumt be tirfie for laughter. and for gaiety and for song. And there
must be a goal of giving an opportunity to each individual among us to
develop his own capacities for his own purposes, to use the gifts he may
have, whether they are as a great musician, a great actor, a great business
tycoon, a great scientist, a great teacher. In whatever direction, to use
those gifts to the top of his bent for his benefit as a human being and for
the benefit of a nation.
You will help us in this. You are helping us in this. The
future is in your hands. This is why, Sir, you were so right when you
said how pleased I was to come and talk to the Young Liberals and what
an appreciation I had of the contribution they have to make and have made
to this nation of ours. 



EMBARGO: 9. 30 p. m. Sunday_ 6 July/
" 1THIS WEEK"
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, AT HSV-7,
MELBOURNE
( Recorded on 4 July for replay on 6 July 1969)
Interviewers: Geoff Raymond
John Boland
Q. Well, Mr. Prime Minister, we will be dividing our
questions into more or less two parts. I will be starting off with
foreign affairs and then John will come in, particularly on domestic
affairs. But first of all, I would like to make one broad-based question
on Asia. How do you see our role in Asia today?
PM. Asia is an awfully large geographical conception which
embraces Pakistan, India and Vietnam and Thailand and the * Philippinesa
terrifically wide variety of countries and I think that is rather too
wide a question, but perhaps you mean our near North?
Q. I was perhaps making it too broad. I will narrow it
down. First of all, Malaysia
PM. Yes, Malaysia/ Singapore, the area to our near north....
Q. Malaysia / Singapore, definitely there in view of Britain's
withdrawal and our increasing involvement in Singapore.... perhaps
Malaysia's attitude towards us?
PM. Well, I would answer that question as to how I saw our
role there. And I see it this way. I see it in the need to show a r~ aT
involvement in the area and a willingness to participate and help in all
kinds of ways to give economic help, to give technical help, to assist
with development, to try and open trade channels and also to be prepared
to show that we are interested in helping to counter any military attack
which may be launched on the area. Up until the present and perhaps
still for a short time Britain has been responsible for the defence of
Malaysia and Singapore and has accepted fully that responsibility herself
as a major power and has looked to assistance from Malaysia, from
Singapore, from ourselves, from New Zealand. Now, we can't accept
responsibility for the defence of the area and look for assistance. Rather
must the area defend itself and look to assistance from us and from New
Zealand. There is a change in emphasis there. / 2 
-2
Q. In specific terms, Sir, how would you see Malaysia.
helping itself. You once made reference very recently to. Malayawas
that deliberate?
PM. Oh yes, that was quite deliberate. There were tw
references that were made, one was that our troops were stationed
in Malaya and in Singapore. In fact the reason for saying that was
our troops are stationed in Malaya and Singapore.
Q. . In the peninsula of Malaya as distinct from Malaysia,
the divided nation geographically?
PM. Yes, that's right. One could get into kind of semantic
problems over-this but I am sure that if anybody said which we
didn't and won't our troops are stationed in Sabah, nobody would
have been under any misapprehension as to the geographical area they
were in. But they aren't. They are in Malaya. Or, if you prefer to
put it in another way they are in the Malayan Peninsula, which is
made up of nine states, which is called West Malaysia, but which in
fact is a geographical area which everybody knows to be a geographical
area.
Q. Do you think the Asian leaders, Prime Minister, were
upset by that division that you made?
PM. I think that perhaps the Malaysians themselves sawa
distinction between the use of the word " Malaya" or the use of the
words " the peninsula of Malaya" which I made in the February statement
in Parliament, and took the view that Malaysia is a country and an
entity and why should one use " Malaya" or the " peninsula of Malaya"
or the " nine states which make up the peninsula of Malaya". But I
was talking about the nine states which make up the peninsula of Malaya.
Q. You don't think it fractured our relationships in any
way with....
PM. I don't thinkc it has fractured our relationships in any
way. I think it has made our position clearer, or as clear as it should
be.
Q. The possibility of continuing racial riots and conflict in
Malaya once again, mcst of it has been confined to the Malayan
Peninsula do they complicate our relations there?
PM. I don't think they complicate our relations but I think
they must be a worry to all concerned. I don't see them at this stage
being a threat to the Peninsula of Malaya or to the Malaysian Government.
but the fact that they can take place, after a period of time when there
appeared to be multi-racialism accepted on all sides, does I think
o. / 3 
-3
PM. raise a question mark in one's mind. Because if this
( contd.) country of Malaysia is to be for the future viable, strong, growing,
happy, getting more prosperous, getting more capacity to defend itself,
then I think all the people in that area need to be working together for
a common purpose. And if racial or communal not communist but
communal strife comes into that, then this must cause disturbances
one mould much prefer not to have.
Q. Well, with our continuing involvement in the area, can
we remain divorced or are we intended to remain divorced from this
internal conflict?
PM. We are going to remain divorced from it period.
Q. And this refers, of course, to Singapore -as well?
PM. Yes, but....
Q. In the event of conflict between Malaysia and Singapore
which is not a real possibility at this moment?
PM. I wouldn't regard that as being something which arises
at all.
Q. Are you satisfied with our relationship with Indonesia
and the particular situation there? Do you think they are well disposed
towards us now?
PM. I am quite sure that they are well disposed towards us
and I believe that the present government is really trying to successfully
accomplish the first task before them and which they see as the first
task before them. And that is to increase their economic growth,
increase their efficiency in production and try to see that the results
of that economic growth and that efficiency are enjoyed by the peasants
and the people and the workmen, the people down the line. I am sure
they are trying to do that. I am sure they are well disposed towards us.
Q. Can we afford to do more for these countries in aid, do
you feel? I think you referred during the week to them helping themselves.
Now isn't this the best way for them to help themselves to get as much
aid as they can? Do you think we are giving them enough?
PM. I think without doubt that the answer in the long term to
any problems that might arise there is the economic answer. The
answer is providing prosperity for the peoples that are living there and
work opportunities and so forth, and that aid provides this. Having said
that, I think that it is necessary that there should be, in the confused
conditions of the world, that there should be a military shield to allow
/ 4 
-4
PM. this development to take place behind it, and we are providing aid. It
( contd.) must always be a point of argument as to whether we are providing
enough or could provide a little more. I think our aid to that area has
gone up by 50 per cent in the last five years and certainly it has been
doubled our aid to Indonesia itself has been doubled. It is still not an
enormous amount but it is moving up.
Q. Can we afford more?
PM. Well, it depends on your judgments of priorities as
between what we. as to how our resources should be apportioned
because there are many calls on them. There is this call for aid.
There is the great drain fbr New Guinea's development, for example,
which is taking $ 100 million a year from Australian taxpayers. There
is our requirement for roads and schools and hospitals and defence
and all the other matters. So it is a matter of apportionment.
Q. How long can self-government for New Guinea remain
delayed? And also, perhaps we can go on to what are the views of the
Government on New Qiinea as an eighth State of hustralia, or complete
self-government without the Commonwealth of Australia?
PM. Which was the seventh State?
Q. Sorry' We'l11 leave the Northern Territory out of it.
PM. All right. No, I don't see New Guinea and Papua becoming
an eighth State of Australia and I think in the Governor-General's speech
at the Opening of the first Parliament in which I was Prime Minister, this
was made perfectly clear and spelt out that we do not see this as one of
the possibilities. We see Papua/ New Guinea as an independent self
governing state in its own right, and we are seeking to develop it towards
that end. At the moment, they are greatly dependent on us economically.
For every three dollars of public money spent in New Guinea, Australian
taxpayers provide two. But you also asked me how long before they
become self-governing and independent. We have made it clear that
they can become self-governing and independent as soon as a method is
devised of finding out -Lh at they do want to become self -governing and
independent; and when they do that they can.
Q. What do you think is holding this back?
PM. Well, I think that it is partly that a very great number
of peoples in Papua and New Guinea, particularly in the inland areas
and in the highland areas, do not at this stage want to be completely
self-governing and independent, but steps, of course, have been taken.
There has been the House of Assembly up there, which is elected. 
PM. There are seven Ministers who are not Ministers in our own sense
( contd.) it's no use pretending they are but who are associated with the various
arms of government and getting experience in government and in public
service procedures and how to run a country. Arid when there is a real
demand throughout the whole of the area for self-government, then as
far as we are concerned, we would be quite happy for them to have it.
Q. Getting closer to Australia now, Mr. Prime Minister,
what is the. how do you see Australia's defence looming uip? From
this week it would look very clearly that we seem to be getting closer to
this original concept which I think you were interested in twelve months
ago in Fortress Australia-type defence. Now, how can we help
ourselves in this field and do you think we are ultimately getting back
to that concept?
PM. I have never used I have never ever publicly used
the term " Fortress Australia". I just wanted to make that clear. But
I think it would be true to say that we would need to think of how the
mainland of Australia itself would be defended, what forces were needed
to defend it, what allies were needed to make that defence without
question successful. But we also need, as I said in the beginning, to
show a preparedness and a readiness to try and help, particularly in
Malaysia and Singapore, against external attack should that come. So
our defence thinking would be that we should demonstrate our willingness
to help not to take over the defence but to help and assist in the
defence of these areas. We think this is best shown by stationing forces
in the area ( rather than by some alternate scheme of popping them in
and out on a sort of now -you -s ee-them-now-you -don't jack-in-the-box
approach which is logistically absurd and psychologically stupid), and
at the same time build up our own defence forces in Australia.
Q. How much do you think we can still rely on our allies?
PM. I believe that we can rely on the ANZLJS Treaty completely
for the defence of the Australian mainland, or for New Zealand for that
matter but I am speaking of Australia now and I have no doubt that
Great Britain too, should we be subject to attack ( I don't see this looming)
but should we be subject to attea, that Great Britain would also without
question have forces out here to help us.
Q. In time do you think? It's a long way away.
PM. Oh, I think so. If we haven't of our own resources
suff icient def ence capacity to defend an island. invading armies
have to cross a sea to get here, they have to land at particular points
such as Sydney or Melbourne. It's not much good them landing on some
mangrove-covered coast in the Gulf of Carpentaria or somewhere that
achieves nothing. If we haven't got the capacity to do that and I think
/ 6 
6-
PM. we have and will have then we are not providing sufficient defences
( contd.) for ourselves. But I believe we are. As far as the United States forces
under ANZUS are concerned, their fleets are close and their naval
capacity to help us would take very little time to get h-' re indeed, and
their air capacity to help us would also be almost immediately available.
Q. This is still getting pretty close to the Fortress Australiatype
concept, isn't it?
PM. No, it's not. I don't think it is because the Fortress
Australia-type concept as it has been interpreted by people is Don't
do anything at all outside Australia. You are asking me and I have
been talking to you about what one does in the event of an attack on
Australia itself and I am not saying indeed I have said the reverse
I am not saying that we should do nothing outside Australia, that we
should not station our Air Force units at Butterworth, which Is in
Malaya, or that we should not station our troops in Singapore or that
we should not engage in exercises with the British and the Malaysian
and the Singaporean troops.
Q. Would we still have the capacity to buy the time we would
need, Sir, without the F-Ill
PM. Well, I think so. The F-i11 was conceived as a
comparatively long-range strike bomber. I don't think that is really
relevant to
Q. It hasn't changed the defence thinking at all, the fact that
it looks as though there is going to be a great delay if ever F -ill1s will
be helping us?
PM. No, I think of course, it's nice if you have bombers
in being but insofar as defence is concerned, I don't believe this would
affect the time that would be required, and this was what you asked
me for us to be able to defend ourselves should we be attacked.
Q. Will we ever have these F -ll11s?
PM. We will have them if they meet our specifications and
last as long as we expected them to last when we bought them and will
meet the tests that we expected them to meet when we bought them.
Q. On this very question, you mentioned tests. You have,
particularly, quite a personal part in seeing that this 16, 000 hours
test takes place with the F-ill. Now, in view of the fact that up to
date 8, 000 hours have been achieved and it has shown very big flaws,
can we take the attitude that at 16, 000 hours the aircraft is not going
to completely break up, but is it necessary to persist, to go ahead
with the 16, 000 hours test when half -way through it has shown flaws? / 7 
-7
PM. Well, we think it is necessary for it to be tested to
16, 000 hours before we would be prepared to take it.
Q. Are you happy with the test to date?
PM. Well, it hasn't reached 16, 000 hours or anywhere near it.
Q. It hasn't reached 8, 000 hours without failing so far, so
how could it possibly reach..
PM. Well, I suppose it would be possible to imagine it
reaching 16, 000 hours if they discovered the cause Of the break-ups
earlier and remedied them or if they had some other wing carry-through
box or if they down-graded the actual performance of the plane in the
air. There are a great number of permutations and combinations on
this. But the original understanding when we entered into the arrangements
for buying these planes many years ago was they would be tested to
16, 000 hours. Now, on my last visit to Washington, it was confirmed
that it was reasonable and right for us to expect them to be tested to
that level before we took delivery.
Q. Have you looked at an alternative aircraft if this F Ill
is not successful?
PM. I know that the Air Force as a matter of ordinary
prudence and natural routine have for quite some time been assessing
a variety of aircraft for a variety of purposes.
Q. Have you got any idea at this stage what type of aircraft
they are looking at?
PM. Oh, they are looking at a lot of different types.
Q. American?
PM. Yes.
Q. Would you say that the cost already I think we have
spent $ 50 million on this project
PM. Which project the F-Ill1?
Q. Yes.
PM. Oh, rather more than that! / 8 
Q. Well,_ -was conservative. Whatever we have spent in
excess nf is there any way in your talks with the American
Defence chiefs and the American Government that we can recoup some
of that on say, another aircraft, or can that be used to..
PM. What we would need to do before talking about that at all
would be to get much more detailed technical assessments from our own
people who are over there as to the course of the tests and what happened
at the tests. We would want much more technical advice from the
engineering side of our air force as to the way the plane would operate,
and what we could expect before we reached a situation where we
would be in a position to start talking about what might happen if we
didn't take the aeroplane.
Q. Do you think they are amenable to the suggestion that this
million or in excess of that can be used?
PM. I don't think I can add anything to what I have just said in
answer to your last question.
Q. Before we leave the subject of defence, Sir, we would
have to at this stage bring Vietnam in. The possibility of 200, 000
American troops being home in time for Christmas. Is it envisaged that
Australia will scale down or phase out her commitments in the Phuoc
Tuy province or in Vietnam generally on par with the American effort?
PM. I think that the suggestion of phasing down the Australian
contribution of infantrymen and artillerymen and people driving tanks
which is somewhere around 8, 000 not quite 8, 000 men I think the
suggestion of phasing that down is scarcely tenable. The force was built
up to three battalions with its artillery and with its tanks because that
was a viable force. You could have two battalions in the field and one
resting and that gave you much much more capacity than if you only had
two battalions there because you could only have one in the field and one
resting. Although it may mathematically sound as if it is only twice as
good, in fact it is better than twice as good. So you would be very
very much cutting down the military capacity of the force there and of
course, I would think you would be increasing the danger to the ones that
remained there if you didn't have a self-contained viable force. So the
question would rather be, if it arose, whether we should have troops
ground troops there or whether we should not. You are asking me
hypothetical questions of if the Americans do this or get down that
far, would we
Q. Would we scale down comparably, that was really the
question. / 9 
9-
PM., I think not scale down. I think a time would have to
tom~ e-1 doWforesee it but it would have to come when if there was
a great and . continuing American withdrawal, we would have to decide
whether we left troops there or not. But that hasn't arrived and I don't
know where the idea of withdrawal of 200, 03 American troops by
Christmas came about
Q. It has been mentioned, Sir, in some quarters. If the
Australians were to be withdrawn, it seemed to me I was over there
fairly recently it might be somewhat of a vacuum left, more so than
the Americans because there are no South Vietnamese units working
with the Australians at all. In fact at Nui Dat and environs there,
South Viet namese the ARVN the Army of the Republic of Vietnam
was completely absent. This would pose a difficulty, surely, in us
withdrawing from that area. We are not involved with the South
Vietnamese.
PM. Yes, but that wouldn't prevent the South Vietnamese
units relieving, presumably. I know they are not there. They are not
working now, but if the theory is and it is a theory that the South
Vietnamese will take over where a battalion of American Marines were,
and if it is withdrawn, then a South Vietnamese battalion will take that
over, then again it would be possible for this to happen in Phuoc Tuy.
But we are talking about something which is entirely hypothetical at
the moment.
Q. It is possible, though, that there could be a lessening-down
of our commitment there. If the American commitment is as big as
200, 000, is it possible to see some Australian troops coming home by
Christmas time?
PM. I don't see that happening for the reasons which I gave in
the House and I think on a television interview somewhere else. All I
would say would be that clearly if there ever was a stage reached where
there was an-American withdrawal which was going to go on and on and
on, then at some stage it would be necessary for us to see whether we
could stay there. But that hasn't arisen and I don't see it arising in
the time you are talking of.
Q. Sir, of the British Commonwealth troops in Vietnam
we have only got the Australians and New Zealanders, the rest have
not come to the party, if one could use the expression there are
racial tensions through the Commonwealth, a great divisive element
it seems to me is the Commonwealth a tenable and viabl e proposition? 
10
PM. Yes, I think it's a tenable proposition I'm just trying
to work out what you have in your mmnd when you ask me if it is a viable
proposition.
Q. As a power in wo-rld politics.....
PM. It's not a power in world politics now. I don't think you
could regard the Commonwealth as a power in world politics. I'm
sure nobody would take the attitude for instance, that Stalin took about
the Pope " How many divisions has a Pope got?" -I'm sure nobody
says " How many divisions has a Commonwealth got?". I viouldn't
regard it as a military power in world politics nor, really, as a
cohesive power in influencing matters which might be discussed in the
United Nations or somewhere, because people from the Commonwealth
take different attitudes and different points of view. It is not cohesive
in that way. I think it has advantages but they are not advantages which
could be described as making it a power in any sense.
Q. Are there any advantages to Australia's continuing to
belong to it?
PM. I think there are advantages which are difficult to
describe in a finite way. I think there are advantages for opportunities
to have some kind of a link say, with India or with Malaysia or with
other countries which are within the Commonwealth, but it is not
something you can spell out. It is not something you can put your
finger on. I think there are advantages. I think it is useful, for
example I think it was useful at the laF-Prime Minister's Conference
in London for so many Prime Ministers from so many different countries
and so many different races to be able to sit downi around a table and
discuss matters and pull no punches, be polite to each other but have
different points of view quite clearly put in an atmosphere which is
sui generis. I think it has got that kind of advantage. I couldn't ever
say '" This is the value of it'' or '' That is the value of I think there
is something there.
Q. This raise,, a very interesting point, Prime Minister.
What is its future? What is the future for the Commonwealth? How
do you see that?
PM. I think I would like to wait and see what the future brings.
Q. To get back to Australia again you have often been
it has often been suggested that you sort of indicate a Pres idential-type
Prime Ministership. Do you think that Australia will ever become a
republic and do you think that the Prime Ministership is ever likely
to become more of a Presidential operation? / 11 
11
PM. A Prime Ministership can't become a Presidential
operation. The only way that we could have a President would be If
we departcd completely from the British type of Parliamentary
government which we have, because a President is elected for a fixed
term of years. It doesn't matter whether he is defeated in the Parliament
or not. He still stays there and Congress I'm taking the
United States as an example Congress can pass a law or not pass a
law; it makes no difference, the President still remains there. And,
of course, the great difference between that and the British system of
Parliamentary government is that if a Prime Minister and his
Government are defeated by the House of Representatives or the Senate
or the House of Representatives particularly, then it is necessary for
him to resign and have another election. So the two things are quite
distinct and you couldn't have a Presidential system if you kept to the
present British Parliamentary system.
Q. What about going part of the way, Sir the Australian
flag, the Australian Naticnal Anthem Australian as such,
PM. I like the Australian flag the way it is. I sec no problem
in having the Union Jack in the corner. After all, it is not the British
flag. It is the Australian flag. That there happens to be in the corner
of it a Union Jack is perhaps a reminder of the continuing history of
large numbers of our people and perhaps a reminder of history in
which Australians have taken part in war and in peace. So I think we
have got an Australian flag and I don't really understand those who want
to take away a part of it. I don't see that it makes any difference, that
it would be any more an Australian flag. While we are a constitutional
monarchy, our National Anthem must be God Save The Queen, but I
would like, as you know, to see a distinctive Australian song. I know
some people would like it to bQ " Advance Australia Fair", I wouldn't
particularly. I am not really enamoured of this bom-bah-bom thing....
Q. Are you still a " Waltzing Matilda" man?
PM. Yes, I'm afraid I am! I like the tune.
Q. What about Mick Jagger as Ned Kelly
PM. I knew you were going to ask that! I don't know Mr.
Jagger or very much about him, but fr-om the pictures of him that I
have seen all I can say is that he doesn't quite match up with the
mental picture I had of Ned K( elly.
Q. Would you like to subsidise a film made here in reply,
Sir, perhaps with Chips Rafferty as Robin Hood, do you think?
PM. Who would you have as Maid Marian? / 12 
12
Q. Prime Minister, on the question of your leadership,
there have been many criticisms, and some quite severe. Have any
of these really hurt you? H-ow do you feel personally about these?
PM. I don't tink any of them have hurt me personally.
But some of them I thought were rather odd, particularly the sort of
nonsenses about being a dictator and telling the Cabinet what to do and
making them do things, not putting things before them, not having
Cabinet decisions. These criticisms are so way out and so stupid.
The approach seems to be that if something that a critic doesn't like
happens, then this is me overriding the Cabinet. If something they
do like happens, then this is the Cabinet against my bitter opposition.
You can't really have it both ways. As an example, there is a lot of
nonsense about having dragooned the Cabinet and not told them anything
about going into overseas shipping. Well, we had about five Cabinet
meetings on that and sent Jack McEwen abroad with instructions from
the Cabinet on the sort of agreement he should try to make.
Q. What about Mr. St. John's attacks were you upset
about those?
PM. Well mainly upset about the sort of ridiculous attacks
along these lines. Hie began to be worried when I said I never intended
to have an election. I think this was one of the things, which was
something that has never appeared in the transcript of anything I ha,, ve
said. But you don't really mind if somebody twists facts and twists the
truth in that way. As I say, none of them hurt me personally but some
of them seemed to be a little odd.
Q. Sir, on a personal note, do you enjoy being Prime
Minister?
PM. Yes, from time to time.
Q. What do you find the most arduous part of it?
PM. I think when the House is sitting is the most arduous time
because you have your ordinary work going on, you also have to be in to
answer Questions and be prepared to answer Questions, you have to
make speeches in the House, and a great number of Members of
Parliament want to come in to see you and talk to you about their own
problems, which they should. But it all adds up to a lot of time in a
working day.
Q. just one final question. We should ask you this one.
Commonwealth/ State relations. Do you see them improving? / 13 
13-
PM. Well, I see them-improving in the sense that the States
are getting larger amounts of money each year under the formula
process and the Loan Council borrowings are also going up. But there
is, and I think always will be a natural area of argument between a
State government and a Commonwealth government no matter what
party happens to be State or Commonwealth. There will always be
areas of argument because a State can always say, " Well, we can't do
this because the Commonwealth won't give us enough money", and
this can be applied to anything. And a Commonwealth has always got to
take account of the general call on resources in the community and
whether giving more money would give more things or just lead to
inflation. This is potting the thing very much; a potted answer but
that is all there is time for.
Q. Well, thank you very much indeed, Mr. Prime Minister.
We would like to have you for a lot more but I believe t ime is just
about taken up now. Perhaps you will return to us sometime?
PM. Yes, thank you. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 53/ 196)
ASSASSINATION OF MR TOM MBOYA
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Australia deeply regrets the violent death of Mr Tom
Mboya. He was a dynamic and dedicated leader of his people.
Africa can ill afford to lose men of his calibre.
CANBERRA, 6 July 1969 



69/ 1f03
ANNUAL LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
WA. DIVISION
PERTH, WA. 7 JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr President, Parliamentary Colleagues and Delegates:
It is an honour for me to technically open this Conference
of West Australian Liberals.
As you say, Sir, I have been here, I think on five I am
told on five I think on six occasions since becoming Prime Minister.
I will certainly be back before the elections and while the elections are
on and, given your assistance, I would expect to be back as Prime
Minister after the elections are over.
After all, this is a really exciting part of a really exciting
nation. Here, Sir, I think you are taking something like ttrnce the
national average of migrants and the population here is growing at
something like twice the national average. Here we have a part of
Australia which is already contributing enormously to our total
mineral exports and which nothing can stop contributing in even
greater measure in the years to come.
You must feel it yourself, the excitement in the air in
Perth; though that is nothing compared with the excitement in the air
in Port Hedland, in Mt Tom Price, and in the other new frontiers of
this developing State. There is an enormous future which has just
begun for Western Australia, and that is not to be regarded as merely
a future for Western Australia but for Australia as a whole.
I wonder what it; is that brings you, as Liberal delegates,
to a meeting of this kind. What is it that you want to see happen in
this country? What is it that you want to see the Members you support
and the Government you put in office do? There will, of course, be
on matters of detail different answers from different individuals, but
there must be some basic overriding consensus of what you wish to
happen in Australia, of what you wish a Government to do for
Australia. Because you don't go out, I am sure, merely to elect a 2/ o 
Mr Smith or Mr Jones or Mr Robinson to some particular seat. You
must, and have, a reason for seeking a particular representative of
a particular philosophy. And I want to talk a little tonight of what I
think motivates you people to see that the sort of Government you want
is in office in Australia.
I suppose first of all you want to see a continuation of a
climate which a Government can create a climate which enables Individuals
in Australia to take their risks in a developing coun~ try, to use their
initiati-t~ s, to, take their losses if thuy fail, and star-t again, and to take their
gains if they succeed without being envied by others. Because this is
the sort of climate which permits to individuals the greatest possible
area of freedom to experiment, to build new businesses, to try new
developments. In that climate, and in that climate alone, can a
country quickly and properly and to the benefit of its citizens grow
rich and prosperous and give to its citizens the chance of self
fulfilment. So it is, I think, that climate, as opposed to the idea the
socialist idea that the individual exists to serve the state that you
want to see in the Government you elect in Australia. But you want
to see other things too. You want to see other things done as a result
of that climate being created and these are the ones that I see as
important. And these are the ones I believe you see as important.
Firstly, you must wish to look to the defence and security
of Australia. We are not under any imminent threat of invasion or
attack, nor can I envisage myself in the decade ahead that we would
be under such imminent threat. But history shows that a nation which
does not look to its own defences and its own security even in times of
peace fails to do so at its peril. And the pages of history, and receltt
history, show hations which thought they were safe, and because they
didn't contribute to that safety, found out too late they we:--e noDt cafe at
all. So you would wish us, I think, to regard this as the rock on which
all other development, and indeed our existence, mustC~ pend.
To do this, we must look to our own defences, though the
defences which can be called in to being by a nation of 12 million are
not great. Yet we must look to our own defences and be able to be
seen in the world to be taking a serious and a real approach to our own
security. And we must also look beyond ourselves. We must, as you
know we have done, become involved in the region to our North. This
is the region in which we live, the region in which in the future we must
0 
continue to live; and we must help that region technically, economically,
by opening the avenues of trade and by doing all we can to increase the
standards of living of the peoples in that region. For in that way lies
ukimately the greatest defence. But we must also show our readiness
to participate in the defence of that region against external attack. And
this we have done, and this I believe you would wish us to do.
When I say " participate in the defence of that regioii', I mean,
precisely, participate in it. Up until the present and for a little while to
come, Britain has taken full responsibility for the defence of the region
to our North. She has accepted that responsibility as a major power.
She has looked for assistance to the people in the region themselves, to
those in Malaysia and in Singapore; and she has looked to us and she
has looked to New Zealand, and she has not looked in vain. But we
cannot take over that overriding responsibility and that must be clear to
all.
0 We can join in, and will join in concerted efforts against
external attack, but we cannot take over the full responsibility that
Britain had. And that is the difference between what was, and for a
little while is, but what in the future will not be. I believe you would
wish us to do this. I believe you would see it as sensible. I believe
you would see the stationing of our air force on the peninsula of
M~ alaya and the stationing of our troops in Singapore as visible evidence
of this interest, of this willingness to participate, and as tt. e only real
way in which such visible interest can be shown.
This is one great difference between ourselves and our
opponents, for they would reject what I have just put to you. They
would say we should not do this. Rather would they adopt a jack-inthe-
box policy of shooting some troops up and then bringing them back
.9 and then shooting them up and briaging them back on the premise of
now-you-see-' em-now-you-dork; a proposition which is as psychologically
inept as it is logistically absurd, and which in fact would mean no real
readiness to partic ipate in the defence of the region at all. This is one
great difference and this is one clear-cuLc difference.
But also in this area of defence, we must look to alliances
with major powers. Britain will come to our assistance, I am sure, but
the major assistance I think we must look for now is from the United
States. We have an understanding and an undertaking that that
assistance will come under the ANZUS Pact, but we would not wish as
a Government, and you would not wish, I believe, as an Australian
people that we should expect to get that assistance in time of peril,
without ourselves contributing to Zue. alliance which promises us that
o 4/. 
assistance. There is another major difference between ourselves
and our opponents. We are prepared to contribute to a joint defence.
We are prepared to participate in such installations as North-West
Cape, Pine Gap or Woomera because'they are for our joint protection.
But our opponents would not be prepared to do that. They would seek
only to take and not to contribute because there might be perhaps some
small danger in contributing. I do not believe that any alliance which
seeks only to take and not to give will be a lasting alliance or a lasting
security for this country. And in this field, which I have rated so
important, these are the great differences between what I believe and
hope you wish, and what I know our opponents would destroy.
Then, what next? What more? What other things are
uppermost in your mind. I venture to say that development of this
nation, continued and accelerated development, is one of the major
W things you wish to seethappen. Yet because at the moment there is
virtually no unemployment at all in Australia, which means that all
the labour available is e mployed in one field or another, in private
enterprise development or government development but employed
there is no unused labour on which to call for accelerated development.
So there must be a continued effort to bring in more migrants to this
country and to beat the record number of migrants which this year wil 1
see coming to these shores. This is one of the essentials of continued
and accelerated development.
The other, of course, is the provision of capital to enable
labour and capital to work together. Her-w e cannot possibly hope to
generate from within our own savings and within our own community
sufficient capital to develop this country as quickly as it must be
developed. I believe we could not possibly hope to generate from
within our own savings even half as much capital as is required for
our future development. So we : must continue, as we have done, to
look to overseas capital to flow here to enable the strength of this
country to grow and to enable the industrial and material capacity of
this nation to increase.
Yet, at the same time, we would wish as a government,
and I believe that you would wish, that the maximum opportunityfor
Australian participation in this growth and development should be
offered to the Australian people, preferably at the beginning of a
development, but certainly as that development progresses. It is
impossible, of course, and it would be ridiculous to try to say that
there must be a specific proportion of Australian ownership or some
0
goe' 
I think that it is cynical in the extreme,
extreme, to talk about abolishing the means test.
$ 150 million more for social services, and that is improper in the
For if there is to
what ultimately the
o. 6/.
4
.4 development can't go ahead. But if it is known abroad that an Australian
Government wishes and expects that an opportunity for Australian
participation will be offered to the Australi; n people then I believe that,
knowing what a government wants and tenZ i-es--onsible, those grvat
companies will do what they are already daiiw and that is offer more
and more~ opportunit5es for iequity pz-rt!, ipation in dc2velop--m-nt. And
this we will seek to bring about.
This is not putting curbs on the flow of capital into Australia.
This, I believe, will not frighten off any capital from Australia. For
given a politically stable country such as we are, and given the opportunity
of full profits from an investment of capital, then I believe that capital
will come here and will not be deterred by the request that an offer should
be made of some participation in that development. And it is important
that this should happen because in fifty years, developments which now
begin will, as this country grows, grow with it, and the assets and the
value and the worth of these developments will, in fifty years' time, be
immensely greater than they are now. And there should be a chance for
Australians to own and participate in some of that growth in their own
country. So I believe that you would wish to see, and we will do our best
to see this happens an increasing flow of labour, an increasing flow of
capital, an increasing chance of Australian participation in that material
development of which I have spoken to you.
What else should a community require? What else do Liberal
supporters seek from their Government? To my mind, having spoken of
material things, one of the requirements you wouid wish a requiremnnnt
essential if a nation is to be truly great is proper care of the aged, the
widowed, the children of widows, the ill and the handicapped amongst us.
That will require, an d has indeed called forth, careful analysis of our
social services system as it at present exists, in an endeavour to
isolate the areas of greatest need and give more assistance to those areas,
And, at the same time we must deal with a problem which is wih us now
and which in the future will grow, and that is the problem posed by those
who during their lives have themselves saved in one way or another, such
as contributing to superannuation, or in some other way. Some of these
people now find themselves little better off, possibly even, when one takes
into consideration their ineligibility for pensioners' fringe benefits,
possibly even worse off than those who have not contributed during their
lifetime.
WI-6 
0z the abolition of the means test would cost $ 150 million more a year
then that amount would go into this one proposition without one single
cent flowing to ameliorate the lot of those who are really in need. But
having said that, it still remains true that if saving is not to be
discouraged, and it must not be, then we must see that those who do
save andhave saved get some advantage from that saving and do not find
themselves in a disadvantageous position as against those who have not.
This kind of compassion, this kind of thought-out approach as opposed
to the past practices of merely raising pensions all across the board
is something that I think you would wish to see happen in this country
and something we are determined to see happen.
On the other fronts, on th e other problems which face us,
there are many difficult choices of priority. Of course, throughout
this nation we want better hospitals, more hospitals, cheaper hospitals
and a health scheme which works better than the existing one. Not that
that scheme is as bad as is sometimes painted, for 77 per cent of
the Australian people are covered by health insurance, another 12 per
cent are covered by repatriation or old-age benefits or in similar ways,
but not enough citizens are covered sufficiently to meet the calls of
illness, particularly prolonged illness.
Then there is the need for more technical schools, since if
the nation we have in our mind is to grow as we hope it will, then it
will only grow by the proper application of modern technology. This
can only be done by properly trained technicians and technologists, the
demand for which is immense and will grow in geometric proportions
in the years ahead.
There is a demand for more education. I speak not now of
technical education but of general education. A requirement for better
communications, a call for more to be spent on roads, a multitude of
requirements and nobody can meet them all, quickly. Should anybody
come before you, as I suspect somebody night, and say " I will overcome
the problems of health; I will overcome the problems of education; I
will build a new naval base in Western Australia; I will build new
railways everywhere; I will provide powerhouses there; I will provide
you name it and I will promise it", then he would not be able to deliver
on that promise, and all men of sense must know this. We would not
adopt that attitude. We would select what we would consider the highest
priorities for the national good, provide finance sufficient to see that
all our manpower and all our materials and all our resources were put
to use, and would necessarily if we are to avoid inflation and the
raising of taxes have to do this over a period of time. But we would
wish to put before you our goals and the steps by which we hope to approach
and hope to solve them. And perhaps when you think of it, that is another 
difference between ourselves and our opponents. For I think that
is a more honest approach, I think it is a genuine approach, whereas
I think those who promise all things to all men at once, must be seen
to be lacking in credibility.
Sir, in endeavouring to do what the people in this room
would want us to do, I am sure that from time to time we will make
some mistakes, forno man and no woman and no government can avoid
mistakes. If we do, they will be mistakes which have been made
honestly after examination of all the facts, and when they are realised,
they will be admitted and the course of action changed. I do not think
there will be many such mistakes. I think that I can only make this
one promise that the team we have in Canberra, strengthened as it
is by the members who come to us from West Australia, will dotheir
utmost to carry out what I feel you have in your own minds as objectives
for the future of this, our nation. And we will try to do two things which
are not finite. We will try to encourage and increase a feeling of pride
in being Australians, even if that overrides pride in being Victorians
or West Australians. So that wherever in this nation a man may live
Queensland, New South Wales or Victoria he will be proud and
pleased and happy at the development going on in other parts of the
country. And we will try to do something else if we canA. We will try
to foster amongst the Australian people a flietnf of unity of purpose.
I don't mean the acceptance of uniform ideas but I do mean the acceptance
of the concept which I am sure is true, that there is no longer room in
our nation for the idea, for example, that employees are automatically
opposed to employers and that their interests are different. Rather,
looked at properly, must they be the same for a manufacturer must
wish to see as much purchasing power as possible among the people,
most of whom are employees, and an employee must wish to see as
much efficiency as possible, because in that way the goods he and his
friends buy are cheaper. So there is no longer room for a concept of
employees on one si de and -mployers on the other, no longer room for
a concept of owners of industrial factories having interests diametrically
opposed to those who are or, the land. Rather there needs to be a feeling
that what happens, happens for all Australians, for the good of all
Australians and there is no divisive requirement because a man is an
employee or employer or works in the city or works in the country.
This is another thing, I believe, that is required of a great nation.
Given the continuation of the climate I have spoken of, given
an attempt to approach these non-definable things I have spoken of,
given the approach to defence and social services and the other calls
8/. 
8.*
upon us which I have mentioned, then I think we have, through you, a
better chance of turning this country into the one I think we all imagine
in our hearts it can be, a better chance than any other group or any other
organisations existing in Australia today, or likely to exist in Australia
in the future. We will, given your continued support, make our efforts join
with yours to realise the promise of this sunburnt country and pass this
promise on to our children and our children's children. This, I think,
is why you leave your homes to hand out" how to vote" cards, why you
work, what you want to see happen, and if it is, then we will try our
utmost to be worthy of your confidence. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 54/ 1969
VISIT BY THEIR ROYAL HIGH1TL-SLS TEE XT) U( E AlD
DECIIS 01' KEITT 1fLOG AL'., L i'PR
THE AUSTTRALIAN CATITAL TECITOIY
SATURDAY 9 AUGUST
3.45 p. m. Ceremonial Arrival at R. A. A. F. Fairbairn
Liet by The Governor-General and
Lady Hasluck
The : Pri.., e 1inister and
ifrs. Gorton
Guard of Honour Royal Salute
Artillory S&amp; lu'e 21 guns
Inspection of Guard of Honour and Band
Leave for Governwciiu House
EveningI-No en-agements
Attend St. John's Church, Reid
Lunch Afternoon Evening At Government House
offici, l engagements
Dine at ' The Lodge'
0
I SU1TDAY 10 AUGUST
1Norning / 2 
MiONDAY 11 AUGUST
M'orning Lunch
Afternoon Evening Visit Australian War Memorial
Wreathlaying The Duke of Kent
The Duke and Duchess of Kent visit the
Hall of liemory and the Galleries
Travel via Canberra City to Regatta Point
Visit the National Capital Development
Commission's Development Display at
Regatta Point
At Government House receive ' Press'
U. ith High Commissioners of Commonwealth
countries and w'ives
No engagements
Attend Dinner Party at Government House
TUESDAY 12 AUGUST
Late morning
Lunch Afternoon Evening Attend Reception given by the Prime Minister
and Mrs. Gorton on behalf of the Australian
Government at Parliament House.
At Government House
Ceremonial Departure for Port Horesby
Arrive at Port ioresby
Prime Minister's Department
CANBERPA. A. C. T. 2600
7 July 1969. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 55/ 1969
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Government began its pre-Budget series of
economic consultations in Canberra today.
Ministers conferred with national organisations
in three separate groups primary industry, manufacturing
industry and commerce. The consultations have again proved valuable in
providing Ministers at first hand with the views of those
directly engaged in commerce and industry. This will be of
considerable assistance to the Government in its consideration
of the forthcoming Budget.
Tomorrow, Ministers will have discussions with
representatives of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council, the Export Development Council and the Australian
Council of Trade Unions.
CANBERRA 9 July 1969
Note: Attached is a list of those taking part
in today's talks. 
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED AT
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
9 JULY 1969
PRIMARY INDUSTRY GRCUP
National Farmers' Union
of Australia
Australian Primary
Producers' Union
Australian Wool Growers' and
Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers'
Federation
Australian Mining Industry
Council
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY President President President Vice-President President President GROUP Mr. Mr. Mr. Mr. Mr. Mr. F. J. McAvoy, C. B. E.
R. B. Gerrand
B. A. Wright
L. H. Heaslip, 0. B. E.
K. M. McDougall
N. S. Kirby
Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation
of Australia
Federal Chamber of
Automotive Industries
COMMERCIAL GROUP
Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia
Australian Bankers'
Association
Australian Council ( f
Retailers President President Executive Member President Chairmran President Mr. Mr. Mr. J. C. Campbell
R. A. O'Neill
N. W. Lawrance
Mr. G. M. Hastie, 0. B. E.
Mr. N. A. Jackson
Mr. T. Luxton, D. S. 0.,
M. B. E. 



PRESS STATEMENT AUSTRALIAN TRANSPORT ADVISORY COUNCIL
PORT MORESBY, 9 AND 10 JULY 1970 3JUL 1970
( Joint Statement by the Ministers) / D n
The Australian Transport Advisory Council considered
a number of matters concerning railway transportation at their
meeting in Port Moresby.
Among these was an improved procedure for making
bookings for interstate railway journeys recommended by the
Victorian Minister, Mr Wilcox.
Railway Commissioners have been requested to discuss
these procedures with a view to the use of a computer system.
Refunds for incompleted journeys was another matter that
Commissionersare to look into.
They will also consider a proposal put forward by
the Western Australian Transport Minister, Mr O'Connor, for a
daylight service to operate through the Avon Valley in Western
Australia. At present the interstate trains pass through the
valley at night. The Council concluded its meeting today, the first
to be held in Papua and New Guinea.
Ministers expressed their appreciation of the
opportunity to get an insight into the problems and achievements
of this new emerging nation.
Ministers who attended the meeting chaired by the
Commonwealth Minister for Shipping and Transport, the Hon.
Ian Sinclair, were the Hon. M. A. Morris ( NSW), the Hon.
V. F. Wilcox ( VIC), the Hon. W. E. Knox ( QLD), the Hon. G. T. Virgo
the Hon. R. J. O'Connor ( WA) and the Hon. L. H. Bessell ( TAS).
PORT MORESBY, T. P. N. G.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 10 JULY 1970 



PRESS STATEMENT 30 JUL
MECHANICAL INSPECTTION OF LONG-DISTANCE BUSES
( Statement by the Ministers)
Minimum safety inspection standards will be drawn up
for long-distance tourist buses operating throughout Australia.
This was decided today ( July 10) by Commonwealth and
State Transport Ministers meeting in Port Moresby as the
Australian Transport Advisory Council.
The Ministers have asked the Advisory Committee on
Vehicle Performance to prepare the standards together with a
time scale for their introduction.
They also asked the Standing Committee of Advisers to
closely examine the question of adequate enforcement of such a
standard by means of periodic and random inspections.
All Ministers agreed with the serious concern expressed
about the road-worthiness of tourist coaches in a paper presented
to the meeting by the N. S. W. Minister.
The item was raised following a number of serious
accidents involving long-distance buses in which a number of
people were killed and injured.
The matter of tourist vehicle road-worthiness was of
the utmost importance because large numbers of people were
exposed to risk in any accident involving a bus, and also because
the good safety record of the industry should be maintained in
the interest of tourism.
PORT MORESBY, T . P. N. G.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 10 JULY 1970 



PRESS STATEMENT TRANSPORT OF DRUGS OF DEPENDENCE AND RECIPROCITYK
OF THIRD PARTY INSURANCE
( Statement by the Ministers)
An urgent investigation will be held into the
security of drugs of dependence during transport and storage.
State and Commonwealth Transport Ministers decided
this today ( July 10) at a meeting of the Australian Transport
Advisory Council in Port Moresby.
The move followed instances of large quantities
of addictive drugs being stolen or lost in transit in various
parts of Australia. This has caused serious concern among health
authorities and members of the National Standing Committee on
Drugs Dependence. Ministers will ask the Advisory Committee on the
Transport of Dangerous Drugs to investigate the problem in
conjunction with representatives of the National Standing
Committee. Ministers also decided today to seek legislation in
all States and Territories to bring about compulsory third
party insurance throughout Australia.
They noted advice from the Standing Committee of
Attorneys-General that there are no Constitutional difficulties
in the way of States and Territories legislating complete
reciprocity between jurisdictions in tP recognition of third
party insurance policies. 
2.
The Minister's decision was aimed at ensuring
complete reciprocity between the States and Territories in
registration and administration of third party insurance.
PORT MORESBY, T. P. N. G.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 10 JULY 1970 



PRESS STATEMENT MOTOR VEHIICLE AIR POLLUTION JOJU
( Statement by Ministers)
State and Commonwealth Transport Ministers meeting in
Port Moresby as the Australian Transport Advisory Council today
( July 10) discussed the establishment of' standards to control
motor vehicle exhaust pollution in Australia,
The Council directed its Standing Committee of Advisers
to discuss with the automotive and petroleum industries the
introduction of' U. S. standards on exhaust emissions. The
Committee hopes to arrange a meeting with industry early in
September. It will report back as a matter of urgency to ATAC at
its next meeting in about six months.
The report will cover:
* Recommended uniform exhaust control standards;
* Approved devices to be fitted to motor vehicles
to reduce exhaust emissions;
oRecommended date of application of the standards.
Ministers studied a comprehensive dossier covering
air pollution from all modes of transport prepared by South
Australian officials at the request of Council.
The Queensland Minister, Mr W. Knox, suggested maximum
permissible levels for chemical emissions from motor vehicle
exhausts which his Government is considering implementing.
Ministers were anxious to obtain the best achievable
emission control standards so as to effectively combat the
public health problem of air pollution. 
2.
It is estimated that the various transport modes
mainly the motor vehicle can under certain circumstances and
in some Australian cities contribute about 64 per cent of
atmospheric pollution in Australia.
The Standing Committee of Advisers would also discuss
with the petroleum industry developments in reducing the
contaminants in motor fuels,
Following a previous decision of ATAC, all States have
taken action to require manufacturers to fit devices to new
motor vehicles designed to prevent the discharge of crankcase
gases into the atmosphere.
PORT MORESBY, ToP. N. G.
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 10 JULY 1970 



L I
FOR PRESS: K j~ P. M. No. 56/ 1969
PRESIDENT THIEUS STATEMENT ON FREE ELECTIONS
IN VIETNAM
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The statement which President Nguyen Van Thieu
has made today is a most important one. It demonstrates
strikingly his willingness to do his part in clearing the way for
a political solution that will end the fighting and at the same time
let the people of South Vietnam determine their own future.
President Thieu has indicated that in free elections,
the N. L. F. would be allowed to contest the polls if they renounce
violence and pledge themselves to accept the result of the election.
The N. L. F. could be represented in the arrangements for the
conduct of the elections. An international body would supervise
the elections and make sure that they were held under conditions
fair to all. President Thieu's government is prepared to discuss
with the other side the timetable and the modalities under which
the election will be held. The President has also pledged that
there would be no reprisals or discrimination after the elections.
His government has declared that it will abide by the results of
the election whatever those results might be.
This is a very significant statement removing
obstacles which certain people in other countries have seen in
the way of a peaceful outcome.
President Thieu's political initiative today, and
President Nixon's speech on 15 May, demonstrate the sincerity
of the Republic of Vietnam and its allies in seeking for a just
and lasting peace in accordance with the wishes and interests of
the Vietnamese people. kt is up to the other side to respond.
CANBERRA 11 July 1969 



FOR PRESS: R A R(
P. M. No. 57/ 1969
PROPOSED ROAD CONNECTION BETWEEN
CANBERRA AND TUMLJT
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, and the New South
Wales Chief Secretary, Mr. Willis, today announced that the
Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments have agreed
that the future direct road connection between Canberra and Tumut
should follow a route via Wee jasper.
The two Governments are in agreement that although
there will be an ultimate need for a better road connection between
Canberra and Tumut, the present need does not justify its construction
at the expense of many works of greater urgency.
Both Governments have accepted the recommendations
contained in a report prepared jointly by the National Capital
Development Commission and the Department of Main Roads, New
South Wales. These authorities carried out a technical evaluation
of alternative routes between Canberra and Tumut and the benefits
likely to accrue to road users of those routes.
The Commission undertook an assessment of the
economic, land use and development, tourist and recreational aspects
of the proposed routes while the Department prepared an assessment
of the engineering aspects. The findings of these authorities were
contained in a joint detailed report submitted to the Commonwealth
and State Governments. The investigation followed representations by
Parliamentarians, Local Government Authorities and other interested
bodies for an improved and more direct road connection between
Canberra and Tumut. Two possible routes were investigated, one
via Wee jasper and the other via Brindabella.
The Governments have supplied copies of the report
to Commonwealth and State Parliamentary representatives of the area
and to Local Government bodies directly concerned with the proposal
for a direct road link between Canberra and Tumut.
CA NBERRA
11I July 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 58/ 1969
PRIME MINISTER'S MESSAGE FOR THE MOON
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, has been invited
by the National Aeronautics and Space Agency to send a message to the
moon with the astronauts of the Apollo 11 mission.
Microfilmed messages from a number of world leaders
are to be sealed in a capsule and left on the moon's surface.
Mr. Gorton's message reads:-
" Australians are pleased and proud to
have played a part in helping to make it possible for
the first man from earth to land on the moon. This is
a dramatic fulfilment of man's urge to go ' always a
little further' to explore and know the formerly
unknown; to strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.
May the high courage and the technical genius which
made this achievement possible be so used in the
future that mankind will live in a universe in which
peace, self-expression, and the chance of dangerous
adventure are available to all. JOHN GORTON." i
CANBERRA 13 July 1969 



FOR PRESS: CL 24 JUL 69
P. M. No. 59/ 1969
EXTENSION OF PERIOD OF OPERATION OF THE
1962 COMMONWEALTH/ QUEENSLAND SUGAR AGREEMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth and Queensland Governments
have agreed to extend until 31 August 1969 the period of operation
of the 1962 Commonwealth/ Queensland Sugar Agreement which
would otherwise have expired on 30 June 1969.
The Sugar Agreement provides for the regulation
of the Australian sugar industry and the marketing of sugar in
Australia to the benefit of both producers and consumers.
At the present time the two Governments are
negotiating a new Sugar Agreement and this, when finalised, will
have retrospective effect from 1 July 1969.
The short-term extension is necessary in order
to preserve the benefits of the 1962 Agreement until the arrangements
for the new Agreement are finalised.
CA NBERRA
18 July 1969 



FOR PRESS: 22 4JUL P. M. No. 60/ 1969
THE MOON LANDING: PRIME MINISTER'S COMMENTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, visited Honeysuckle
Creek early this morning to watch the Tracking Station making its final
preparations to take over a key phase of communications with the Apollo
astronauts. He spent about 45 minutes at the Station, during which he
was taken on a tour of inspection by the Director, Mr. Tom Reid. He was
later briefed on aspects of the Mission by Mr. Reid, Mr. Willson H.
Hunter, NASA's Senior Scientific Representative in Australia, Mr. A. S.
Cooley, the Secretary of the Department of Supply and Mr. L. F. Bott,
Deputy Secretary of the Department of Supply.
Before leaving Honeysuckle Creek to return to his office at
Parliament House, Mr. Gorton paid tribute to the United States and the
astronauts:-" THIS, THE FIRST LANDING OF MAN ON THE
MOON, IS A SUCCESS WHICH EXCITES THE WONDER AND
ADMIRATION OF US ALL. THE UNITED STATES HAS ACHIEVED
A GREAT AND PEACEFUL TRIUMPH FOR MANIKIND GENERALLY.
ALL AUSTRALIANS CONGRATULATE THE
UNITED STATES, THE THREE ASTRONAUTS, NEIL ARMSTRONG,
EDWIN ALDRIN AND MICHAEL COLLINS, THES N1ATIONAL
AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION AND THOSE
PEOPLE ALL AROUND THE WORLD WHO HAVE BEEN ASSOCIATED
WITH THIS APOLLO MISSION. AUSTRALIA IS PROUD TO BE
PLAYING A PART IN THIS ADVENTURE THROUGH ITS TRACKING
STATIONS, THROUGH THE PARKES RADIO TELESCOPE AND
THROUGH OTHER FACILITIES. THIS MOON LANDING WILL
BEGIN A NEW ERA IN SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AND
IT DEMONSTRATES IN THE MOST DRAMATIC WAY WHAT MAN
CAN DO BY THE APPLICATION OF ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY
FOR PEACEFUL USES.
WE MARVEL AT THE HIGH COURAGE AND THE
SKILL OF THE ASTRONAUTS AND AT THE SCIENTIFIC
GENIUS WHICH MADE THIS ADVENTURE POSSIBLE. THESE
ASTRONAUTS HAVE DARED DANGEROUSLY AND SUCCESSFULLY
AND THEY HAVE CARRIED OUT MAN'S URGE TO GO ALWAYS
A LITTLE FURTHER, TO EXPLORE AND KNOW THE PREVIOUSLY
UNKNOWN, TO STRIVE, TO SEEK, TO FIND AND NOT TO YIELD.
/ 2 
2-
THERE IS NO TIME MORE MEMORABLE THAN
A FIRST TIME, NO TRIUMPH GREATER THAN ONE SOUGHT
AND ACHIEVED IN PEACE AND THE WORLD IS THE RICHER
BECAUSE OF THIS EPIC JOURNEY.
TO THME MEN ON THE MOON, WE SAY:-
' THANK GODSPEED.....
AND A SAFE RETURN HOME.'" o
Following is the transcript of a brief interview with the
Prime Minister at Honeysuckle Creek:-
Q. Prime Minister, as a former fighter pilot yourself, only
twenty-five years ago you were flying Hurricanes what
did they do 350 miles an hour?
PM. Well, that's what they used to say in the papers but in
point of fact they used to cruise at about 180. They
would do 350 for about 30 seconds before the engines
blew up:
Q. Could you possibly imagine at that time that you would
see a man on the moon in 25 years' time?
PM. I suppose that I could have imagined it myself but this
was because I was a devotee of science fiction and it
didn't seem impossible that man would go further and
further into space. But one couldn't do other than have
faith, that it would happen.
Q. We wiere not allowed to take a sound camera into the
tracking station for technical reasons. What did you
say to the staff of the tracking station here at Honeysuckle
Creek?
PM. Well, I asked them what all the wriggly green lines
were and what the various noises coming out of bits
and pieces of the equipment were, and got answers
which I wouldn't pretend thoroughly to understand. I
think perhaps the best way of saying what I felt when 1
was in there was that I was blinded by science.
The Prime Minister has sent this personal message to
President Nixon1 ( via our Ambassador in Washington):-/ 3 
-3-
" THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA HAS
TODAY MADE HISTORY.
I SEND YOU, ON BEHALF OF THE
AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE, OUR WARM CONGRATULATIONS
ON THE SUCCESSFUL FIRST LANDING OF MEN ON THE
MOON. WE HAVE GREAT ADMIRATION FOR THE
COURAGE, SELF-DISCIPLINE AND SKILLS OF YOUR
ASTRONAUTS AND SALUTE ALL THOSE WHO HAVE
CONTRIBUTED TO THIS GREAT, PEACEFUL ACHIEVEMENT.
A NEW ERA HAS BEGUN IN SPACE SCIENCE
AND SPACE TECHNOLOGY AND WE WISH YOU EVERY
SUCCESS WITH THE NEXT STAGE.
TO NEIL ARMSTRONG, EDWIN ALDRIN AND
MICHAEL COLLINS WE SAY:-
' GODSPEED AND A SAFE JOURNEY HOME.'
Mr. Gorton, who spent the day preparing for the
pre-Budget Cabinet meetings beginning tomorrow, watched the historic
first step on to the moon on a television set in his office.
CANBERRA 21 July 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 61/ 1969
MESSAGE TO PRESIDENT ABOARD U. S. S. HORNET
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton tonight sent
the following message to President Nixon on board U. S. S. Hornet:-
" I WOULD LIKE YOU TO KNOW THAT
THE PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA SHARE YOUR JOY AND
YOUR PRIDE IN WELCOMING BACK NEIL ARMSTRONG,
EDWIN ALDRIN AND MICHAEL COLLINS.
" AUSTRALIA FOLLOWED EVERY STAGE
OF THEIR EPIC JOURNEY WITH ADMIRATION AND
BATED BREATH: " I WOULD APPRECIATE YOUR PASSING
ON CUR CONGRATULATIONS AND BEST WISHES, AND
LETTING THEM KNOW THAT THE GOVERNMENT AND
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA WOULD GIVE THEM A WARM
WELCOME WHENEVER THEY COULD MANAGE TO
VISIT US. SINCERELY, JOHN GORTON."
CANBERRA 24 July 1969 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 62/ 1969
YOUTH ORCHESTRA FOR EXPO
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr ohn Gorton
The Government has decided to send the Australian
Youth Orchestra to Japan to take part in
The Orchestra will represent Australia in EXPO's
' World of Youth" Festival in Osaka next July, during which it will
give a week of daily performances.
The National Music Camp Association established the
Australian Youth Orchestra in 1967. It comprises 92 of Australia's
most talented young instrumentalists, ranging in age from fourteen
to twenty-two. Most come from the various conservatoriums and
schools of music. EXPO ' 70 authorities in Japan have shown a keen
interest in a visit by the Youth Orchestra, and I am sure the
performances by these gifted young people will win many friends for
Australia. CANBERRA, July 1969 



LIBERAL WOMEN'S RALLY
BRISBANE, Qld. JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I never have looked up the number of women on the rolls
throughout the Commonwealth of Australia In the way your President has,
but I did just happen to discover that on the Queensland rolls, as distinct
from the Commonwealth rolls, there are 15, 000 more women than men.
So our minds must have been working in the same direction, Madam
President. We were both looking to the strength. And indeed we were
looking to the strength, at least as far as a political organisation is
concerned. It is the strength that comes from the behind-the-scenes
work of the Women's Section, from the running of the branches, from the
posting out of literature, the contribution of ideas and from all the tasks
that have to be done in a party or . n a campaign.
Now, it will not be long some months, not long before
we all find ou. rselves in an electoral campaign to discover whether the
people of Australia wish us to continue to give the kind of government that
has tran~ sformed Australia over the last two decades. And it has
transformed Australia. It is a different nation from that of twenty years
ago. You will remember sometimes we tend to forget but you will
remem-ber all the people from so many races in the world who have come
to Australia in that time, been assimilated and brought to us their own
cultures, their own ways of thinking, and infused into the bloodstream of
Australia, giving us a new vigour and a new interest. They have certainly
improved the variety of what we eat and drink twenty years ago steak
and eggs was about the culinary end as far as Australians were concerned:
The population has been built up, the development of the
country has grown in a way it has never done before and, at the same
time, there has been removed from the minds of people generally that
fear of unemployment which was always present two decades, or three
decades ago. They find themselves living now in a country which has, I
think, the lowest rate of unemployment of any nation in the world
though from time to time particular parts may be stricken by particular
pr&amp; blems. And even in the last year or eighteen months, I think we
have given an indication to Australia that we are not merely going to go
ahead without seeking changes and new pastures. While providing that
background of progress, we will seek out new areas to help, new avenues
along which we can advance to the future. / 2 
-2
And begause these things tend sometimes to be overlooked
in the rush of events, let me remind you of some of those new approaches
which in the last year or eighteen months have taken place.
We have, for example, in the field of education, taken
steps to see that every school in Australia is provided through
Commonwealth Government funds without matching requirements from
the States with libraries. So those secondary schools of which I speak
may have not only science teaching facilities but facilities for teaching
the humanities which alone can develop minds able to use science to the
proper ends. We have developed an entirely new approach to the problem
of communications through roads in Australia. And for the first time,
by cost-benefit analysis of various proposals, and by the abandonment of
the requirement that a particular amount of a given sum should be spent
in some particular area by abandoning that, by taking cost-plus
processes, by adding a half billion dollars to the sums of money for the
next five-year period, by setting aside specific amounts of that to try
and overcome the congestion which the urbanisation of Australia is
imposing on its city dwellers, by setting sums aside for new freeways,
for new communications in the city, we have, I think, taken a giant step
in that particular field, and a new step.
We have entered the area of overseas shipping so that
Australia will have a ship operating between Australia and Japan, between
Australia and the United Kingdom and between Australia and the United
States. This is not only to save the invisible costs which the operation of
foreign ships imposes on us, but so that we can have proof that the products
af the land for they are what will mostly fiW the ships are carried at
costs which we know to be fair costs and that our producers are not mulcted.
And this again, I believe, is something a nation, an island nation like
Australia should have done, something which I believe will grow,
something which within this short space of time has been a new initiative.
We have taken decisions which were not easy in the
international climate to our north, where the situation has changed so
significantly. We have taken the decision that we will not be the sheriff
in that region to which we belong, as England was the sheriff or was
claimed to be the sheriff. We cannot fill the role of sheriff nor do we
want to, but we are prepared to play our part in the defence of the region
in which we stand as members of the sheriff's posse and as fairly strong,
relatively strong members of the sheriff's po~ sse. We have decided that
we will have Australian troops visible in the area to our north as evidence
of this approach. These were not easy decisions to take in the light of the
enormously changed circumstances through Brti's withdrawal from our
north, but we have taken them. 
-3.
These are some indications of new approaches over the
last eighteen months. And yet now we stand on the threshold of opportunities
such as Australia has not known before and which will give us chances to
take more and more new initiatives. We are on the threshold of the exciting
seventies, those years when the overseas earnings of Australia will grow
and grow as our farm produce grows, as our minerals finally come into
their own and are exported and as I hope, will be fabricated and exported;
on the threshold of years when, if things are properly run, there will be
modernisation of the equipment in our manufacturing industries and more
automation. One man will be able to do the work done now by two, yet
there will be so much work to do, there will not be unemployment, but
rahter a chance of the greater production which is possible if one man does
the work of two and of the greater reward which is possible for each such
man; These are the opportunities that lie before us.
You would expect us, I believe, in these circumstances, to
go in to these exciting seventies with the twin beliefs that we have work to
do at home, development to do at home and we have also a part to play in
the defence of the region in which we live; and that we must do both, or
else there is a possibility we might fail to achieve either. And so you
would, I think, expect us to devote to the development of our own capacity
for defence not a greater percentage of gross national product but certainly
greater rums of money as our gross national product grows. You would
expect us, I think, to look to our alliances, and in particular our alliance
with the United States for defensive purposes. And looking to those
alliances, you would expect us to be prepared to contribute towards a joint
defence and not merely to seek to take and give nothing back.
And you would expect us to see that we kept the rate of
employment as high as it is, that we continued to bring in the record number
of migrants which we are now attracting and that we developed all parts of
this nation as quickly as the manpower resources and the capital resources
would permit. I say " would permit" for there are many things throughout
Australia which today can be pointed to and people can say " This should
be done. It should be done now. It will be economical. It will return
money for the investment that is put into it. It will add to growth". All
these things are true of all t tese projects. And yet with the work force
fully employed, a great accretion of new projects is not immediately
possible. Yet you would expect us to see these things happen, subject to
the limitations of an expanding work force and expanding capital.
I think, and I have been criticised for thinking this, but I
still think it and still propose to express it, that we will need for the
development of this country and the speed at which it should be developed,
great amounts of overseas capital. We cannot generate from within our
own savings enough to do all that lies before us. Yet I also believe that
we can and should require an offer of participation to Australians in these
/ 4 
-4
new developments at the beginning and the key word is " offer"'. There
should be a chance to participate. There should be a chance for Australians
to see their investments grow as their country grows, to be part owners.
This we will make clear I think we have made it clear to the world,
and to those who have money to invest. And I do not believe for one
moment that it will prevent the flow of that overseas capital which we must
have. For Australian participation is not a condition, but the offer to
Australians to participate is a goal which I think we will attain.
I am sure, too, that you would wish us to use some of the
material benefits which will flow from the economic circumstances I see
before us, to ensure that in a way that has not happened before, those
who are at the end of life's race, those who are widowed or ill or handicapped'
in some other way, are helped by the community. And you would want us,
I think, to see that those who help themselves during their life are not
thereby entirely c~ ut off from any additional assistance from the State.
I hope nobody will imagine when I say that that I am talking
about the possibility of abolishing the means test. I am not and it should
not be abolished. There is no reason in the world as far as I see it
why $ 450 million should eventually be spent to provide a pension, for
example, to my wife who will have one anyway, or to other wealthy citizens
of Australia. That money can far better be used in relieving real need.
But there is a need to see that those who have in some way or other given
some provision to themselves are not entirely cut out at the lower levels
from some assistance from the State as well.
These are the things, I think, you would want a government
to do. I would add one other thing. There is a need, I think, to improve
not only the material circumstances of life so that one has two cars, bigger
houses, more refrigerators or better machinery or whatever it might be.
There is also a need to improve the quality of life, a need that will grow
as the leisure time for the population of Australia grows, an opportunity
to do a number of things. An opportunity first to choose the course in life
which most appeals to an individual; to choose and be properly trained,
and to be excited by the chance of being properly trained; to be whatever
an actor, a film producer, a television producer, a plumber, a carpenter,
a scientist, a technologist. And what I would say improved the quality of life would be
if people, young and not so young, were given the opportunity to advance
their minds and exercise their minds. There must be many of you here
today who found, as my own wife found, that you had been married, there
had been a family, the family had grown up and got married, and all those
years that you had put in to raising that family had gone and the family
had gone. And if the quality of life is to be improved, there should be
opportunities for courses of various kinds for those who wish to take them
so that that great reservoir of intelligence, ability and capacity which I 
believe lies in the female population should be given a chance for Australia's
sake to be used,_ sbld.' jegven &amp;-chance for the individual's sake to be
used. I could go on for some time but there is not time speaking
of the improvements in the quality of life that are possible and will be
increasingly possible as the material benefits of our work and development
continue to flow in to us. I hope and I believe that as we step across the
threshold of tLese exciting seventies, the people of Australia will say they
would like to see a continuation of the kind of government that has transformed
Australia. For it is not old, it is not tired; it is young and vital and
seeking new approaches and, in the next twenty years, it will seize
opportunities to make that transformation greater still.
I think and believe that this will happen. If it does, then
on behalf of the team I lead in Canberra, I can pledge to you that we will
seek to our utmost to do that which I have tried to outline to you this
afternoon, and we will go into the fight to do it, fortified by two things
fortified by the knowledge that in all things that matter, we are a united
team and a united party. There are no ideological cleavages anywhere,
though there are and there should be discussions and arguments as to how
a particular goal should be achieved. And that is different from the
bitterly divided Opposition. We stand for achievement whereas people
riven with ideological factions, riven with hatreds, cannot achieve its
pledges. The second thing fortifying us is gatherings such as this which
I have had the honour to attend in so many places in Australia. They show
that there are behind us sharing our aspirations, great masses of intelligent
Australians, willing to give of their own time and effort to build the
Australia we believe in. 



p 69/ 109
STATE COUNCIL MEETING OF THE VICTORIAN
DIVISION OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
Melbourne, Vic. JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John' Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Premier and Delegates:-
This is, as the President has said, merely a fleeting visit.
I have to be in Queensland by lunchtime, then have a meeting of the
Women's Sections from all over Queensland, and then attend a fund-raising
dinner for one of our candidates. So you can see, it is not an uncrowded
day. But this part of it is one that I would not, for anything, have missed.
I speak to you at a time only some months before there will
be a decision made by the Australian people as to what Government will
carry them on and through those exciting seventies which beckon to us now.
It is my hope, and my belief, that with your help the Australian people will
choose as their pilots through these years ahead a government which
continues those policies and those philosophies which have, over the last
twenty years, transformed this nation; a government which will adopt new
approaches and policies to take full advantage of those great opportunities
which await us. It is a little inhibiting speaking to you on the eve of a Budget,
but perhaps I might remind you of some of the things which have been done
in the space of very little more than a year or eighteen months, things
which already indicate, I think, the courses we will take in the future. I
would remind you that we have adopted an entirely new approach to the
system of building road communications throughout Australia and Victoria,,
and this is an important avenue of approach, not just a gimmick. For the
first time, there has been a cost-benef it analysis of the construction of
roads and where they should be. For the first time there is no longer a
requirement that a fixed amount of the total road money available whether
it Is of cost-benef it or not should be spent in particular areas, and for
the first time there is a requirement that the congestion of the cities should
be relieved by a proper road programme. Accompanying these new
approaches has been the addition of half a billion dollars for the road
programme.
&amp; 4) 10 
71 -2
I. / 3
We have, let me remind you, taken the not inconsiderable
policy decision to enter, or perhaps I should say re-enter, the field of
overseas shipping so that Australia will have ships plying with Australian
produce between this country and Japan, between this country and the
United Kingdom, between this country and the United States. And this will
not only be profitable, it will save invisibles in our import bill. And it
will also enable us to know precisely what the economics of this trade are
and to see that our producers, and to this extent I speak of our primary
producers for they provide the bulk of our exports to see that our
producers are not mulcted by freight charges higher than they should be.
We have accepted a responsibility in the new changed
situation to our north, although let us make it quite plain that we cannot
take over the role of sheriff which Britain had. But we will be clearly
seen to be members of the posse and have there in that region, visible
Ifor all to see, an. Australian presence. And these were not easy decisions
to make, and are but some of those new approaches in this relatively brief
I would add just one more to them before I leave. We have,
I think, already shown our awareness in a practical way of those of whom
I have so often spoken and those whom I believe you think of so often that
is the handicapped amongst us, the ill, the aged. This will continue, and
it will continue in the seventies at an increasing tempo, with more people
coming in ( for our immigration programme is already a record), with
more development taking place, with more overseas capital required to do
it and more Australian ownership being offered in that development and
the key word is " offered". And as those material goals before us are
reached, we will not only seek to look after those ill and aged of whom I
have spoken, but try to see if we cannot improve the quality of life in
-' Australia, as the material resources of Australia grow. And by the
quality of life I mean the opportunity for people to train themselves for
whatever field of endeavour they may wish to enter. If they wish to train
to be a television producer, a film actor, a plumber, a carpenter, a farmer,
in the field of business management, a scientist whatever it is they wish
to be; that opportunity to receive the necessary training is what we would
wish to see provided as part of the quality of life. And to try to see that
our younger people are brought up with the opportunity not only to achieve
that of which I have spoken but to take part in outdoor activities surfing,
skiing, riding, in whatever it may be that Is a healthy outdoor interest
and is as much a part of the quality of life as is intellectural attainment.
These things become easier as material resources grow,
but they are an integral part of a full life in a nation such as Australia,
and will be achieved under the leadership of the Liberal Party, and with
the help and assistance which you of the Branches, however you may
differ on minor matters, are united to give us. 
-3
a-A G*% IJ
ak* j Pa__
Pill Wh~ at a difference there is between those of you in this hall
who will argue out matters of detail but on matters of ideology the climate
which provides employment and growth are as one. What a difference
between some other meeting, which I seem to have heard is taking place
somewhere or other in Melbourne, where the whole of the time appears to
be devoted to pretending that those deep schisms which exist don't exist
and can be papered over and can be hidden for at least long enough to
pretend to the people there is something difference from what there really
is. We will come before you, as we always have, putting
programmes that can be achieved without inflation and without pretence. We
will make no promises that can't be carried out. But if I may, just before
I close, be a little repetitive, I would like to bring to the attention of those
of you who have not already read it, a little piece of doggerel I wrote at
Question Time one day in the House no-one was asking me questions at
the time, so I thought I would put the time to good use: which seems to
me to put in one nutshell the different approach of our opponents, particularly
their Leader. And the little piece of nonsense runs like this and of
course you will understand it is in the mouth of the Leader of the Opposition
I promise you, I promise you
To do anything at all you want me to
And if I get rather lost
As to how much it will cost
I can always raise taxation
On guess who? You.
Well, you think of it and he'll promise it. But this will not be our approach.
It would not be the approach you wanted. It would not be the approach you
would support. But with that support you give us and I thank you for it
now I am sure that we will see, with the team of candidates we have,
that towards the end of this year there will be opening for Australia three
more years of Increasingly exciting government and increasingly exciting
development for this nation which we all love. 



69/ 1,
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 63/ 1969
MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, has received
the following message from President Nixon:-
" Dear John, I very much appreciated your message
welcoming the safe return of our astronauts. It
symbolises perfectly the special bonds of friendship,
co-operation and understanding which exists between
the Australian and American people. I will most
certainly look into the possibility of Astronauts
Armstrong, Aldrmn and Collins visiting Australia.
With all best wishes. Sincerely, Richard Nixon.
CA NBERRA
3 August 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 64/ 1969
DROUGHT RELIEF FOR QUEENSLAND
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Carton, referred
today to the extra measures of drought relief assistance which
he had agreed to make available to the Queensland Government
in a letter to the Premier on 29 July.
He recalled that in 1968-69 the Commonwealth
gave approximately $ 2 million to Queensland on a dollar-fordollar
sharing arrangement between the Commonwealth and
the State. Mr. Gorton has now told the Queensland
Government that in 1969-70 the present financial year the
Commonwealth is prepared to give $ 2 million on the same
sharing basis, and in addition will give the whole of any agreed
relief expenditure which the State may incur in excess of
$ 4 million. This excess expenditure is tentatively estimated
to be approximately $ 6 million.
The result is that as compared with a grant of
$ 2 million last year the Commonwealth stands ready to provide
an estimated $ 8 million this year.
CA NBERRA
August 1969 



FOR PRESS: F 13'* 1969
P. M. No. 65/ 1969
ROYAL VISIT 1970
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Queen has been pleased to approve an itinerary for
Her visit to Australia next year with The Duke of Edinburgh.
They will be in Australia from Easter Monday 30 March
to Sunday 3 May, and will visit the Australian Capital Territory, New
South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Tasmania. The itinerary is:-
March to 2 April
2 April to 4 April
April to 8 April
8 April to 12 April
12 April to 23 April
23 April to 28 April
28 April to 3 May New South Wales
Tasmania Victoria H. M. Y. " Britannia" en route to Brisbane
Queensland including three days rest
period on H. M. Y. " Britannia"
Australian Capital Territory
New South Wales
As previously announced The Queen and The Duke of
Edinburgh will take part in the celebrations of the bi-centenary of
Captain Cook's voyage. Her Majesty and His Royal Highness have
suggested that some events related to the major economic development
in Australia after the first settlements might be included in the programme,
for example, events connected with exploration and transport, the
development of agriculture and mining and port development. The Queen
and The Duke of Edinburgh also hope to see something of the work in
Australian schools and hospitals and nature conservation.
Lt. Gen. Sir Reginald Pollard, K. B. C. D. S. 0.,
will be returning to Australia on Monday 11I August following discussions
in London and will be meeting with the State Directors at an early date
to settle the detailed programme of engagements to be submitted for
Her Majesty's consideration.
CA NBERRA
7 August 1969 



69/ 16
FOR PRESS: Issued by the Cffice of the Press
Secretary to the Prime Minister.
AUSTRALIAN SECRETARY TO THE QUEEN
Lieutenant-General Sir Reginald Pollard, K. B. E.,
C. D. S. who is in charge of the planning of the visit to
Australia next year by Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal
Highness The Duke of Edinburgh, will be Her Majesty's Australian
Secretary for the occasion and will be a member of the Royal
Household throughout the visit.
Sir Reginald will return from London tomorrow
( Monday 11 August) after conferring with The Queen and Prince
Philip. CA NBERRA
August 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 66/ 1969
SAILING SHIPS FOR COOK CELEBRATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Two Governments have confirmed that they will be
sending sailing ships to Australia to take part in next year's Captain
Cook Bicentenary Celebrations.
Chile's training barquentine, " Esmeralda", will
be in Sydney for the re-enactment of the landing ceremony at
Botany Bay on 29 April. Japan's cadet training barque, " Nippon
Maru", will also be here for the Bicentenary Celebrations, but
her sailing schedule is still being worked out.
I am delighted that the Chilean and Japanese
Governments have been able to accept our invitation, and I am
sure these sailing vessels, which are among the few remaining
in the world, will be assured of a warm welcome.
Several other Governments have indicated
informally that they are considering sending ships to Australia
for the celebrations.
CANBERRA 11 August 1969 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH
The Hon. C. E. BARNES, M. P.
ON
BOUGAINVILLE COPPER DEVELOPMENT
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 12 August 1969]
Mr BARNES ( McPherson-Minister for
External Territories)-by leave-Mr
Speaker, this statement is cOncerned with
the recent incidents near Kieta, Bougainville,
in the Territory of Papua and New
Guinea, in connection with the provision of
land for the Bougainville copper project.
On 31st July a lease was issued to Bougain-
Dville Copper Pty Ltd under the Territory
Mining Ordinance over 175 acres of land
at Rorovana. On 1st August, surveyors cornenced
marking the boundary of this land.
-) tview of reports that there might be
~ violence 100 police were sent to the area in
_) three groups. A group of approximately 20
women crowded around police guarding a
concrete survey peg. The police did not use
force and eventually the peg was removed
and carried away by the women. Clearing
and marking of the area continued on 2nd
and 4th August without interference. On 5th
August a bulldozer clearing scrub for the
survey team was confronted by a group of
approximately 65 men and women. There
were approximately 70 police present. The
officer in charge warned the people to disperse
on at least two occasions. He then
ordered a group of 15 police carrying
shields and batons to move in front of the
bulldozer and attempt to push the crowd
away with their shields. There was a general
melee and at this point the officer in charge
decided to attempt to disperse the crowd
with tear gas. The tear gas used is non-
20644/ 69 toxic. It was only partially effective. After
further warnings police were ordered to use
their batons about the legs of the natives
and after a very short time the crowd dispersed.
There were no injuries other than
one man who appeared to have grazed his
leg falling over a log. No-one was injured
by the police. Minimum force was used.
The members of the Papua and New
Guinea constabulary acquitted themselves
with distinction in these incidents, behaving
with the greatest restraint and discipline.
Their actions were at all times fully in
accordance with the fine traditions of this
force. These are the facts of the incidents.
I turn now to the situation behind them.
For many years there has been some
knowledge of the mineral wealth at
Bougainville Island but it was not until 1960
that an Administration geologist reported
the possibility of a major low-grade copper
deposit. Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd
began prospecting the area in 1964. In 1967
after more than 12 months of negotiation an
agreement was signed between the company
and the Administration. This agreement was
tabled in the Commonwealth Parliament. It
was debated in the Territory House of
Assembly and a ratifying Ordinance was
passed by the House. The House consisted
of 54 elected and 10 official members. The
House also amended the Territory mining
legislation so as to provide that 5% of all 
royalties for minerals should be paid to the
owners of the land from which the minerals
were taken. This was accepted by the
Government. in June of this year the Territory House
of Assembly ( now consisting of 84 elected
and 10 official members) debated a comprehensive
White Paper on the Bougainville
project and again endorsed it. The motion
passed by the House on -this occasion
described the project as ' a major and
essential development in the economic
future of the Territory'.
In relation to the situation at Rorovana
as well as . at Arawa, the Administrator consulted
the Administrator's Executive
Council, which has a majority of elected
members of the House of Assembly. The
Council gave unanimous support to the
Administrator's proposals for further direct
consultation with the people, to be followed
if unsuccessful by leasing under the Mining
Ordinance . or by compulsory acquisition
under the Lands Ordinance, and endorsed
the employment of police if necessary to
ensure protection of those going about their
lawful business in the area. The Council
also expressed an earnest wish that the
Rorovana and Arawa villagers would sell
their land to the Administration.
The Bougainville copper project offers
gigantic benefits to the Territory as a whole.
These benefits will include jobs for 2,500
New Guineans within the next 5 years, a
township of 10,000 people, a $ 2m training
programme for indigenous people during
the period to 1973, revenue to the Administration
of between $ 200m and $ 300m in
the first 10 years of operation, and export
income in excess of $ 100m per annum.
In addition, the Administration, on behalf
of the people of the Territory, has the
option of a 20% equity interest in the project.
CRA has indicated that it may also
provide opportunities for individual equity
participation by. the people of Bougainville.
The project therefore offers a tremendous
opportunity for the Territory to lift itself up
out of the field of competition of low priced
tropical products in international trade, and
to make a giant stride towards economic
self-reliance.
, In view of its importance to the Territory
and in view of the nature of the problems
involved, the Government and the Administration
approached this whole question with great and careful consideration of the problems
extending over many months. Advice
regarding particular aspects of the attitude
of the local people from expert anthropologists
and psychologists has been carefully
examined and the whole matter has been
the subject of the most careful study.
Certain difficulties were experienced in
1966 and 1967 in the actual area of mining
operations at Panguna, where the open pit
mine, the concentrate plant, the mine town
and a location for stacking waste rock will
be sited. The 10,000 acres of this land
covered by a special -mining lease.
The people of Guava, Moroni and
Dapera who occupy or own land in this
lease, were originally antagonistic to the
project as are the coastal people of Rorovana
and Arawa now. The problems were
handled patiently and sympathetically.
These inland people are now reconciled to
the mining operation. They are receiving
full compensation for loss of housing and
gardens and there will also be annual cash
payments for the loss of use of land and
for royalties. In summary there are about
1,000 men, women and children involved
and when ' the. mine is fully in operation
cash pavments are expected to total approximately
$ 100.000 per year. Not all the compensation
for loss of houses and gardens.
et cetera, has yet been determined by the
mining warden but some fifty people in the
villaee of Moroni have been awarded cash
and kind compensation valued at approx'
mately $ 40,000.
Oiher leases required for roads, disposal
of tailings, sources of aggregate and limestone
, et cetera may total up to 40,000
acres. Much of this area will be swamp. It
is not expected that village dwellings will
be involved.
The incidents on 1st and 5th August that
I have referred to above relate only to requirements
for the port. The company had.
however, proposed that the town be sited on
the coast in an area of some 2,000 acres
south of the site proposed for -the port.
This location would have deprived some
650 villagers of their houses, gardens and
economic crops. To avoid this the Administration
decided to locate the town at Arawa
plantation of 998 acres and to supplement
this area with some 640 acres of adjacent
sparsely planted: village land which contained
no village houses. 
The arrangements for land for the port
and for the town that were decided upon
were chosen so as to cause the least disturbance
to the minimum number of native
people. The land is uninhabited. No homes
are lost. No villages are displaced. The
people have other land. Full compensation
will be paid. If need be, however, the
Administration will also make other land
available. In providing land for the port or for the
town associated with the copper project the
Administration is acting first and foremost
in the interests of the Territory. The Territory
gets more out of the copper project
than the company does. The project will
not be on full stream until about 1980.
When that happens, however, the following
points apply:
50% of the taxable income goes to
the Territory Treasury;
royalties are payable to the Territory
Treasury in accordance with the
Mining Ordinance scale;
if the Administration's option on
of the equity is taken up then
one-fifth of the dividends paid or
profits accumulated but not distributed
will accrue to the Territory.
Quite apart from these financial considerations
and the indirect tax benefits
flowing from the huge payroll that will be
financed by the project there ' are the jobs,
training' and development benefits I have
Salready referred to. The people of Bougainville
have known for years that the project
would require substantial areas of land but
until the detailed investigations were completed
it was not possible to specify the
particular areas. In March of this year the
company applied for its special mining lease.
This brought into operation ma; or aspects of
the Agreement, including the obligation by
the Administration to'pr6vide land. For over
3 years the Administration has used all possible
means' to explain to the people of
Bougainville the nature and implications of
the. mining project. The construction of
Radio Kieta was expedited in 1967 to facilitate
communications with the native
people. Since mid-1966 over forty Administration
patrols have been made in the area
affected by the mining project: A primary
objective of these patrols has been to
explain to the people the nature of the project and how it would affect them. In addition,
individual officers have spent in the
aggregate hundreds of days visiting villages
and individual families for this same purpose.
The Administrator himself visited
Bougainville earlier this year and spoke to
the people and talked over Radio Bougainville.
Last month an Assistant Administrator
led a special mission to the Island and
held meetings in the villages most affected.
This mission included indigenous ministerial
members of the House of Assembly and all
three Bougainville members of the House.
Radio and news sheets have been used
extensively and the elected members for
Bougainville have been given every opportunity
and encouragement to inform themselves
and their people of the project and
the consideration it had been given by the
House of Assembly.
As an example of the detailed and painstaking
effort on the part of the Administration
to achieve communication with the
local peoDle I refer to the fact that the
Assistant District Commissioner of the area
visited Rorovana four times in the past 4
months and the peonle of Rorovana themselves
visited the District Headquarters at
Kieta 12 times in the past 5 months for discussions.
There have' also been frequent
discussions with the Councillors of the
Rorovana Council and the Council President.
It appears that the opposition of the
Rorovana people to the sale of their land to
the Administration is not related to'lack
of information nor, indeed, to the amount
of compensation offered to them. Some 175
acres of Rorovana land is required for the
port area. The Rorovana people number
some 450 and they ' have total land of
aporoximately 1,600 acres. The loss of this
175 acres will not seriously affect their
economic livelihood. They have been offered
a good price and alternative productive
land; There has never been anry real indication
that they would sell at any price. On
the other hand, not all the native people ' are
opposed. At the village of Lonsiro only a
few miles from Rorovana, one native landholding
family concluded arrangements with
the Administration un'der which they were
paid $ 5,600 for a 42-year lease of 49 acres
of land.
The ' Administration's cositibn in relation
to negotiations for land for such public
purposes as ports,' town sites, airfields and so 
on has to take account of the' need for these
public facilities throughout the Territory.
The proposed port for which the Rorovana
land is required will be for public and not
just for company use. The legal authority
for compulsory acquisition or lease of-land
exists in the Territory as in other countries
to avoid the need for excessive payments
out of the public purse, that is, to serve the
interests of the public as a whole.
Compulsory acquisition is an essential
power in all communities. It is used in Australia
more freely than in the Territory.
Individuals or small groups are not allowed
to hold the whole community up. In the
Territory as here the amount of compensation
is in the last resort subject to law.
The Agreement between the Administration
and CRA which the Commonwealth
Government is backing is modern in its
approach and enlightened in its ideas. There
will be adequate return to the Territory
Government in terms of taxes, royalties
and dividends from the profits of the operation.
There are those who would accept the
merits of the Bougainville Copper Agreement
but who would criticise the way in
which the Government or the Administration
had handled the matter. This is easilv
done. Nevertheless it ignores the tremendous
difficulties of communication and of
comprehension which have confronted the
Administration in this matter. I have explained
the painstaking nature of the Administration
communication activity. There
has been no effort spared. The basic difficulty
has been that people of this area are
living in one world and the problems of
development and the requirements of development
confront them with another
world. In the absence of skill arid patience and
moderation on the part of the Administration,
especially its field officers, we could
easily have had a much worse situation
than that which confronts us. As it is we
cannot expect easy solutions. We must
understand that what -happenedat Rorovana
and what may happen elsewhere reflect
the problems of transition into a
modern world and a modern society. These
cannot be sidestepped by an Administration
that must act in the interests of the Territory
as a whole. The Government, however,
is grateful to the officers of the Administration
for the extent to which their
efforts have so far contained the problem. The Government makes no apology for
the Agreement. It considers that the Agreement
is a spectacular contribution to harnessing
the interests of private capital and
the skills of the large corporation to the
development requirements of the Territory.
Not many developing countries are fortunate
enough to have the prospect of so
large and so remunerative a development
within their boundaries. In this, confidence
plays a major part. The investment of
$ 300m demands confidence. In this case
the investors are showing their confidence Ji
not only in the Commonwealth Government
but in . the people of the Territory
themselves because the mining project looks
ahead to the time when the people will be
running their own affairs. In this respect the
projected investment is an act of imagination
and confidence. There are many who
seek to knock it but it has the backing of
the Territory people through their House
of Assembly. It will survive.
The Government considers the Administration's
actions are fully in accordance
with the law. Action has been taken in
Papua and New Guinea to test the law. The
Government will welcome an authoritative
and definitive judicial interpretation of the
legal position.
Since 1964, the Government has made
available to the Territory by way of grant
in aid sums totalling S400m. The Government
and the House of Assembly have last
year jointly backed a 5-year $ 1,000m development
programme for the Territory.
The Bougainville project offers a unique
opportunity for the Territory to make a
dramatic advance towards these objectives
of development. The attitude of a handful
of people may attract our sympathy, and
we may go . to considerable lengths to resolve
their problems. But in the last resort
we cannot allow them to block this great
prospect and thus throw into doubt the
noli-ies on which the futures of more than
2 million people depend.
In the structure of ignorance, superstition
and prejudice, persuasion and explanations
are not easy but with other expatriate
influences working in the opposite
direction-some not without prestige in
native eyes-difficulties become great. The
present choice before the people of this
Territory is whether to drift in a primitive
and backward situation in close dependency 
on the generosity of the Australian taxpayer
to provide a modicum towards health,
education and the preservation of law and
order and burdened by their ancient customs
or whether to advance as a modem
state financed substantially by its own
resources. These resources lie dormant and will continue
that way under traditional attitudes.
Developed they will provide the revenues for the hospitals, the schools, the better
standard of life and most important a
nation not only able to stand on its own
feet economically but able to opt for a
meaningful independence should this be desired.
This progressive transition has been
the way chosen by the people of the Territory;
its achievement needs sympathy and
understanding from us in Australia as well
as our continuing support.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MURRAy at tne
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



rvNA-
, Vx 17
FOR PRESS:-P. M. No. 67/ 1969
AID FOR THE ARTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Government's intention to aid and encourage the
highest possible national standards in the Arts is reflected by the
substantially increased provision in the Budget for grants and other
support through the Australian Council for the Arts.
The allocation of 850, 000 for 1969-70 which
represents an increase of 183, 651, or 71%, over expenditure
last year, will provide for support in several new areas as well as
for consolidation and extension of existing activities.
The Government will continue to support the
maintenance of national touring companies which will bring the best
drama, music, ballet and opera to all States and allow talented
Australian artists to make a professional career in this country.
Public interest in the ballet and opera is increasing and the
Government will therefore support the establishment of a second
theatre orchestra to enable extended seasons to be provided by these
companies throughout the Commonwealth.
The Special Projects Fund established last year offered
help to a wide variety of smaller companies based in the various
States; it provided encouragement for playwrights, choreographers,
composers and other creative workers. The Fund will be considerably
extended in the coming year.
The Government regards the matter of professional
training in the Arts as of great importance, and will continue to
support the national training schools in ballet and drama. Subject to
the findings of a survey which is at present being carried out,
support will also be provided for training schemes for theatre
administrators and technical personnel and, in this coming year,
the first steps will be taken towards establishing a national opera
school to provide a flow of trained opera singers for the National
Company and for other purposes. / 2 
-2
Many bodies such as the Australian Elizabethan Theatre
Trust and the Arts Council of Australia ( Federal) provide a valuable
service in bringing a variety of theatre and artistic activities to
Australians in metropolitan areas and in the country. The Government
will continue to provide support for these bodies through the Australian
Council, and in particular it is hopeful of seeing the work of the Arts
Council in country areas considerably expanded.
The Government is looking at ways in which the Arts
of the Australian Aboriginal might be fostered. It will provide support
towards the establishment of a permanent professional group of
Aboriginal dancers. This group will perform throughout the country,
and will teach Aboriginal children the traditional culture of their people.
In previous years Federal Government assistance to
music has principally been channelled through the Australian
Broadcasting Commission, whose valuable work has brought a wide
variety of music to Australians through orchestral concerts and
broadcasts. Assistance to composers has been provided through the
Government's Advisory Board in this field. This year funds will also
be made available for musical activities through the Australian Council
for the Arts which will advise the Government on appropriate additional
areas for support. In regard to film-making in Australia, the Government
has accepted the recommendation of the Australian Council for the Arts
that an Interim Council be established to investigate and report on the
form and location of a National Film and Television Training School,
and has provided $ 100, 000 for this purpose. The membership of the
Interim Council, which will include a representative of the National
Institute of Dramatic Art, will be announced shortly.
The Council for the Arts has also formulated plans to
encourage the making and exhibiting of short experimental films and
provision of $ 200, 000 has been made in the Budget so that assistance
in this direction will begin during the present financial year.
CA NBERRA
13 August 1969 



DEPA
FOR PRESS: 4 W~ P. M. No. 68/ 1969
TWO DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSIONERS FOR LONDON
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, today announced
the appointment of two Deputy High Commissioners for Australia in
Britain. Mr. R. W. Boswell, 0. B. E. Secretary to the
Department of National Development, is to succeed Mr. J. L. Knott,
C. B. who was appointed Director-General, Posts and Telegraphs,
in December last year.
Mr. W. B. Pritchett, at present Assistant Secretary,
Department of External Affairs, has been appointed to a new office of
Deputy High Commissioner which replaces the present position of Senior
External Affairs Representative in the United Kingdom.
Both Mr. Boswell and Mr. Pritchett will take up their new
appointments shortly.
CANBERRA 19 August 1969
Biographical Background: Mr. Boswell has been Secretary to the Department of
National Development since 1965. He was Controller of the Weapons
Research Establishment in South Australia from 1958 until 1965 and from
1948 had been associated with the development and operations of the
Establishment. Mr. Pritchett joined the Department of External Affairs
in 1945. His last overseas appointment was High Commissioner in
Singapore from 1965 to 1967. Earlier he had served in Indonesia,
Germany, India and Malaysia. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. o91/ lb9
RiLTLREML. T OF MR ALLEA FAiRAL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
I deeply regret that Allen Fairhall has decided to
retire. We have worked together since 1949 and he will be a great
loss to the Parliament and to the Cabinet. But he told me some time
ago that he felt he should, in the interests of his health, not stand for
Parliament again. He has given outstanding service to Australia
during twenty years in the Parliament, and has made a particularly
noteworthy contribution as Minister for Defence. We shall miss his
wise counsel in the Cabinet Room.
CANBERRA, 19 August 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 70/ 1969
AWARD OF VICTORIA CROSS FOR GALLANTRY
IN VIETNAM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Her Majesty The Queen has awarded the Victoria Cross to
a member of the Australian Army Training Team in Vietnam, Warrant
Officer Class 2 Rayene Stewart Simpson, D. C. M.
Warrant Officer Simpson displayed outstanding heroism on
two separate occasions during an operation with a mobile strike force in
Kontum Province in May this year.
A veteran of the Second World War, Korea, and the
Malayan Emergency, Warrant Officer Simpson came originally from
Chippendale in New South Wales. He is still serving with the Training
Team in Vietnam. Warrant Officer Simpson's repeated acts of personal bravery
in last May's operation were an inspiration to all Vietnamese, United
States and Australian soldiers who served with him. His conspicuous
gallantry was in the highest tradition of the Australian Army.
I have sent Warrant Officer Simpson the following message:-
" On behalf of the Commonwealth Government, my
colleagues and I offer you our most sincere
congratulations on the award of the Victoria Cross
bestowed on you by Her Majesty The Queen.
Australia is proud of you. Your exceptional
valour and leadership while serving as an adviser
of the Australian Army Training Team in Vietnam
must be an inspiration to all Australians."
CANBERRA 2 1August 1969
Note: Attached:-Details of Warrant Officer Simpsont s actions.
Personal background on Warrant Officer Simpson. 
BACKGROUND TO V. C. AWARD
Details of Action: On 6 May 1969 Warrant Off icer Simpson was serving as a
company commander in a Mobile Strike Force Battalion on a search and
clear operation in Kontum Province. When one of his platoons became
heavily engaged with the enemy, he led the remainder of his company to
its assistance. The enemy who were equipped with automatic weapons and
grenades were in strong defensive positions and well protected by the
covering fire of other troops dispersed about their positions. Disregarding
the dangers involved, he placed himself at the front of his troops, thus
becoming a focal point of enemy fire, and personally led the assault on the
left flank of the enemy position.
As the company moved forward, an Australian warrant
officer commanding one of the platoons was seriously wounded and the
attack began to falter. Warrant Off icer Simpson, at great personal risk
and under heavy fire, rushed across open ground to the wounded warrant
officer and carried him to a position of safety. He then returned to his
company where, with complete disregard for his safety, he crawled forward
to within ten metres of the enemy and threw grenades into their positions.
As darkness fell, Warrant Officer Simpson realised he
could not break into the enemy position. He ordered his company to
withdraw and threw smoke grenades as a protective cover. Then, carrying
a wounded platoon leader and with the assistance of five Vietnamese soldiers,
he covered the withdrawal of his company.
Mr. Gorton said his leadership and personal bravery
throughout this action were outstanding.
On 11 May in the same operation, Warrant Officer Simpson'sa
Battalion Commander was killed and an Australian warrant officer and
several Vietnamese soldiers were wounded. In addition, one other Australian
warrant off icer who had been separated from most of his troops had been
pinned down by enemy fire. Warrant Off icer Simpson quickly organised two
platoons of Vietnamese soldiers and several advisers and led them to the
position of the contact. On reaching the position, the element with Warrant Off icer
Simpson came under heavy fire and all but a few of the soldiers with him
fell back. Disregarding his own safety, he moved forward in the face of
accurate enemy machine gun fire in order to cover the initial evacuation
of the casualties. The wounded were eventually moved out of the line of
fire, most of which was being directed at Warrant Officer Simpson from
close range. In the words of one American eye-witness, " The whole area
was sprayed. Warrant Off icet Simpson's area caught the full blast and the
tree he was beside was ripPed apart. His leadership and encouragement
motivated myself and others so the wounded were pulled out safely." / 2 
2-
At what appeared to be the risk of almost certain death he
made several attempts to move forward to recover his Battalion'
Commander's body, but on each occasion was stopped by heavy accurate
fire. Realising the position was becoming untenable and that priority
should be given to extricating all casualties as quickly as possible,
Warrant Officer Simpson alone and still under enemy fire, covered the
withdrawal of the wounded by keeping himself between them and the enemy.
He fought on and by his outstanding courage prevented the enemy advancing
until the wounded were removed from the immediate vicinity.
The Prime Minister said Warrant Officer Simpson's gallant
and individual action and his coolness under prolonged fire were exceptional
and were instrumental in achieving the successful evacuation of the wounded
to a helicopter evacuation pad.
Personal Background: Rayene Stewart Simpson was born at Chippendale, New
South Wales on 16 February 1926. He enlisted in the AIF on 15 March 1944
and served overseas in Morotai, Tarakan, and Rabaul. He was discharged
on 9 January 1947 and subsequently re-enlisted on 17 January 1951.
During his second enlistment, Warrant Officer Simpson
served in Korea, Malaysia and Vietnam. During his second tour with the
Australian Army Training Team in Vietnam he was wounded in action in
October 1964 and was subsequently awarded the Distinguished Conduct
Medal for bravery. Warrant Officer Simpson was discharged on 16 May 1966
but again re-enlisted on 2 May 1967 and has served continuously with the
Training Team in Vietnam since that date.
His Decorations and Medals are: Victoria Cross,
Distinguished Conduct Medal, Pacific Star, War Medal 1939-45, Australia
Service Medal 1939-45, K~ orea Medal, United Nations Service Medal ( Korea),
General Service Medal with Malaya Clasp, Vietnam Medal, and Vietnamese
Campaign Medal. Warrant Officer Simpson is married and his wife resides at
5-30-1 Chome Yayoicho-Nakano-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
V. C. Warrant Officer Simpson's award is the 95th Victoria Cross
awarded to an Australian and is the third since World War IL / 3 
-3-
The last two awards were made to the late Warrant Officer
Kevin Arthur Wheatley for action in Quang Ngai Province, South Vietnam
on 13 November 1965 and to the late Major Peter John Badcoe for his
actions between February and April 1967 in South Vietnam. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRAL~ rr
SPEECH ss 16
BY I( A
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, 7M
ON
APPROPRIATION BIL ( No. 1) 1969-70
Second Reading
( BUDGET DEBATE)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 21 August 1969]
Mr G. ORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
[ 8.301--Mr Deputy Speaker, at the beginning
I wish to endorse the remark made by
the Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) that the Budget
which he introduced to the House last
week is one of -the best budgets to come
before us in the last 20 years. And that is
really saying something, for successive budgets
under a Liberal Administration have
led in that period of time to a situation
where, compared with 1948-49, our mean
population has grown from 7,796,000 to
12,171,000; our gross national product at
constant prices has risen from $ 8,391m to
$ 21 ,077m; our steel production has risen
from 1,178,000 tons to 6,599,000 tons; our
new motor vehicle registrations have risen
from 103,149 to 459,885; our construction
of new houses and flats completed has
risen from 52,684 to 115,357; our mineral
exports have risen from $ 12,883,782 to an
estimated $ 464,079,000 and our unemployment
rate has fallen to a stage where all
our people can be said to be fully employed
to an extent that has never been known in
this country before.
It is estimated, too, that the increase in
average earnings in this coming year, after
income tax, will be some 5% and that the
average income earner will be some 5%
better off. This is a pretty significant record
of achievement as a result of the planning
and the budgets that have been introduced
20930/ 69 in the past. It is a very good augury for
the achievements that are available in the
future and will be availed of by further
budgets introduced in the next 3 years by
a Liberal Government which has this
record of achievement behind it. In the circumstances
in which we find ourselves
today, with great pressure on our labour
resources, as I have indicated, and considerable
pressures on some sectors of demand
in the economy, the Budget is, as it
needed to be, deflationary rather than inflationary.
It is mildly deflationary. It has
reduced an overall Budget deficit of $ 385m,
which was budgeted for last year, to an
estimated overall Budget deficit of only
$ 30m in this financial year. It has increased
a domestic surplus of some $ 200m last
financial year into an estimated domestic
surplus of $ 500m this financial year. It is,
Sir, financially responsible.
Yet at the same time it has made very
significant advances along the road to social
justice. Steps along this road were taken
last year. Further steps are apparent in this
' Budget and yet further steps remain for
future budgets presented by a Liberal
Administration. Some 17 months ago the Governor-
General stated in his Speech:
My Government will review the field of social
welfare with the object of assisting those in most 
need while at the same time not discouraging
thrift, self-help and self-reliance.
Let us see what has happened in the
intervening time to fulfil these intentions.
We will have in the space of a year increased
the basic rate of age pension by
$ 2 a week for single persons. This is an
increase of more than 15%, which is an
unprecedented increase and which is an
increase far in excess of any increase in
the cost of living. In the same period we
will have increased the rate for the married
couple pensioners by $ 3 a week, increased
the pensioner wife's allowance by $ 1 a
week, increased the allowance for the first
child by $ 1 a week and for other children
by $ 2 a week. We will have increased the
pension for a widow with two children by
a week and given an additional $ 2 a
week if one of the children is under 6 years
of age or is an invalid. We will have increased
the unemployment and sickness
benefit by $ 1.75 a week and the wife's
allowance by $ 1 a week. We have given a
personal care subsidy of $ 5 a week for
persons over 80 years in hostel type accommodation
under the Aged Persons Homes
Act. Our deserted wives and home care
programmes open up a new aspect of cooperation
with the States in the welfare
field depending not merely on cash grants.
I do not argue that no more remains to
be done, for, of course, much does remain
to be done. But I do suggest, Sir, that this
is a practical. demonstration of moving to
carry out an intention-not a vote catching
intention but rather is it an honourable
approach to fulfil a promise honestly made
some 17 months ago, and very greatly
fulfilled at this stage.
But what of our other stated intention, to
encourage thrift and self-help, which previously
were discouraged? Previously if a
certain amount had been earned or had been
gained in superannuation, a pension was
reduced by $ 1 for every extra $ 1 earneda
100% tax. What of our stated intention
to overcome those problems? We have in
this Budget made what I think is a most
significant breakthrough in that direction by
the introduction of the tapered means test.
This is a measure which really does encourage
thrift and self-help and I1 doubt whether
its benefits are even yet fully understood in
the community. Under these proposals,
those who have provided for their retirement
through superannuation or through other means of saving will no longer have
their pensions reduced by $ 1 for every $ 1
they receive in excess of $ 10 a week if they
are single or $ 17 a week if they are married.
Further, a single man or woman whose
income or means as assessed equals or
exceeds $ 25 a week at present receives no
pension at all. Under our proposals such a
person will receive a pension, reducing as
his income increases but not ceasing until
his income reaches $ 40 a week.
-In addition such a person with an income,
for example, of $ 30 a week, who
previously paid $ 72 a year in tax, will now
pay tax of only $ 17, a further increment
and a further encouragement to saving.
Indeed, Mr Deputy Speaker, he receives a
double benefit-a pension increased from
nothing to $ 5 a week and a tax benefit of
$ 1.05 a week. An aged single person
receiving $ 40 a week of taxable income does
not get any pension under our proposalsbut
he does get a tax concession of approximately
$ 1.60 a week.
As a further example of how the scheme
works, a married couple who are pensioners
with income or means as assessed of
a week will have their pension increased
from nothing to $ 5 a week, and they will
receive tax concessions amounting to
approximately a further $ 1.42 a week. And
the benefits continue for a single person
until he receives an income of $ 44 a week,
and continues for a married couple until
such a couple receives $ 80 a week. At all
these ranges of income these benefits are
matnifest. They should be fully understood.
I do not wish to take up the time of the
House in giving further detailed examples
of particular rates of income or means as
assessed and the benefits which flow from
them, but instead with the concurrence of
honourable members I will incorporate in
Hansard, at the conclusion of my speech,
three tables which show the benefits flowing
from part pension and the benefits flowing
from tax concessions in each income
range. But I emphasise again that it is necessary
when computing the encouragement given
to thrift to take into account not only the
benefit from the part pension now to be
paid but also the tax concessions now to
be available. I doubt, Sir, if there has ever
been such an incentive to thrift-such an 
incentive to self help-proposed in this
House previously and I believe it will result
not only in a just approach but also will
reduce the total pensions bill otherwise to
be borne in the future by the working taxpayer,
and we have done this without
increasing taxation.
I would like to contrast those proposals
which I have just spelt out with what
I take to be the proposals of the Opposition,
but unfortunately there is great difficulty in
doing this properly because when one reads
the Budget speech made by the Leader of
the Opposition, he has not made any firm
proposals at all. All he has told us in relation
to high, wide and handsome statements
about abolishing the means test for everybody,
no matter what their range of income
or superannuation schemes-all he has told
us is that if his Party is elected it will then
appoint a committee to tell them what they
ought to do, because apparently they do not
themselves yet know what to do or have not
yet worked out a scheme which they could
put before this Parliament. This is a completely
nebulous approach, and it is also an
improper approach, because it means that
the Opposition is either afraid or unable to
make firm proposals as to how they would
carry out whatever their proposals areafraid
or unable to present these before the
people so that the proposals and the cost of
those proposals may be judged by the people
themselves. For my part I believe the
explanation of this extraordinary cavalier
approach is that the Leader of the Opposition
is afraid to put his proposals forward,
even imprecisely. For, Sir, if those proposals
are to follow the recommendations of Professors
Downing and Gates, as he suggests
but does not definitely state, then they
would require increased taxation on the
working population to raise S880m a year-
$ 880m a year being the part to be paid by
employers, or a tax of approximately 6%
on payrolls. And they would require an
additional tax on the wage earner ranging
from about $ 15 a year for the lowest paid
contributor who is compulsorily to be taxed
to $ 182 a year on income earners of $ 90 a
week or above.
Dr J. F. Calms--I think you are all
mixed up.
Mr GORTON-The honourable member
for Yarra ( Dr J. F. Cairns) suggests that it
20930/ 69-2 may possibly be that I am in some way
mixed up. If I am it is because there have
been no definite proposals put before us
but merely a suggestion that if the Party
opposite is elected they will get somebody
from outside to tell them what to do, which
is of course what they have been doing
in a different way ever since they have been
the Opposition. Furthermore, it is worth
noting in these Downing proposals, as I
understand them, that the benefit to be
received on retirement by the working man
who has been taxed during all his working
life, is also to be taxed in his hands after
he has retired.
Mr Griffiths-Well, they are taxed now.
Mr GORTON-Do not deny it. It is also
worth noting that those proposals, if they
are the proposals ultimately to be adopted,
require that such benefits even though they
have been paid for during a working life
are to be reduced by one-half of any
earnings continuing after the age of
This is supposed to be something called
' the abolition of the means test'. So these
proposals require the community to accept
substantial and compulsory increases in
taxation throughout their working lives; to
accept increased costs and prices due to
an additional compulsory 6% levy cn payrolls,
and to accept that when they do get
benefits those benefits are taxable and
subject to a means test of one-half when
they reach
Let me make two additional points about
this strange amorphous non-proposal. The
first point I want to make is to bring home
by illustration the increased burden of taxation
that the scheme-which is apparently
to be put forward but, of course, we do
not really know what it is but it has been
hinted at-would require. For the Professor
Downing scheme, if that is the one to be
adopted, requires all who are self employed
to pay in addition to their own tax to which
I have referred the contribution that would
otherwise be paid by their employer. So a
self employed man, a farmer, anybody in
his own business or a shop keeper with a
wife and three children, who is earning
a week, after allowing for average concessional
deductions would be required to
pay income tax of something over $ 200
per annum to be increased under Professor 
Downing's proposals and the Opposition's
proposals, unless they are told to do something
else, by $ 100 per annum or almost
This is actually the employee's contribution
and because he was self employed
he would also have to pay the employer's
contribution-an additional amount of $ 200
per annum-so that the total income tax
bill would rise from $ 218 to $ 518 per
annum. I do hope that there will be some more
precise proposals put before this House in
regard to what aspects of this scheme are
or are not to be adopted than the mere
statement: ' Well, we are rather in favour
of this kind of course. We do not quite know
how to do it. Ii we get elected we will put
a committee up to tell us and it will be
something along the lines of the Downing
scheme'-which I have just shown to the
House requires these sacrifices from the
taxpaying man, from that section of the
community the Leader of the Opposition
was so sorry for, for whom he wept crocodile
tears, but who would be the really hurt
people should this compulsory additional
tax be introduced.
Mr Crean-Tell us who is paying the
$ 800m extra tax this year.
Mr GORTON-I will not interject on
the honourable member and I ask him not
to interject on me. But, Mr Deputy
Speaker, I have been asked a question and,
if you do not mind, I will reply to it
because it is an interesting point. I have
been asked who is paying the $ 850m extra
tax to be raised by the Treasury this year.
The people earning wages and salaries are
paying this, but their rates of taxation are
not being increased by one cent-and no
one can say that the Opposition's proposals,
if they are implemented, would not require
an increase in rates of taxation. I will move
on to that later. It is no wonder that the
Leader of the Opposition has not made any
firm proposals. It is no wonder that he
adopts as a policy a promise to ask other
people to tell him what his policy should
be. But it is a wonder that he should believe
the Australian people are as gullible as he
seems to believe they are, and I suggest
very strongly that he and the Party who sit
behind him are Under an obligation, if they
are to retain any credibility in this matter
at all, to put precisely before Australians just what they do propose to do and just
what extra taxation and just what increases
in taxation rates they propose to impose
on the working population in order to do
it. For our part we can say with truth
that our proposals are clearly and
concretely set out in the Budget for Australians
to judge, as they ought to be.
Mr Duthie-You are the Government
and you can do this.
Mr GORTON-They have been costed
and they do not require any increase in
taxation. It is said that we are the Government
and that is what we should be expected
to do. I agree. That, indeed, is what we
have done. But they are the Opposition and
they can be expected, if they propose to
put an alternative scheme, to put it in the
same finite, concrete, costed way that the
Government has put its scheme before
Australians. Apart from advances in the field of
social services, the Budget provides for great
advances in providing for education. It provides
for a continuation of the grants now
made by the Commonwealth for science
blocks and libraries in secondary schools,
both government and independent. It provides
for a continuation of the grants made
for building secondary technical schoolssolely
government secondary technical
schools. It provides for a continuation of
the $ 8m a year for capital to build teacher
training colleges for State governments to
train teachers for State government schools,
except that there is a small percentage of
private teachers trained in them. It also
indicates that that grant will be increased
to $ 10m a year in the future, and all of
these grants require no matching contribution
from the States whatever.
Further, the Commonwealth accepts the
proposals put forward bythe Martin Committee
that teacher training should be permitted
as an integral part of colleges of
advanced education and should. attract Commonwealth
grants when they are so integrated
and accepts that recommendation
from the Martin Committee, again to the
advantages of State education systems. It
accepts the proposals of ihe Australian
Universities Commission for the coming
triennium and of the advisory body on colleges
of advanced education for the coming
triennium, and as a result expenditure from 
all sources-Commonwealth, State and fees
-will rise from the record $ 651m in the
present triennium, which ends at the end
of this calendar year, to $ 910m in the
triennium beginning on 1st January 1970.
It provides for increased scholarships and
it provides something which has been
attacked by the Leader of the Opposition in
the sense that he does not think it should
be provided in the way it is. It provides for
assistance to be given to the recurrent costs
of independent schools. This assistance f~ r
all independent schools is to total $ 16m for
recurrent costs in this financial year and
for science blocks and libraries in this
financial year. That is what this Budget in
this financial year is providing for independent
schools-a total of $ 24.8m. This is
fully justified and fully warranted. For our
part, we believe in a dual system of
education. . Mr Bryant-Why do you neglect the
State schools?
Mr GORTON-I will show you that we
do not. We believe -in a dual system of
education. We believe that it is good for
education itself for there to be alternative
approaches able to be tried out both in the
government schools and in the independent
schools. We believe that those who bear
their full share of taxation should be able to
receive some return if they decide that they
wish their children to attend other than a
government school, and we believe, looking
at the matter purely from an economical
point of view, that it would be nothing less
than a disaster for the government schools if
the independent schools were not able to
continue and nothing less than a disaster for
the nation if the independent schools, being
able to continue, were to provide a bad type
of education. It is necessary to see that both
these problems are attacked, and this Budget
sets out to attack them, yet the proposal is
criticised by the Leader of the Opposition
on the grounds that the Budget makes no
provision for government schools, echoing
an interjection made fairly recently by one
of the Leader of the Opposition's closest
followers. To quote the words of the Leader
of the Opposition: ' There is not one cent in
the Budget for government schools'. Such a
statement reveals either ignorance or a
determined and quite futile attempt to
conceal the truth, for this Budget provides in total for independent schools, as I have
said, $ 24.8m in this financial year, and it
provides in total for government schools,
including the provision of teacher training
in that field, not $ 24.8m but $ 39.4m. There
are a lot of cents in $ 39.4m, and I am
surprised that the Leader of the Opposition
could say that there was not one cent in
the Budget for government schools.
I should not conclude without referring
to some of the most glaring of the attempts
at misrepresentation which were evident in
the speech delivered here by the Leader of
the Opposition. He implies that the Budget
increases taxation. It is perfectly clear that
it does not. The rates of -income tax or
indirect taxes are not raised by one cent.
If he had said that total collections from
taxation will rise he would have been correct,
but he chose instead to imply that
rates of tax were to rise, which is untrue.
He claims that the Budget makes no considered
approach to the needs of all schools.
both* independent and government, and I
have shown that the Budget provides indirect
grants for government schools and the
provision of capital for training teachers for
government schools, more than it provides
for independent schools. He claims that it
ignores the problems of capital cities, yet it
contains provision for the first steps in the
Government's decision to provide S600m
for urban roads and freeways over the
coming 5 years to relieve one of the greatest
pressures on the urban system-the congestion
of traffic and the time wasted and
economic loss through that congestion. He
claims that it makes no attempt to grapple
with social services, and I have shown both
that it does, and that there has been no
concrete alternative proposal advanced.
rExtension of time granted.] I thank the
House and will not take advantage of it.
The Leader of the Oipposition claims in
his speech that the Treasurer spoke of a
growth rate of 6% in the coming year and
said that the Treasurer had refused to
indicate how much of that growth rate
would be real growth and how much inflation.
Yet the Treasurer's speech specifically
states as reported on page 33 of Hansard of.
12th August 1969:
An increase of at least 6% in gross national
product at constant prices
I interpolate that that means in real terms.
It seems a reasonable forecast to make. 
Yet we are told that the Treasurer had
refused to give that information. It is there.
It was there for the Leader of the Opposition
to see, but it was misrepresented to this
House. The Leader of the Opposition claims that
' the Treasurer concedes that to abolish the
means test entirely over the next 5 years
would cost less in each of those years than
the present proposal will cost this year'.
The Treasurer has not, as far as I know
and from any document I can read, conceded
anything of the kind. But the Leader
of the Opposition's remarks, being translated,
mean that he thinks that to abolish
the means test would, when it has been
done, cost annually six times as much as
our own taper proposals, without providing
even one extra dollar for the areas of Deed
that remain.
Mr Crean-That is not what he said.
Mr GORTON-That is what he said. I
will quote what he said. I am told it is not
what he said. Indeed what he said was:
The Treasurer concedes that to abolish the means
test entirely over the next 5 years would cost less
in each of those years than the present proposal
will cost this year.
This means that he thinks that this year,
next year, the year after and so on for the
following 5 years you add at least as much
as is provided this year, which means that
it will be six times as much annually as is
provided now, and that, Mr Deputy
Speaker, will not leave one extra dollar to
relieve those who have no other m eans at
all; to relieve the widows; to take any
further steps along the road of helping real
need. I think that the statement as it was
made was made in a way designed to lead
the unwary to be taken in.
The Leader of the Opposition said:
For the first time in memory this Budget contains
not a single development proposal. This
Budget continues the silence on Queensland water
projects. Amongst the papers presented with the
Bu dget for all to read who have the intelligence
to read and the will to honestly
reproduce what they read, the Budget contains
money, makes provision for the
Copeton Dam, for the King River Dam, for
continuing the Tailem Bend pipeline in
South Australia, for the Fairbair ' n Dam, for
a loan of $ 14.7m to Tasmania for power.
In total an increased developmental project of $ 71m in the Budget over last year. Yet
we were told that for the first time in
memory the Budget contains not a
single developmental proposal. 1 cite these
examples, and they are examples selected
out of many that could otherwise be chosen
to illustrate what I believe to be the false
and unsustainable basis of attacks on our
p roposals, for, coupled with the nebulous,
imprecise, audacious suggestions of ' Elect
the Labor Party and we will get somebody
else to tell us what to do', and coupled with
an inability to level genuine criticism and
attacks on the proposals we ' have made, it
leads me to the conclusion that this long list
of misrepresentations, this long list of misstatements,
points up the bankruptcy of new
ideas, points up the inability of a concrete
and proper attack on the proposals the
Government has put forward. For we have
put forward matters finitely presented and
finitely costed. That they can only be
attacked by misrepresentation must mean
that there are no finite alternative proposals
ready to be put before this House.
I just wish to make one other point. it
was clear from the opening remarks made
by the Leader of the Opposition in this
House that there has suddenly burst upon
him with a startling clarity as some new
revelation from on high, that when new proposals
are made, that when advances in
social services or education or development
are made, the money to make them has
got to come from the taxpayer. He suddenly
realises this, apparently, because he points
out with an air of surprise that this is where
the money is coming from; it is coming
from the taxpayers. OK, we knew that, and
I think most people knew it before. Let us
accept that. But what is more important
than this new revelation is what I hope will
be a subsequent revelation, and that is, that
if all the proposals, I will not say advanced,
but imprecisely sketched and put before
this House were ever to take a concrete
form, then the money would still continue
to come from the taxpayers, but i much
larger amounts than at present and as a
result of much higher rates of taxation than
at present. What we are proposing, a3 1
said, is a Budget which takes good steps,
which is financially responsible, and which
will not take from the taxpayer by raising
rates of taxation one single penny this year.
I commend it to the House, and I believe
it will commend itself to the country. 
SINGLE PENSIONER
EFFECT OF TAPERED MEANS TEST
Present Means Tapered Means
Test Test
Means as
Assessed
per week* Income Income
Pension and Pension and
pension pension
15.00 25.00 15.00 25.00
11 14.00 25.00 14.50 25.50
12 13.00 25.00 14.00 26.00
13 12.00 25.00 13.50 26.50
14 11.00 25.00 13.00 27.00
10.00 25.00 12.50 27.50
16 9.00 25.00 12.00 28.00
17 8.00 25.00 11.50 28.50
18 7.00 25.00 11.00 29.00
19 6.00 25.00 10.50 29.50
5.00 25.00 10.00 30.00
21 4.00 25.00 9.50 30.50
22 3.00 25.00 9.00 31.00
23 2.00 25.00 8.50 31.50
24 1.00 25.00 8.00 32.00
25.00 7.50 32.50
26 7.00 33.00
27 6.50 33.50
28 6.00 34.00
29 5.50 34.50
5.00 35.00
31 4.50 35.50
32 4.00 36.00
33 3.50 36.50
34 3.00 37.00
2.50 37.50
36 2.00 38.00
37 1.50 38.50
38 1.00 39.00
39 0.50 39.50 40.00
M0 This column converts to weekly terms a single person's
Means as Assessed which comprise annual income plus onetenth
of assets in excess of $ 400.
MARRIED COUPLES-BOTH PENSIONERS
EFFECT OF TAPERED MEANS TEST
Present Means Tapered Means
Test Test
Means as
Assessed
per week' Income Income
Pension and Pension and
pension pension Present Means Tapered Means
Test Test
Means as
Assessed
per week* Income Income
Pension and Pension and
pension pension
19
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 43.50 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59
60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 24.50 23.50 22.50 21.50 20.50 19.50 18.50 17.50 16.50 15.50 14.50 13.50 12.50 11 .50
10.50 9.50 8.50 7.50 6.50 5.50
4.50 3.50 2.50 1 .50
0.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 43.50 25.50 250 24.5 24.00 23.50 23.00 22.50 22.00 21.50 21.00 20.50 20.00 19.50 19.00 18.50 18.00 17.50 17.00 16.50 16.00 15.50 15.00 14.50 14.00 13.50 13.25 13.00 12.50 12.00 11 .50
11.00 10.50 10.00 9.50 9.00 8.50 8.00 7.50 7.00 6.50 6.00 5.50 5.00 4.50 4.00 3.50 3.00
2.50 2.00 1 .50
1.00
0.50 44.50 45.00 45.50 46.00 46.50 47.00 47.50 48.00 48.50 49.00 49.50 50.00 50.50 51.00 51.50 52.00 52.50 53.00 53.50 54.00 54.50 55.00 55.50 56.00 56.50 56.75 57.00 57.50 58.00 58.50 59.00 59.50 60.00 60.50 61.00 61.50 62.00 62.50 63.00 63.50 64.00 64.50 65.00
65.50 66.00 66.50 67.00 67.50 68.00 68.50 69.00 69.50 70.00
1 7 26.50 43.50 26.50 43.50 0 This column converts to weekly terms a married couple's
18 25.50 43.50 26.00 1 44.00 Means as Assessed which comprise combined annual income
18 plus one-tenth of assets in excess of $ 800. 
COMPARISON OF TAX PAYABLE AT ORDINARY RATES WITH TAX PAYABLE
UNDER PRESENT AND PROPOSED AGE ALLOWANCE
Annual tax payable
Weekly Single taxpayer Married taxpayer
taxable income Under. Age Allowance Under Age Allowance
At provisions At provisions
ordinary ordinary
rates rates
Present Proposed Present Proposed
10.88 14.13 17.88
22.27 26.63 31 .01
36.22 41 .99
47.73 53.50 59.96 66.61 73.28 79.94 87.43 95.01
102.57 110.21 118.69 127.17 135.64 144.32 153.70 163.08 172.46 182.20 192.47
202.76 213.04 224.00 235.52 247.03 258.54 270.05 281.56 293.08 304.59 317.45 330.56 343.67 356.80 369.91 383.01 396.12
409.44 423.89 438.33 452.77 467.22 481.66 496.12 510.55 23.98
47.97 71.95
95.94
119.92 135.64 144.32 153.70 163.08 172.46 182.20 192.47
202.76 213.04 224.00 235.52 247.03 258.54 270.05 281.56 293.08 304.59 317.45 330.56 343.67 356.80 369.91 383.01 396.12
409.44 423.89 438.33 452.77 467.22 481.66 496.12 510.55 8.66
17.33
26.00 34.66
44.26 54.66 65.06 75.46 85.86 96.26
106.66 117.06 127.46 137.86 148.26 182.92
217.59 252.26
281.56 293.08 304.59 317.45 330.56
343.67 356.80 369.91 383.01 396.12
409.44 423.89 438.33 452 77
467.22 481 .66
496.12 510.55 10.88 14.13 17.88
22.27
.26.63 31.01 36.22
41.99 47.73 53.50 59.96 66.61 73.28 79.94 87.43
95.01
102.57 110.21 118.69 127.17 135.64 144.32 153.70 163.08
172.46 182.20 192.47
202.76 213.04 224.00 235.52 247.03
258.54 270.05 281.56 293.08 304.59 317.45
330.56 343.67 356.80 369.91 383.01 396.12 409.44 423.89 438.33 452.77 467.22 481.66 496.12 510.55 23.98 47.97 71.95 95.94
119.92 143.91 167.89 191.88
215.86 239.85 263.83 287.82 311 .80
335.79 359.77 383.76 407.74 431 .73
455.71 4.33
13.00
21.66 30.33 39.00 55.66 72.99 90.32
107.66 124.99 142.32 159.66 176.99 194.32
213.52 236.92 260.32 283.72 
COMPARISON OF TAX PAYABLE AT ORDINARY RATES WITH TAX PAYABLE
UNDER PRESENT AND PROPOSED AGE ALLOWANCE
Annual tax payable
Single taxpayer Married taxpayer
Weekly
taxable income Under Age Allowance Under Age Allowance
At provisions At provisions
ordinary ordinary
rates rates
Present Proposed Present Proposed
3 3
62 525.61 525.61 525.61 525.61 479.70 307.12
63 541.39 541.39 541.39 541.39 503.68 330.52
64 557.16 557.16 557.16 557.16 527.67 353.92
572.95 572.95 572.95 572.95 551.65 377.32
66 588.72 588.72 588.72 588.72 575.64 400.72
67 604.49 604.49 604.49 604.49 599.62 424.12
68 620.27 620.27 620.27 620.27 620.27 447.52
69 636.04 636.04 636.04 636.04 636.04 470.92
652.86 652.86 652.86 652.86 652.86 494.32
71 .669.96 669.96 669.96 669.96 669.96 528.98
72 687.07 687.07 687.07 687.07 687.07 563.65
73 704.17 704.17 704.17 704.17 704.17 598.32
74 721.28 721.28 721.28 721.28 721.28 632.98
738.41 738.41 738.41 738.41 738.41 667.65
76 755.51 755.51 755.51 755.51 755.51 702.32
77 772.75 772.75 772.75 772.75 772.75 736.98
78 791.62 791.62 791.62 791.62 791.62 771.65
79 810.49 810.49 810.49 810.49 810.49 806.32
829.36 829.36 829.36 829.36 829.36 829.36
81 848.22 848.22 848.22 848.22 848.22 848.22
82 867.09 867.09 869.09 867.09 867.09 867.09
83 885.96 885.96 885.96 885.96 885.96 885.96
84 904.83 904.83 904.83 904.83 904.83 904.83
923.70 923.70 923.70 923.70 923.70 923.70
86 942.56 942.56 942.56 942.56 942.56 942.56
87 961.43 961.43 961.43 961.43 961.43 961.43
88 980.30 980.30 980.30 980.30 980.30 980.30
89 999.17 999.17 999.17 999.17 999.17 999.17
1,018.05 1,018.05 1,018.05 1,018.05 1,018.05 1,018.05 
AGED PERSONS
BENEFITS RESULTING FROM PROPOSED CHANGES IN PENSION AND AGE ALLOWANCE
SINGLE PERSON
Means as Pension per week Tax Payable per week Total
assessed -benefit
per week Present P roposed Increase Present Proposed Decrease per week
14.00 13.00 12.00 11.00 10.00 9.00 8.00 7.00 6.00 5.00 4.00 3.00 2.00 1.00 15.00 14.50 14.00 13.50 13.00 12.50 12.00 11.50 11.00 10.50 10.00 9.50 9.00 8.50 8.00
7.50 7.00 6.50 6.00 5.50 5.00
4.50 4.00 3.50 3.00
2.50 2.00 1 .50
1.00 0.50 0.46 0.92 1.38 1.38 1 .84
2.31 2.61 2.78 2.96 3.14 3.32 3.50 3.70 3.90 4.10 4.31
,4.53 4.75 4.97 5.19 5.41 S
* Assuming concessional deductions allowable as follows:
Means as Assessed Concessional deductions
per week per week S
20-29 2
30-48 3 
AGED PERSONS
BENEFITS RESULTING FROM PROPOSED CHANGES
IN PENSION AND AGE ALLOWANCE
MARRIED COUPLE
MensP ension per week Tax Payable per week* oa
assessed -benefit
per week Present Proposed IIncrease Present Proposed Decrease per week
3 17 25.00
18 24.00
19 23.00 22.00
21 21.00
22 20.00
23 19.00
24 18.00 17.00
26 16.00
27 15.00
28 14.00
29 13.00 12.00
31 11.00
32 10.00
33 9.00
34 8.00 7.00
36 6.00
37 5.00
38 4.00
39 3.00 2.00
41 1.00
42 43 44 46 47 48 49 51 52 53 54 56 57 58 59 61 62 63 64 66 67 68
69 71 72 73 74 26.50
26.00 25.50 25.00 24.50 24.00 23.50 23.00 22.50 22.00 21.50 21.00 20.50 20.00 19.50 19.00 18.50 18.00 17.50 17.00 16.50 16.00 15.50 15.00 14.50 14.00 13.50 13.00 12.50 12.00 11 .50
11 .00
10.50 10.00 9.50 9.00 8.50 8.00 7.50 7.00 6.50 6.00 5.50 5.00
4.50 4.00 3.50 3.00
2.50 2.00 1 .50
1.00
0.50 1 .50
2.00 2.50 3.00 3.50 4.00 4.50 5.00 5.50 6.00 6.50 7.00 7.50 8.00 8.50
9.00 9.50
10.00 10.50 11 .00
11 .50
12.00 12.50 13.00 13.50 14.00 13.50 13.00 12.50 12.00 11 .50
11.00 10.50 10.00 9.50 9.00 8.50 8.00 7.50 7.00 6.50 6.00 5.50 5.00 4.50 4.00 3.50 3.00 2.50 2.00 1 .50
1.00
0.50 1
2.00 2.50 3.00 3.50
4.00 4.50 5.00 5.50 6.00 6.50 7.00 7.50 8.00 8.50 9.00 9.50
10.00 10.50
11.00 11 12.00 12.50 13.00 13.50
14.00 13.50 13.00 12.50 12.00 11 11.00
10.50 10.00 9.50
9.00 8.50 8.00
7.84 7.67 7.51
7.34 7.18 6.42 6.22 6.02 5.66 5.29
4.91 4.54 4.17 3.79 3.43 2.93 3.06 3.18 3.27 3.28 3.29 
MensP ension per week Tax Payable per week* oa
assessed
per week Present Proposed Increase Present Proposed Decrease per week
6
76 8.76 5.46 3.30 3.30
77 9.22 5.91 3.31 3.31
78 9.69 6.36 3.33 3.33
79 10.15 6.81 3.34 3.34
10.15 6.81 3.34 3.34
After allowing for appropriate deduction for spouse who has no income other than pension; and
09) assumed concessional deductions other than dependants as follows:
Means as assessed
per week
3
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79
80 Deduction per week S
.8
Debate ( on motion by Mr Erwin) adjourned.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MuanAY at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



MELBOURNE PORTS ELECTORATE I SEP 19,
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER HELD AT
ST. KILDA TOWN HALL, VIC. _ L
AUGUST 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I would like to assure you, Sir, and everybody here that
this particular function is one that appeals to me very much indeed,
because I am here primarily not entirely but primarily to do what I
can to get you to do what you can to help Kevin Randall win the seat of
Melbourne Ports. And this is an entirely possible thing, based on the
redistribution. On the figures for the 1966 election, if they are maintained,
Kevin could win by 1, 500. They may not be maintained because 1966
was an all-time record. But even if they aren't, I think that those of you
who have seen the calibre of his campaign and who have planned the future
campaign with him, would agree with me that even if the 1966 figures are
not maintained, it is perfectly possible that he will win by 2, 500. I think
and hope he will. And this depends not only upon what he does, or I do or you
do, but on the message getting through to the electorate. We must make
known the record of what has been done by the Party he seeks to support
and the attitudes now adopted by the Party which he seeks to support. And
we must provide a look into the future as envisaged by the Party which,
when elected, he will support.
Even at the risk of boring you, may I, because it is so
important, recapitulate some of those things which in a relatively brief
space of time have been done. When I say " in a relatively brief space of
time" I mean the time during which I have been entrusted by my colleagues
with the leadership of the Liberal Party. You are familiar with the two
decades of transformation under Liberal Governments and of the climate
created by these Governments since 1949. It is this climate that has
given us unprecedented prosperity, unprecedented employment and new
horizons. I do not dwell on that that is of the record. But in the last
seventeen, eighteen, nineteen months, there have been a niumber of highly
significant actions taken by the Government which Kevin Randall is going
to support, actions which are going to react on the future of Australia for
generations to come. / 2 
-2
There was the significant decision to which I will refer
again later when I mention the Democratic Labor Party the significant
decision regarding retention of Australian forces in South East Asia. This
was not an easy decision in the circumstances in which Great Britain
announced an accelerated withdrawal from the countries to our North and
the circumstances in which the United States indicated that she would
maintain an interest in those countries but showed some hesitation in
committing troops to that particular area. So, I repeat, it wasn't an easy
decision for Australia to make in all those new circumstances to leave
some troops in that area as a visible indication that we regarded ourselves
as of the region in which we lived. Not as a nation that would move in to
take Britain's place but as a natioa which would seek to contribute by
economic means, by technological means, by opening up the avenues of
trade and by assisting in the event of external attack. That decision was
taken and so we will have the air force, navy and army there to work in
with the region which must help itself as an earnest of Australia's
participation in the region.
There was a decision which in my belief will in a decade be
shown to be one of the most significant Australia has made in the field of
trade. That was the decision to enter overseas shipping with Australian
ships and Australian crews; ships flying the Australian flag, plying between
this nation and Japan, this nation and the United Kingdom, this nation and
the United States. Only three ships so far, but setting an example which I
hope will be followed by private enterprise and which, if it is not, will, I
hope, be expanded by government. For we are an island continent, we do
depend on trade and we do depend on exports. Our riches abroad are
amassed because of what we grow at home, and we should not dissipate
those riches by paying to others the freight for transferring what we grow
to the markets where they are sold. And we should know, and know without
question, what is a proper price to pay for those who freight cargoes from
Australia abroad. There is no other nation yet which has grown great
without having its own ships, and we have taken the first steps along these
lines. We have made an approach in some ways pedestrian not
I suppose emotionally exciting, but nevertheless of great importance in that
we have had a look at the whole road construction programme in Australia.
For the first time we have tried to get a cost-benefit analysis of what
returns will come from the building of what roads in which particular area.
As a result, we have abandoned previous formulae and have set aside for
the next five years $ 600 million to be spent in urban areas to try and
overcome one of the problems which so besets us. That is to get a free
traffic flow, to enable freeways to be built, to allow people and freight to
come in and out of urban centres without being held up and without
frustrations and economic loss. 
We have tried, and I think with some success in the time
that we have had to advance along the road of providing for the ill and the
old and the invalid and the needy. We said we would do this in the
Governor-General's Speech from the Throne. And in the first Budget
brought down we did take some steps in this direction. We did remove
from those who had long-continued illnesses in hospital the fear that they
would not be able to be looked after for the duration, though there are still
things to be done in this matter in nursing homes.
We did pay attention to the needs of families without
breadwinners. We did a number of other things with which I will not
weary you. And in this last Budget again we raised the payments to those
who were most needy, we paid particular attention to the needs of widows
with children and we looked after those who had been most seriously hurt
in war in the defence of this country. We did these in an unprecedented
way in that never in the space of little over a year had such rises been
made in basic pensions and in, pensions for totally and permanently
incapacitated servicemen. But we did more than that for basic to the Liberal belief
is an assertion that we do not want to have a welfare state conception
which believes that people should be looked after from the cradle to the
grave without being required to make some effort themselves, without
being required to put into the nation rather than just take out. And we do
believe, as a part of Liberal philosophy, that those who have in their
lifetimes practised thrift and self-help should not thereby be penalised
when they come towards the end of the race of life. So we have made a
breakthrough there in this Budget of great significance not yet I think fully
realised in the community, in which a single man or a single woman can
still receive some benefit from the state until his or her income reaches
$ 44. A married couple can still receive some increase, some benefit
from the state until their income reaches $ 80 per week. There is incentive
now to earn more, even if you are on a pension, to contribute to
superannuation, to save in other ways and this in itself is good and right
and proper from a Liberal point of view. But it also, I think, has the
practical advantage that in time to come there will be less and less call
upon social service payments because there is this incentive to thrift and
to self-help. In other fields, too, we have not been idle. In the areas of
defence and foreign policy I have already spoken of the great decision
to involve ourselves in joint defence of the countries to our North. And at
this point, Sir, may I express some slight surprise at what the Party
known as the Democratic Labor Party has, I gather, been saying about us
in the last few days. Indeed, wherever I have gone today, it seems to me
some reporter has sprung out from behind some pillar or from behind some
door and poked something into my face and said, " What is your reaction to
what the DLP or Senator Gair or Jack Little or somebody is saying?". And
I haven't bothered to answer them because I was saving it for tonight. 
4-
I think in short comfpass that my reaction is this and ought
to be this: That the Democratic Labor Party is a properly constituted
party in Australia, that it had its genesis in a real fear of the infiltration
into the Labor Party of communist ideas through the unions which the
communists controlled and which were represented at the Labor Party
organisation and through the unwillingness of the Labor machine and the
Labor Political Party to attack communism in the unions or in public or
indeed at all. And the men who formed that party were men of principle
and they laid their seats in Parliament upon the line because they were
men of principle. Many of them must have known that they would lose
those seats when they took this action fifteen years ago. But they acted
because they believed what they were doing was right, because they
believed the ALP as it stood and I interpolate " as it stands" was bad
for Australia, was infiltrated, had no interest in the defence of Australia
and had a wrong foreign policy. It was becaus~ e they believed all these
things they stood on principle and formed a new party.
Since that time they have supported Liberal principles and
Liberal approaches because these were more in line with their beliefs than
were the approaches of the Labor Party. And now it is up to them as a
political party operating in freedom to decide which approaches they wish
to support at this coming election.
There are two things, however, of which I am sure and in
which I believe most of you would support me I think perhaps all of you
would support me. One of them is that no great political party such as
we are should tailor its policy or change its policy from what it thinks to
be right merely in order to attract some support which ought to come to
it anyway. Nor should it submit to what could be described although I
do not so describe it as political blackmail.
And the other points I want to make are these. You will
remember that I said just now that those who formed this Party were men
of principle who believed that what they were doing was good and right for
Australia. What is their choice in this election now coming up? They are
interested in the defence of this country. They are interested in the
foreign policy of this country. Can they support candidates from the Labor
Party who would immediately sign a Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty
without waiting to see whether Australia's interests were adversely affected
by doing it; and could they reject a Liberal Party candidate who would
want, of course, an effective and efficient treaty of this kind but would not
wish to sign it until he was sure it was effective and efficient and that our
interests were not jeopardised by it. Could they support a candidate from
the Opposition Party who would quibble and haggle and argue with the
United States of America over whether a defence base of joint interest to
our two countries could be established in Australia? Would they do this in 
' r 5
preference to a Liberal Party candidate who would say the ANZUS Treaty
is the strongest guarantee Australia has got for its future survival, and
if we are to have that treaty and make it work properly then we are
required, not by a Treaty's written terms, but in decency required to
help to provide a joint defence defence bases which being of interest arnd
importance to the United States are therefore of interest and importance
to ourselves. Could they support the Opposition's attitude on that as
opposed to a Liberal Party attitude?
Gould they support an Opposition attitude which says that
National Service training would be abolished at once should they be elected
as against the Liberal Party attitude which says that we will in the future
need to keep, post-Vietnamt forces of such a size that National Service
training must be retained? It will need to be retained for the purposes of
defence itself and this is secondary for the immense benefit it brings
to those young men who go into National Service training and come out so
much better citizens than when they went in.
Could they support an Opposition candidate who would at
once support in his Party the withdrawal from Malaya and Singapore of all
our forces ground, air and naval who would immediately scuttle from
the area and once and for all indicate that we were not concerned with what
happened? Could they support that as against a Liberal Party candidate
who would, while not being prepared to inherit the burden that a great
power, Britain, previously took on, while not being prepared to enter into
mini-Vietnams, nevertheless was prepared to keep a force in being there
to help against any extraneous invasion which might come?
Sir, if this Party, the DLP, with its basic principles,
professing the beliefs it still professes, could back Opposition candidates
supporting the policies I have put before you in preference to Liberal
candidates supporting the policies I have put before you, then the principles
on which it was formed will have been repudiated and the reason for which
it came into being will no lorger exist.
And so, it is up to this Party to see, this Democratic Labor
Party to see whether the choices being what they are, they can support
people who stand in defiance of all they have said they believe, as against
people who stand not for all they believe but much more so than do our
opponents of the Labor Party.
There has been in the last week or ten days much discussion
about what the newspapers have defined as some great cha,-nge in policy by
this Government towards the Soviet Union. I am always interested to read
and know the difference between what some man says in Parliament in
this case the Minister for Foreign Affairs and what the newspapers say
he almost said in Parliament and make it the news. What in fact was said
by the Minister for External Affairs was this. / 6 
6-
He pointed out in his speech that the Soviet Union stands
condemned for its invasion of Czechoslovakia, the anniversary of which is
now with us. Hie used the words that the Soviet Union adhered to the
pernicious doctrine of only limited sovereignty being allowed to those
communist states who were around the periphery of the Soviet Union itself.
He pointed out the need to be on guard against the Soviet Union, not to be
lulled, to be careful all the time in all dealings with that country. But he
did go so far, and I think that this is sensible, as to say that we in Australia
had things we wished to see happen in the smaller Asian countries to our
North. We wished to see them retain their independence. We wished to see
them grow economically. We wished to see the benefits of that economic
growth passed down to the peasants and the workers from the higher strata.
We wished to see the avenues of trade opened to them so that they could
help themselves. We wished to see them left in peace against extraneous
attack. And he then said that we had so far not heard what the Soviet
Union proposed about these countries, but they had spoken of some ideal
of collective security that they hadn't spelt out. If their idea of collective
security should turn out to be on all fours with what we in Australia want,
if the Soviet Union should cancel some of the debts which are owing to it
from these countries, should help them economically, should help them
technologically, should help them to retain their independence, then we
would because these are the same objectives as we have be prepared
to examine such proposals with interest. That cannot surely in any man of
commonsense be said to be a change in policy but rather an expression of
hope, hedged with careful doubt but an expression of hope that perhaps
the objectives we have for the safety of the countries to our North and
therefore for our own, might possibly be brought about. At any rate, I
see no great change in emphasis there, no great change in policy but
merely an acceptance and an understanding that there are changes happening
to our North and we will need to examine from all sources whatever may
be put before us to help our own objectives and no-one else's.
Well, that is my reaction to the approach of the DLP.
What now remains to be done in this country? I have sketched
quite briefly some of the things we have done. I've set out our attitudes
and the facts of foreign policy. I've made an excursion into how those
approaches in defence and foreign policy may affect another Party, but
what remains to be done when we get re-elected, as we will
First, ( I do not put these in any order of priority) but first,
there is undoubtedly a need to build up our own defences in this country
on land, on sea and in the air. But we will not go to the point of diverting
to that build-up all of the increased prosperity of Australia. I do not
believe we will need to put more of our GNP into it. We will need to put
more money into it. We will need to increase it. Perhaps as time goes
by we will need to increase it even faster but for the moment we are 
7-
ourselves under no imminent threat of attack. We must assume that attack
can come in the future. But for the moment, having said that that must
happen, there are other things to do. There are more steps to be taken
along the road of helping those who are in need, particularly I would
suggest large families on low incomes. And there are a number of other
highly significant steps which ought to be taken and which I don't propose
to tell you about until we make the policy speech in October. These will
be spelt-out steps I will then put before you.
They will in themselves be important but what will also be
important are the objectives which they seek to attain. And these will be
the continuing objectives of the Liberal Party only changed as " the times
they are a-changing"; the continuing objectives of creating a climate for
material growth and to see that to the greatest extent possible the savings
of Australians are allowed to be put into the development of Australia.
There will also be the objective of creating a climate, apart from the
purely material kind, which provides individuals with the opportunity to
develop themselves and their internal capacity to be an actor, if that is
what they want, or a scientist or a horticulturist or whatever it may be.
To enable them to express their own personality in whatever it is
even if it happens, as in the case of Kevin and myself, that they should
want to be politicians and persuade other people to put us where we want
to be. Sir, I don't think there is any other party in Australia, I
don't think there is any other group in Australia, I don't think there are
other men in Australia who can achieve what we can if you give us the
opportunity to do it. This decade ahead promises to be the most exciting
in the whole of Australia's history, promises to give us the greatest growth
in manpower and material benefits and in industrial muscles in Australia's
history. It is a decade in which we will come of age, but con-e of age in a
Liberal way if the people choose as believe they will.
We have candidates I ask you to support. We have Kevin
Randall who I believe will be elected with your support. And if he is
elected, then he will help Australia and he will help the Government and
in that way, in the long term, perhaps contribute to the creation of a
nation that will be the admiration and the inspiration of the world and of
great assistance to all mankind. 



" FOUR CORNERS"
INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, FOR ABC TELEVISION NETWORK
Recorded on 28 August for viewing on 30 August 1969
Interviewer: Michael Willesee
The Prime Minister used Question Time in the House
this week to take a verbal big stick to Mr. Whitlam's health proposals
and by the opinion of most who were there at the time, Mr. Gorton
gave Mr. Whitlam a beating. Mr. Gorton's performance probably
wasn't much of a vote-winner because Parliamentary clashes are
rather an "" thing but it was a flying start psychologically for Mr.
Gorton and his team. It could well be that Mr. Gorton needs this
start because he is very much the man in the hot seat. He inherited
a record majority from the late Mr. Holt and there is pressure on
him to hold it. Mr. Gorton could come home a comfortable winner
by say twenty seats and still face criticism for the seats he lost, and
he faces a hostile Democratic Labor Party. None of his predecessors
had to do that. If the DLP carries out its threat of switching its
preferences from the Government in selected seats, then Mr. Gorton
would almost certainly lose some seats. With the election eight
weeks to go, we invited Mr. Gorton to talk with us in Canberra.
Q. Mr. Gorton, firstly, have you bowed to any pressure
from the DLP this week or in the last few weeks?
PM. Neither this week nor in the last few weeks nor at any
time in the past nor at any time in the future.
Q. Mr. Gorton, can I ask you specifically, did you impose
on Mr. Freeth last Monday to alter a statement he was making in
response to an attack from Senator Gair?
PM. Which statement was this? Oh, this was a statement
where Mr. Freeth was defending himself against the personal attacks
that had been made on him by Senator Gair. I had a talk with Mr.
Freeth. After all, it is not unusual for Ministers and Prime Ministers
to talk, and indicated that I thought the proper attitude for a government
and ministers to adopt was not to attack the DLP, which after all are
a party of principle. We don't need to attack them or to denigrate
them, merely to say that they have a right to do what they like with
their preferences but they have got to consider the different policies
which they must choose between. Mr. Freeth has got a right and so
has anybody else to come back against personal attacks or
misrepresentation of his words. / 2 
Q. In talking with Mr. Freeth, did you suggest that he add
the allegation that in certain quarters of the ALP there was some
sympathy for communist policies?
PM. No, he had that in himself. He had in his speech
himself the words that he had thought that although the ALP itself was
not communist, and would agree with him on that I mean, you take
ALP Members of Parliament or their supporters, of course they are
not communist but he had indicated before that he felt there was
communist influence in sections of the ALP through communistdominated
trade unions and matters of that kind, and he reiterated
that.
Q. Prime Minister, could we go back to Mr. Yreeth's
statement of August 14 which started all this, and I think there is a
lot of misunderstanding around it. In this statement, Mr. Freeth
welcomed the opportunity of practical and constructive dealings with
the Soviets and said it was natural that they should promote their
presence in our area. Now, firstly, did you approve of that statement?
PM. Yes, I did. I approved of the statement and I approve
of your quotation of it which is better than the quotation when you
first spoke to Mr. Freeth. Do you remember when you were
interviewing Mr. Freeth and you said: " Why, Mr. Freeth, did you
welcome the Russians?". Well, Mr. Freeth didn't, but he welcomed
the opportunity of constructive discussions and you have put it
completely in its proper context.
Q. Thank you.' Prime Minister, did Cabinet approve of
Mr. Freeth's statement'?
PM. No. I don't know of any occasion since I've been in
Parliament or in Cabinet when a foreign affairs statement has been
taken to Cabinet or gone through Cabinet.
Q. Did Mr. Fairhall, your Minister for Defence, see
the statement?
PM. As far as I know he didn't see the statement but equally
as far as I know he completely agrees with it and agreed with it and
would have agreed with it.
Q. Wouldn't you think that was a little bit unusual that a
Minister for Defence shouldn't see a defence statement?
PM. Well, it's rnot really a defence statement. It's hard to
draw the line, I suppose, between defence and foreign affairs. / 3
2 
3-
Q. It certainly went into Mr. Fairhall's area.
PM. I don't know of any occasions, for instance, when Sir
Garfield Barwick was there or Paul Hasluck was there where statements
on foreign policy ever went through Cabinet or to other Ministers
other than the Prime Minister. I don't know of any.
Q. Prime Minister, the biggest point of debate over Mr.
Freeth's statement: Was it a significant policy change?
PM. I don't think it was a significant policy change. It has
been so interpreted but I don't think it was. Look, what Gordon Freeth
said was this. He said we must remember that the Russians have
invaded Czechoslovakia. We must remember that they have I think
I quote correctly " a pernicious doctrine of only limited sovereignty"...
Q. Yes, but whatever these qualifications they don't really
alter the fact do they that he did make statements that were unusual
coming from an Australia Government?
PM. Well, if they were unusual they were as a result of
unusual and completely changed circumstances. Now, where does the
unusuality lie? He said, and I agree, we in Australia have requirements
that we would like to see carried out in the area to our North. We
would like to see the countries economically developed. We would like
to see trade routes opened. We would like to see the standard of living
rising, and we would like to see them retain their own identity and
their own sovereignty. Now, we have for some time ourselves been
trying to get non-aggression pacts and things of that kind in the area
between individual countries and this is in our national interest. The
Russians have said something which they haven't spelt out which was
that they were interested in much the same sort of thing. Now we don't
know what they are interested in. What Gordon Freeth said was that if
they make propositions which seem to be in line with our own national
aspirations, then we would be prepared to look at them and not just
reject them because they came from Russia.
Q. Would you agree then there could be a significant policy
change in the light of the changed circumstances of that area?
PM. Well, if Russia went to the length of maijrzg some
proposals, which sheihasn't yet done and if those proposals were, in
our judgment, in line with our own and didn't pose dangers because of
Russia's general attitude and actions didn't pose those dangers then
it could be, particularly if the Americans maintain the same sort of
diplomatic and economic influence that they have spoken of, it could
be of assistance to our national aspirations. 
4
Q. Prime Minister, moving on to the defence cut in the
Budget. Mr. Fairhall said, " We are more interested in programmes
to meet our needs, not in any arithmetic of expenditure"'. Do you go
along with this?
PM. Well, yes, I go along with it if I give it this meaning
which I think Mr. Fairhall would give it. That there is no point in
spending large sums of money merely to be able to point to the
arithmetic and say, " Look at the large sums of money we are spending".
That is fairly pointless. It is more important to get the kind of
material and the kind of equipment that you want. But I wouldn't say,
and I don't think he said or could have been interpreted to have said
that you would cut down your arithmetical sum. Merely, that you
wouldn't make he said merely that you wouldn't make the size
of your arithmetical sum the real test. The test would be what were
you getting and what did you need?
Q. Gould I draw your attention then to a statement you made
after last year's Budget when you said the vote or the expenditure then
indicated the importance you attached to defence. Doesn't this seem
a little bit contradictory?
PM. Except that after last year's Budget we were building up
not only arithmetical sums of money but also the hardware that those
arithmetical sums of money represented and in last year the payments
fell due whereas in this year there is still coming in the hardware but
payments for them, I understand, are being carried over into the next
financial year.
Q. Now, despite your defence cut in the Budget and the
resignation of your Defeiice Minister, Mr. Fairhall, do you still wish
to make defence the key issue in the next election?
PM. I think that defence will be a key issue in the election.
I think it must be because there are such clearly-delineated differences
between the Labor Party and ourselves in this field.
Q. A couple of quick points on defence not quite related.
The F-Ill decision. Can you tell us when that will be taken?
PM. No, indeed I have never promised that an F-ill decision
would be taken before an election though I have been so reported. What
I have done is said I would do my very best to get a decision made and
announced before the election and this I wanted to do and this I believe
I will be able to do. I believe we will be able to make it before the
election. Well before the election. 
Q. Could you indicate a date? You do have the report
before you now?
PM. Well, I haven't yet seen it but I understand that it has
been completed. I understand it has just been completed.
Q. So perhaps a couple of weeks?
PM. Perhaps: Who knows?
Q. On the point of a phased withdrawal from Vietnam the
Americans are doing this and you have indicated we shouldn't do this.
Why not?
PM. I have indicated that I thought that if and when our troops
were withdrawn from Vietnam they should not be withdrawn in driblets.
The ground troops which are the ones I am speaking of being three
battalions and ancillary services and tanks and so on being a viable
force should be regarded as a force and either left or withdrawn; but
you don't take out some companies or one battalion or something which
is what the Labor Party, I understand, is talking of doing.
Q. But if you did take some out wouldn't you then go back
to the arrangement you had before, before you built up
PM. Yes, you would. The arrangement which was found to
be unsatisfactory, to be inefficient, to probably present greater
dangers to the two battalions who are left than the three who are there
now. You go back to a situation which was unsatisfactory and which
we corrected.
Q. Prime Minister, before we leave this area, what is your
reaction to DLP threats?
PM. I think the DLP is a party which has a perfect right to
make up its own mind as to which policies it should follow and nobody
can have any objections to that. And if they feel that some other policy
is better than our own, then they have a right to direct their preferences
or seek to direct their preferences as they may wish.
Q. That is not a reaction, though, is it, when they threaten
you? / 6 
-6-
PM. Oh, what is my own reaction... 0. Well, is this a
reaction then? That I feel that since they are a party which was formed,
believing in the importance of defence and thinking the Labor Party
would not provide it, since they are a party formed believing that there
was, through communist-dominated unions influence oll1 the Labor
Party and not on ourselves, I do not see how they can in principle
support at this election a Labor Party whose defence policies are so
different from ours, so much further away from theirs than ours. Is
that a reaction?
Q. Perhaps! How many seats do you think you owe the DLP?
How many seats have they delivered to you?
PM. How many seats have they delivered to us as a result
Of.
Q. Their preferences.
PM. Well, it depends on whether you count all the seats in
which perhaps we needed five or eight or ten per cent of their
preferences. I would not count such seats as seats which were won as
a result of DLP preferences, even though we might have needed ten
per cent or fifteen per cent, because I believe they would have been
likely to have come anyway. I would say there might be four or five,
possibly six, where we wiould need fifty per cent or in some cases
seventy per cent of DLP preferences. So in that sense, without being
able to answer you exactly, that would be about of the order. Of
course, the DLP owe, I would say, at least two and maybe more seats
to us for our preferences.
Q. Is that a counter-threat?
PM. No, no. just pointing out one of the facts of life.
Q. Prime Minister, I would like to look more closely at
you and firstly your impression, your personal impression on
government. You have been accused of political patronage in
government guilty or not guilty?
PM. What does political patronage mean?
Q. I would think bringing a friend in, all things being equal
perhaps? ./ 7 
7-
PM. I would think, on the whole, not guilty. The last two
appointments that I made to the Ministry, I think, were one of the
causes of this. Now, Mr. Freeth could scarcely though I like him
very much have been described as a great friend of mine. For
example, when we were contesting the Prime Ministership he was
quite openly and quite decently and quite honestly doing his best to
defeat me, so there could scarcely be a charge of patronage there.
On the other hand, Mr. Dudley Erwin was supporting me. There
again, he was the Whip, which is not always but usually not always
the stepping-stone to an appointment further up.
Q. Whether guilty or not guilty, do you think it is
necessarily a bad thing to have this sort of political patronage?
Pm. Yes, I do if the person is not competent to do the job.
I don't think it's a bad thing if the person is you know, other things
being equal is as good as anyone else.
Q. In various ways, commentators talk about your
independence. Firstly, is it true, and if it is, is that a natural thing
or some sort of deliberate policy?
PM. Independence? Of what?
Q. Oh, independence of the Party, of Cabinet, of the
bureaucracy.
PM. Well, I think one ought to be not independent of, but
certainly not swayed by the bureaucracy. One should listen to their
advice but one * should then form one's own judgment after having had
the benefit of that.
Q. Could we make it comparative? Do you think perhaps
you are more independent than perhaps Prime Minister Holt?
PM. Well, I think comparisons are fairly odious. I would
just say that I don't believe one ought to be swayed by the bureaucracy.
I think one should pay attention, considerable attention to what people
in one's Party say, not be bound by it, and this has always been the
way in which Liberal Prime Ministers have operated. This is not
something from me, myself. As to the Cabinet, then there again,
when you have a strong majority feeling one way, I think one should
do what the Cabinet wants unless one believes that something is so
highly significant and highly important that one couldn't go along with
it oneself.
Q. And that has happened fairly often with you in two years,
hasn't it? ,/ 8 
-8
PM. Not terribly often maybe once or twice.
Q. But haven't there been six, perhaps ten occasions when
you have stepped in and taken over a matter that would normally be
under the responsibility of a Minister shipping, MLC
PM. MLC, yes. MLC is a complete point in support of the
case that you are making. Shipping is quite the reverse. I think
there were six Cabinet meetings on shipping initiated by the Minister
for Trade, and at one stage culminating in the Minister for Trade
being sent by Cabinet to the United Kingdom to make a negotiation the
terms of which were in a Cabinet decision and which were very very
close to the ultimate terms decided on.
Q. How about the recent Budget where it appeared that your
imprint was fairly strongly on that because it wasn't quite the advice
the Treasury had given you?
PM. Yes, I think well, I wouldn't say it wasn't quite
the advice the Treasury had given me. I am not going to venture into
that matter. But such things as assistance to social services and the
tapered means test are certainly things which I felt very strongly
on and fought for. Not alone other Ministers were with me too.
Q. Prime Minister, in talking about you in this area of your
impression on government, the name Cyrus Hewitt often comes up.
You appointed him to head your Prime Minister's Department. He is
sometimes said to have unusual power. Firstly your comnment on this
and also could I ask you perhaps whether you regard him more as the
sort of adviser that an American P resident might take to off ice with
him?
PM. I don't thik he has got unusual power at all. People
have been writing this for some time now. You know, journalists tend
to each other up a little. Somebody writes it and somebody else repeats
it, somebody else repeats and after a while it becomes part of folklore.
But I don'~ t think he has got any unusual power whatever. He certainly
hasn't with me and I don't think he has with other Ministers and I doubt
if he has with the Departmental Heads. He would be onte of the advisers
I would look to but as I say, one looks to the Heads of the Bureaucracy
for advice and then makes up Oize' s own mind.
Q. Prime Minister, in this question, I am not inferring any
unusual amount inside criticism, but presuming there must always be
some, do you concern yourself about criticism from the inside or do
you feel.. 
9-
PM. You mean from the Party members
Q. Yes, perhaps more particularly Cabinet, but also within
the Party.
PM. I don't concern myself with criticism from within the
Cabinet because I think there is very very little. I may be quite wrong
but I don't know of any anyway but it is quite possible it could be but if
so I don't know of it. Within the Party, one seeks to do one's best to
give Party members the opportunity to express their views, to realise
that the things that they really believe in and really put forward are
thoroughly examined and are not accepted for what can be argued to
be good reasons. Having done that, then I think one just has to put up
with the criticism, because whatever one does with a large group of
people, one is never going to please everybody, so there is always
going to be some criticism.
Q. How do you see your policy-making role in relation to
the Liberal Party?
PM. Well, I think that the time has come, and I think it is
evident in this country that it has come when the Liberal Party has
got to re-examine the dogmas of the quiet past in the light of the
changing present. We have got to re-examine our defence and foreign
affairs commitments because of the changes of Britain going, of the
United States perhaps not being so interested in providing troops
assistance to our North. We have got to examine the requirement for
as much Australian participation in development as is possible,
instead of just accepting without question, without asking for Australian
participation.
Q. In these respects do you see yourself as a man of change?
PM. Yes, I think so. I think too in seeking to re-evaluate
social welfare and to move from a situation of merely raising 50 cents
or one dollar across the board to try to find areas of need and doing
what you can in them and at the same time trying to reward thrift and
seeing that is not held back. These are changes and these are things
we are doing.
Q. When you talk about the need for the Party to change,
are you suggesting some section of the Party at least might be lagging
behind? 
PM. No, I think they are going along I think the
Party is very happy with these sorts of changes. We want to try
and provide opportunities for the individual to express himself
not just to have a job though it is essential that there should be
full employment, but to have the chance to do the sort of job
which appeals to him and which he can feel happy in doing rather
than one which he just has to do unhappily in order to earn a
living. Now these are things you can do through education,
through technological education, through the opportunity for
adult education and re-education and you can do it too through
expanding the opportunities in the arts and this again is
something I think
Q. Prime Minister, to wind up, how long would
you like to remain Prime Minister?
PM. Well it depends on how I am feeling. If I am
feeling good and healthy I think well, you know, when I am
feeling good and healthy I think it would be lovely to be there
for a long time. If you get a little tired you think, oh, it's a
bit wearing and it's my fault there is a drought in Queensland
and I can't sleep and it's my fault that something has gone wrong
somewhere else or it's my fault there is an argument in a union.
This sort of thing.
Q. Does any consensus come out of this?
Pm. Oh well on those occasions you think to yourself,
well, really I don't want to be Prime Minister for more thanl
another twenty years.'
Q. Prime Minister, thanks for talking to " Four
Corners" 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 71/ 1969
AWARD CF VICTORIA CROSS FOR GALLANTRY IN VIETNAM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Her Majesty The Queen has awarded the Victoria Cross to
a member of the Australian Army Training Team in Vietnam, Warrant
Officer Class 2 Keith Payne of Stafford Heights, Brisbane.
Warrant Officer Payne showed outstanding devotion to duty
and leadership under the most hazardous conditions during an operation
with a battalion of a Special Forces Unit near the Cambodian/ Laotian/
Vietnamese border in Kontum Province in May this year.
He has previously served in Korea and the Malayan
emergency and is still a member of the Australian Army Training Team,
Vietnam. Warrant Off icer Payne's acts of personal bravery add
further to the stature of the Australian Army as a professional fighting
force. I have sent Warrant Off icer Payne the following message:-
" My ministerial colleagues and I congratulate you on the
award of the Victoria Cross conferred by Her Majesty The
Queen. Your exceptional devotion to duty, personal
courage and cool leadership under fire were in the best
tradition of Australia's fighting men.
CA NBERRA
8 September 1969
Note:-Attached: Details of Warrant Officer Payne's actions
and personal background. 
BAC%-KGROUND TO VICTORIA GROSS AWARD
Details of Action: On 24 May 1969 Warrant Off icer Payne was serving as a
Company Commander in a Mobile Strike Force Battalion on a search and
clear operation in Kontum Province. Shortly after capturing an undefended
hill, two companies of the battalion were attacked by elements of a welldisciplined
and well-equipped North Vietnamese force using machine guns
and small arms. As the companies broke under heavy mortar and rocket
attack Warrant Officer Payne attempted to encourage his troops to hold
their position. He continually exposed himself to enemy fire while firing
back and throwing grenades at the North Vietnamese. He received
shrapnel wounds to his hands and arms.
Despite his efforts the battalion continued to withdraw in
disorder and the battalion commander decided to fight back to the battalion
base. Warrant Officer Payne and the remnants of his company covered
their withdrawal. He managed to hold together a small number of
indigenous soldiers of the two companies to form a temporary defensive
perimeter in a valley some 350 metres tothe north east of the hill which
the North Vietnamese had retaken.
Warrant Officer Payne then requested permission to attempt
to gather together the wounded and disoriented members of the battalion
left on or near the enemy position. He left the reorganised group and
moved out alone. In a traverse of approximately 800 metres he managed
to gather together forty indigenous soldiers in about three hours. On
return to the temporary defensive perimeter he found that his force had
returned to the battalion base. Leading these forty soldiers he found a
group of advisers who had been left behind with some seriously wounded
soldiers during the battalion withdrawal. Warrant Officer Payne arranged
for the evacuation of the wounded and personally lead the group back over
difficult enemy held terrain to the battalion base arriving in the early hours
of the morning. Mr. Gorton said his leadership and personal bravery
throughout this action were outstanding.
Personal Background: Warrant Officer Payne was born in Ingham, Queensland, on
August 1933 and enlisted on 13 August 1951 after a short period in the
C. M. F. He served with I R. A. R. in Japan and Korea in 1951 and with
3 R. A. R. in Malaya in 1964. He joined the Army Training Team in Vietnam
in January 1969 where he is still serving. He was wounded during the action
for which he received the Victoria Cross but remained on duty. / 2 
-2-
His decorations and medals are:-
Victoria Cross, Korea Medal, United Nations Service
Medal ( Korea), General Service Medal with Malay
Peninsula Clasp, Vietnam Medal and Vietnamese
Campaign Medal.
Warrant Officer Payne is married with four sons and one
daughter and his family lives at 28 Falkirk Street, Stafford Heights,
Queensland. 96th Victoria Cross: Warrant Officer Payne's award is the 96th Victoria Cross
awarded to an Australian and is the fourth since World War II. The last
three awards were made to the late Warrant Officer Kevin Arthur Wheatley
for action in Quang Nhai Province, South Vietnam on 13 November 1965;
the late Major Peter John Badcoe for his actions between February and
April 1967 in South Vietnam; and to Warrant Officer Rayene Stewart
Simpson, D. C. for action in Kontum Province, South Vietnam in
May 1969. 



K( INGSTON ELECTORATE LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
Glengowrie, S. A. J, 2 September 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr, -Lphn Gorton*
Mr. Chairman and Miss Kay Brownbill or after what you said about how
one-eyed everybody is should I call you " Madam Cyclops" you did say
durinig the course of your introduction that I was going to be stuck with the
people of South Australia and I was going to be stuck with you do you
remember? Kay, there is nothing I would want more than that we would
be stuck with you in the House of Representatives for years and years to
come and I hope that all of you present here will keep it that way.
But it is true to say that I have an interest in the people of
South Australia and the State of South Australia. Let me make this quite
clear even though I am speaking in South Australia that it is not an interest
which transcends my interest in the people of We,-tern Australia or New
South Wales or Victoria or any other part of Australia but which takes no
second place to the interest I have in people in the other States.
And this has, I think, been shown I know it can be argued
against by the Opposition but it has been shown by a number of things
which have been done and I hope tonight to be able to indicate one other
area in which we have, as an Australian Government, an interest in this
State. You have got here, and have had for some time an
Australian-renowned, and I think I could almost say a world-renowned,
Festival of Arts. You have taken the lead in Australia in getting this Arts
Festival running and getting people coming to it from all over Australia.
It has been an enormous success. And you are now engaged, I understand,
in an appeal to build a proper centre in which to hold some of this Arts
Festival. The State Government is very generously contributing to this
and so is the Lord Mayor and his Council. But after the State Government
has contributed and after the Council has contributed, there is a requirement
for the raising of $ 300, 000 of public subscription in order to obtain
the total amount required. Your Premier, who never lets an opportunity
pass to make suggestions to the Australian Government how they might
take a greater interest in South Australia, wrote to me and suggested that
the Australian Government might open up a certain Act we have in order
to enable donations to this public appeal of $ 300, 000 to be tax-deductible.
This would be in the same way as they are tax-deductible to appeals for
the Sydney Opera House, I think I find that rather difficult to understand
because it's for so long: and other projects of that kind. And we had
some little discussion about this because had this happened and it's not
going to happen but had it happened and had we made donations taxdeductible,
probably the Australian Government would have lost say
/ 2 
$ 150, 000 out of the $ 300, 000 because it would be about $ 1 in every $ 2 that
the donor would have saved. And we were prepared to do this if your
Premier was prepared to accept it. But then we had another talk and we
both agreed that perhaps it might be more suitable for the State of South
Australia and perhaps it might be more suitable for those interested in
the Festival of Arts if instead of doing this, the Australian Government
was to donate $ 200, 000 of the $ 300, 000 that was sought to be raised by
public appeal. And so this is what the Premier and I have decided would
be the best course of action to take and this is what I said in the beginning
is another example of an interest in the State and people of South Australia.
I propose to take advantage of this opportunity you have
afforded me tonight to speak of some matters that are important to the
country, are important to you, and important to me.
Now, I am not going to go through all the things which are
of significance to Australia which I think are going to be the subject of
decision by people in this room and those whom people in this room can
influence. I want to talk really on only a couple of subjects. And one is
the future defence and security of this country because I think that is at
stake in this election and we have heard insufficient about it.
We have an Opposition which, if it became a government,
would be prepared to abandon National Service training and has said so
without equivocation. I look to the post-Vietnam period. Surely we would
need to mainrLain in Australia in our new situation an army at least of its
present size, post-Vietnam. one-third of our present army is made up
of National Service trainees. Can we afford to allow a government which
would in effect cut our army by one-third, because that is what it means.
Or is it not better for us as we grow stronger, as the conditions in which
we live change from those in which we have all grown up, is it not better
for us to do as we would propose to do and that is to maintain National
Service training in order to ensure that the forces of the size we require
are kept in being for we no longer have the shields we used to have.
This is of great significance, I think, to the future security and defence
of Australia. I think it would be utterly wrong to put into power in this
country a government which would withdraw immediately all ground, sea
and air forces which we now have stationed in Malaysia and in Singapore
as an indication and an earnest of our interest in the security of that
region. Because if the people were to decide that the Opposition should
become a government, then the Five Power Treaty would be shattered and
there would be no longer in the areai to our North any Australian military
presence whatsoever. This, I believe, is ingrained in Australians and
properly ingrained in them that this would be a course detrimental to
our future security. And this is of importance to Australia's future. / 3 
3-
Would it be sensible for us because we depend basically
for our ultimate protection on the United States of America, and through
depending on the United States of America, we depend on the ANZUS
Treaty would it be sensible for us to refuse to play our full part in that
Treaty? Should we say to the United States, " You want to set up some
kind of a defence base, something like the North-West Cape, some other
kind of base which will be of importance to your defence and to our defence
and therefore to our joint defence, you want to do this? Well, we are
going to quibble about it. We are going to argue about it. We are not
going to let you do it. We are going to renegotiate the arrangements under
which the bases which now exist are allowed to exist". Would this be
sensible? Because this is what the present Opposition would do were it
the Government. It is what we would not do. And if it were done I believe
it would break the spirit of the ANZUSTreaty riot necessarily the letter
but break the spirit and that it would for that and other reasons make us
able to rely on protection from this Treaty from the United States with far
less certainty than we can now rely. For a small country such as ourselves,
this again is something of great significance to our security.
Again, I don't suppose there is anybody in this room who is
not horrified at the thought that nuclear weapons exist in the world and of
the destruction they can cause. But they do exist and they do so in some
countries, particularly in China not so far from us. In those circumstances,
don't you think it is detrimental or could be to Australia's security to sign
a Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and give up all chance of protecting
ourselves against any possible future attack unless and until we were
certainly assured that the protection we gave up would come without fail
from some other source. I believe it would be playing with the future of
Australia's children if we did that, If we can get an effective and an
efficient and a proper treaty, one which gives us full protection, of course
we want it, of course we will sign it. But we won't sign it until we reach
those conditions. The Opposition will, at once and without question, and
that is another matter of great significance to Australia's future defence.
On this subject of defence and of foreign affairs, I have been
latterly thoroughly astonished at the interpretations which have been put on
a recent speech made in the Parliament by the Minister for External Affairs,
Mr. Freeth. When I arrived in Adelaide today, somebody poked a microphone
into my face at the airport and said, " What about this defence arrangement
with the Russians?" It seems to be an odd kind of growth with nothing
whatsoever to back it at all, and I'd like to take this opportunity to talk
to you a little of this matter.
Sir, let me go into the history of this a little. The Minister
for External Affairs set out in a speech he made in Parliament, in the
first part of that speech, the approach of President Nixon and of the
United States to the problems of Asia and of South East Asia. He said how
he and we welcomed the President's pledge of the continued interest of the
/ 4 
4-
United States in the cQuntries of Asia and the President's intention that
the United States would fulfil its treaty commitments.
The Minister pointed out that the President emphasised the
security of the countries of Asia must primarily be a matter for themselves.
The Minister reaffirmed that we ourselves in Australia have always believed
that successful resistance to aggression, either direct or indirect, depends
in the last resort on the will and ability of the peoples of the countries in
that area to resist either subversion or aggression. And the President
pointed out that he wished and the Minister stated that we wished as we
have stated before that those countries would develop sufficient strength
in themselves to be able to protect themselves while being helped in the
meanwhile. And the Minister emphasised and this is important that by
sufficient strength, he didn't necessarily mean military strength alone.
We meant also and even more importantly in many respects an
improvement in the standards of living in those countries, the installation
of efficient and honest and incorrupt administrations and public services,
the fostering of harmonious relations with neighbouring countries and the
easing and eventual abolition of communal tensions and racial clashes
within those countries. For all of these matters of which I have just spok-en
are the basis of will and ability to resist aggression, are the basis of will
and ability to resist subversion. These are matters which are sine qua non
if a country is to resist aggression and subversion and this is what we
seek. And in seeking to attain these objectives, as the Minister pointed out,
we have helped and we will continue to help, for these are our objectives
and they are in our national interest to attain.
Now, against that background let me carry the story further.
Mr. BrehZnev recencly stated that the Soviet Union was of the opinion that,
and I quote, was of the opinion that events are putting on the agenda
the task of creating a system of collective security in Asia". And we know
no more of it than that, and the Minister indicated that we knew no more of
it than that. No proposals in any depth or anything else have been put
forward except that one indication of an interest. There have been no
proposals, but as I pointed out at the beginning our objective and the
objective of the United States is to develop regional co-operation, economic
development and therefore security. We recognise in Australia as well,
perhaps better than anyone in the world, that Russian communism has as
its objective, as its ultimate objective, the spreading of the system of
communism throughout the world and is in that sense an imperial power.
We should feel, as we have made it clear that we always
would feel, that our ultimate security in Australia would be threatened by
the establishment of any Russian naval or military bases anywhere in our
own region. We feel that any military alliance between Russia and a
country in our own region would pose a threat to ourselves. We cannot
forget Czechoslovakia and Hungary and the Berlin airlift and all the sorry
chapters of the past. 
We have no Intention, nor have we ever considered as the
remotest possibility any military understanding between ourselves and the
Soviet Union or any active military involvement by Soviet Russia in any
collective security arrangement among the countries to our North. For
we think that would be dangerous for us. That should be made clear. I
hope it has now been made clear.
But if, and as yet we do not know, but if proposals are
eventually put forward to help build the economic strength of countries to
our North and those proposals have no strings attached, if proposals are
put forward to lend influence to persuade countries to our North to join a
collective security pact amongst themselves without a Russian military
presence and that is our objective then we should at least be prepared
to examine such proposals, albeit we examine them with caution and with
scepticism and without gullibility. And this was all the Minister for
External Affairs stated in his speech. Yet for some reason I don't
understand, it has been built up and puffed up as if there was some great
change of policy or some sudden soft-line approach towards the USSR. I
don't understand the interpretation, Sir, and I reject it, though I reaffirm
that if acceptable economic help to attain our objectives is suggested, and
is suggested without strings, then it would be ridiculous riot to examine such
suggestions. And I reaffirm that if help in attaining a system of collective
security among the nations of our North amongst themselves is offered
and that is our objective then it would be absurd not to examine those
suggestions, although with the scepticism I have mentioned. That, Sir, is
our approach on this matter. I wonder what the approach of the Opposition
would be? On their past performance, on the way in which they have
excused all the Russian excesses except those in Czechoslovakia, I doubt
very much whether the stand that we have taken on this matter would not
be altered by them in a direction which would in the ultimate endanger this
country. These are all matters which should be in your mind and in the
minds of all Australians when on October 25 they choose whom they wish
to govern them for the next three years.
I have no time now to talk of other issues of significance
and importance in this coming campaign. There are other matters of
social services, of the general developmert of Australia, of the lives which
Australians can lead, but in a meeting such as this and at a time such as
this, I will not go into them, other than to say this. What we will do in
the future by way of development and by " we" I mean all Australians
what courses we will adopt to help those amongst us who are In need of
assistance, what actions we will take to provide more opportunities for
all people throughout our country will in the ultimate depend on those
first matters which I have raised before you. That Is the ability to retain
our own independence, to build up our alliances: to contribute to them with
our own defence forces because that is the rock upon which our development
and indeed our very existence will finally stand. / 6 
S--6-
When you go out from this room, I want you to do what you
can in your own way to see that Kay is returned for this seat to support
those policies, those defence policies I have put before you and those other
policies which at a later time and at a more appropriate time I will also
put before you. For it is the Members you elect that keep a government
in office, and if you agree with the policies proposed, and I hope you do,
and if you are satisfied with your Member, and I know you are, then come
with us in October because we need you and I think Australia needs you.
I 



0 NEWS ITERVIEW WITH CHANNEL 9, MELBOURPNE,
9 4ENBY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON 14 September 1969
Q. What is your reaction, Mr. Prime Minister, to the
demonstration outside?
PM. Well, I think it was a perfectly peaceful and orderly
gathering. There was no attempt to use any force, nothing of that kind.
I think it would have been more interesting if their voices and their
singing had been a little bit better, but that is the only criticism I
would care to make:
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, in our " Today" programme on
Channel 9 on Friday, the External Affairs Minister, Mr. Freeth,
seemed to indicate that any close association with Russia wouldn't do
Australia any good. You seem to have said the opposite to this.
Could you clarify this?
PM. You have got an awful lot of " seems" in there and I
haven't seen the speech to which you refer. Frankly, I don't accept
your interpretation of it and I would doubt very much if it seemed that
way.
Q. But you do agree there is confusion at the moment?
PM. No. I don't. I admit there is misinterpretation of a
perfectly simple speech. It's no different from speeches which have
been made in the past but it has been misinterpreted in very, very
odd ways indeed. There has been some suggestion that we would be
happy to see a military presence or would be happy to join in some
collective security pact or to see Russia join in some collective
security pact. I want to make it perfectly clear that we realise better
than anybody that the continuing aim of communism is imperialist
domination of the world and we would regard it as dangerous for us if
Russian military or naval bases were set up in that part of the world,
but there has never been any slightest suggestion that we should enter
into any kind of collective security pact with Russia. We would not
look with any favour on Russia entering into a military security pact
with countries to our North, but we would like to see the countries to
our North enter into a security pact amongst themselves and help
each other and if that were a common objective, then I would have no
objection whatever to that. But that is quite different to any Russian
military bases or military presence or Russian participation. / 2 
-2-
Q. Well this actually brings up two points the first, say,
Russian ships in the Indian Ocean.
PM. Well the Indian Ocean is an international ocean and ships
have a right to go there. So far there has been no great incursion of
Soviet ships into the Indian Ocean. If there were, they have a perfect
right to be there and we couldn't stop them unless somebody suggested
we should go to war with Russia or something like that, but should
there be a build-up of Russian naval power in the Indian Ocean then
we would obviously need to watch it as the United States have said they
will be watching it.
Q. On the economic side, you were saying if the countries
to our North formed a pact this would be fine, but if Russia persisted.....
PM. Now are you sure you are not getting a. little confused
yourself. I said " A collective security pact of countries to our North"
which means a general effort of trying to help themselves in all ways,
including military ways as well. On the matter of providing economic
assistance, we want to see the people of these countries given a better
standard of living. That has always been our objective, the hope that
they would get better administrations, their economies would build up
and the benefit of those improved economies would spread throughout
the people. That requires various kinds of economic assistance and
we could certainly have no objection to such economic assistance being
provided by the USSR, provided there were no strings attached,
provided there was no great incursion of technicians or something
else, but this is speaking purely of economic assistance. And that is
our objective.
Q. You don't believe that this is what could be described
as a " soft line"
PM. Good Heavens, no.
Q. Is this what you believe your critics are suggesting is
the " soft line"?
PM. I don't know what they are suggesting except they seem
to have completely distorted what in fact Mr. Freeth said and jumped
to completely unwarranted conclusions about us being happy if there
were military bases or a military presence or Russians entering into
a pact there none of which is justified.
Q. The coming election, Mr. Prime Minister. The
Gallup polls are indicating that there is a substantial swing to the
Labor Party. What is your reaction to this? / 3 
3-
PM. The Gallup polls, I think, indicated a three per cent
swing from the high point which would have been roughly the same as
the 1966 elections. That is common. If you look at the history of the
Gallup polls, it is common for them to come closer together during
an election period or when an election is in the offing. Having said
all that I am always happier with Gallup polls which I don't regard
as utter authorities but I am always happier when they go for us
rather than against us.
Q. How do you feel about former Liberals standing against,
for example, the Army Minister, Mr. Lynch?
PM. I think there is a local problem there. Ever since MiL.
Lynch has been elected, a certain group in the electorate has been
strongly opposed to him personally and I think this has played a very
large part.
Q. I will have to use the word " seemed" again because I
can only gauge this from outside reports that there is dissension
within your own Party, that there is certain unhappiness with your
leadership.
PM. I don't believe there is. Are you basing your question
on the meeting of 12 or 14 people at the North Sydney Branch which is
one of the 25 Branches in the North Sydney electorate. You probably
are. AnyIway it is absolutely ridiculous.
Q. You don't consider some of these " fall-out" people are
spurring others on?
PM. Oh yes, I woulId think so, but I should imagine with
very little success.
Q. One other point which I haven't mentioned to you at all
is the ACTU and the new leader of the ACTU. Do you have any
comment at all about Mr. Bob Hawke's election?
PM. Oh, I think we will have to wait to see what develops.
Q. On this basis, do you believe, as some would say, that
the position of President of the ACTLJ is almost as important in this
country as the Prime Minister?
PM. No, but I think it is a very important position. I don't
think it is as powerful, but I think it is a very significant post. 


Recorded on 12 September for screening on 16 September 1969
Q. Prime Minister, you appeared to become quite irritated during a recent airport impromptu news conference when once again the subject of Australia's attitude to Russia's presence in South East Asian waters was raised. Do you feel that speculation on this topic has more or less got out of hand?
PM. I think it has got out of hand. I wouldn't say I got irritated at the interview. What I got irritated at was being asked what about our defence arrangements with Russia, and there haven't been any and aren't going to be any and nobody has ever said there are going to be any.
Q. It seemed that the words correct me if I am wrong that really irritated you were when once again the phrase was used: four softer policy towards Russia'".
PM. Well, no, really the one was the defence one, but softer policy towards Russia, again, is something which I think people have just dreamed up. I don't understand it.
Q. There is criticism of the fact that Mr. Freeth's statement was not discussed by Cabinet beforehand. Now, in the light of the speculation since that time, do you feel Mr. Freeth underestimated the impact his statement would have on the public of Australia?
PM. I think that both Mr. Freeth and myself saw no alterationswhatsoever in our policy approaches. Indeed, I think if you went backover policy speeches made by the previous Minister for External Affairs,you could have got the same kind of approach from them without anyproblem. Since there was no policy change whatever, it didn't seemto be of the significance that apparently pundits and commentators andpeople have tried to build into it.
Q. Could I suggest then Prime Minister that what has happened is that that statement hit a tender spot in the minds of many Australians'The United States obviously wants to move its influence back a littlefrom South East Asia at the present time. Britain is moving out of thearea. I suggest that many Australians are coming to feel that Australiais becoming a little isolated and unimportant in the calculations of manyof the major powers.
PM. I have no doubt at all that many Australians would feelthat Australia was far more isolated than she used to be, and 1, myself,have no doubt that this is true. The British will soon have no physicalpresence in the countries to our North, and the United States, thoughit will maintain its interest there and treaty obligations there, well,there is some doubt about what would happen in the event of hostilities,we don't know whether it would be in the countries to our North; sofrom that point of view I would think it was an accurate assessment tosay we were becoming more isolated. I don't think it would be asaccurate to say what was the other phrase " not considered of anyimportance" because I do believe that the ANZUS Treaty, as longas we maintain its spirit as we as a Government would do, shows thatwe are considered to be of great importance.
Q. Well, you make the point yourself there that " we as theGovernment" would do. In other words, there is some doubt perhapsin your mind about the other countries.
PM. No, the onldy doubt in my mind is that the Oppositionwouldn't. You see, they wouldn't they would quibble about jointdefence bases. They would try to renegotiate things like the NorthWest Cape. They would in my view tarnish the ANZUS Treaty.
Q. Now you admit this feeling of isolation perhaps thereis nothing wrong this feeling. That it is a correct assessment.
PM. We must regard ourselves as more isolated than before.You and I grew up or I grew up anyway until 1939 and subsequently,completely shielded by the British Navy. Britain was our shield. Wehad no standing forces of our own. The countries to our North weregenerally speaking run by European powers. There was no problem.But since the British decision to withdraw, since the changes that havetaken place in Asia, I would say unquestionably we must considerourselves as more isolated. We have no need to get panicky about itbecause I am sure Britain would come to our assistance and I am surethe ANZUS Treaty is our sheet anchor, but still we must regardourselves as more isolated than before.
Q. People, I suggest, feel that the United States is perhapg not this is perhaps understating it perhaps not as close or as big a friend or as a strong a friend that's the word as we are always ledto believe by the various statements both by yourself and by thePresident of the United States. For ins tance, the recent very searchingGallup Poll indicated that 62 per cent quizzed were in favour ofcancelling the F-Ill contract. Doesn't this once again indicatea lack of confidence in the United States?
PM. No, I wouldn't think there was any relationship at all. In the one case we are talking about a security treaty with the United States coming to defend us should our forces be attacked or should our country be attacked, and in the other case we are talking about in effect a commercial contract for a particular aircraft about which there has been a lot of discussion in the Press. I don't see the relationship between them.
Q. You don't think there is one?
PM. No, I don't.
Q. Looking at internal affairs at the present time, does the last Budget contain all of the Government's proposals for expenditure in this financial year that is, if you make any new promises in your policy speech, does it mean they can't be implemented until the next Budget at the earliest?
PM. No, it doesn't mean they can'it be implemented because one could always bring in supplementary Budgets during the course of a year, so physically something could be done. But you are asking me a physical question: " Is it possible for this to happen?", and I am answering in that sense and in that sense alone.
Q. This time, of course, as you have indicated before, you are not willing to give any indication of what might be said between now and the elections for instance?
PM. Well, now, I don't think you would expect me to.
Q. Do you agree with Mr. Whitlam that the Snowy Mountains Authority should become the nucleus of a national water conservation authority in other words, wouldn't such an authority have avoided the Chowilla fiasco, for instance?
PM. I doubt very much whether it would have avoided theChowilla fiasco and I don't think Mr. Whitlam has thought his proposalsthrough at all. The Snowy Mountains Authority we are keeping as aplanning authority, as the sort of people who can provide expertise toconstructing authorities. But I think you would find that the States, forexample, who have their own water departments, and who would wantto construct their own dams and would want to use their own engineersand would want themselves to do the job, would have some reservationsabout a central power moving in and taking it away from them. / 4
Q. Now, you have come over to South Australia thisparticular time on a flying visit and you attended a dinner withMiss Kay Brownbill. Is this just a courtesy call for the only womanin the Australian House of Representatives? I put it that way becauseit seems from all indications it is now, though still a marginal seat,Kingston, a fairly safe Liberal seat.
PM. So what is the question? Is it just a courtesy call? No,it isn't a courtesy call at all. It's a visit made because I very muchwant Kay Brownbill to hold the seat, and anything I can do to help issomething I would be delighted to do. Not as a courtesy, no, butpartly because I have a high regard for her personally, partly becauseI want to see it held.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRILUA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
OVERSEAS INVESTMENT IN AUSTRAIA
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 16 September 1969]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
by leave The importance to
Australia of a strong and continuing inflow
* of overseas capital has never been ques-
'. tioned by my Government. During the years
-after the end of World War II, the accumulated
total of private overseas investment
ini Austral) ia has been about $ 7,000m. With-
6 tha. ' investment, ' it would have been
impossible for us to develop as quickly as
history demands we must. Our immigration
programme would have been restricted.
Import replacement and a, growing independence
of many overseas commodities would
have been curtailed. And we would not have
grown the industrial muscles which we need.
This overseas flow of investment has
developed resources which were previously
not utilised. It has contributed to the sustained
growth in our export income, and
it has raised the general level of efficiency
and therefore of real incomes in many
sectors of the economy. It confers great
benefits on us and it is essential that it should
continue. It is, however, also true that overseas
capital does not come to Australia
merely because of a wish to confer these
advantages on us. Basically it comes here
because we are a politically stable country,
because there are great opportunities for
new development here, and because there
are good opportunities for profit, and for
growth as the nation grows.
Naturally, at a time when great new
possibilities are opening up in this country
22179/ 69 we wish to see Australians get as good an
opportunity as possible, within the limits of
their resources and capacities for saving,
for participation in these developments and
growth and profits. This is not an attitude
that can or should be carried to'the point
of discouraging people from abroad who
are willing to bring here their money and
their energies and their know-how. But it
is an attitude on the part of the Australian
community which overseas interests have to
recognise. To a very large extent they
already recognise and are prepared to
accept it. And many of them indeed, in
indreasing numbers, have seen that it is an
attitude which is basically helpful to them
and can be turned, in a co-operative spirit,
to their and our good account.
As we see it, the central aim of policy
must be to provide, on terms which are fair
as between overseas investors and the Australian
people, the conditions under which
investment will be attracted here. Those
conditions should be such that overseas
enterprises can operate securely and
effectively, making the greatest contribution
they can to our development at a fair
return to themselves. And above all, conditions
under which they can work ' in
harmony, on even terms, and so far as
practicable on a joint basis and in close
collaboration with Australian enterprises.
We do not believe that we can or should
seek to legislate, in such a complex field. 
But we reiterate our wishes and have little brevity I will refer to those amounts as
doubt that overseas companies of repute the increase in funds employed.
A h -iL
will Lnote and reiponJ LU Uose wl es.
Mr Uren-They have not in 20 years.
Mr GORTON-Yes. They are doing it
more and more. The Government has, as
its general objective, the encouragement of
Australian participation in and partnership
with, overseas enterprises. And in speaking
of partnership I place emphasis upon the
offer of equity participation to Australians
by overseas ventures. As encouragement
towards this end we have recently completed
a review of the restraints imposed on
overseas companies seeking to raise fixed
interest borrowings in Australia-or the
borrowing guidelines as they have come to
be known. These guidelines . apply onlyto.
proposed fixed interest borrowings, not to
the raising of share capital in Australia for
the purpose of financing operations by
enterprises incorporated here.
' At present overseas interests proposing
any form of borrowing within Australia are
requested to consult the Reserve Bank and
Australian lending institutions are requested
to satisfy themselves that overseas interestsor
companies in which more than 25% of
the shares are held by overseas interestshave
received approvals from the Reserve
' Bank covering any proposed borrowings.
This will continue. Generally speaking companies
will be allowed reasonable access to
Australian borrowings for financing normal
requirements of working capital, bridging
finance, and continuing carry-on requirenients.
Further, in accordance with the
Government's general policy of ensuring
that every effort is made to increase exports
of Australian goods, ready approval will be
given to borrowings for the specific purpose
of financing export transactions.
In calculating the new local borrowings
that will be approved to finance fixed assets
Sin future, the base will be the local borrowings
approved as acceptable as at 30th
June 1969 under the existing guidelines.
Companies that are now regarded as having
been established in Australia for a period
of' 4 years or longer will be allowed to
borrow up to 10% of any increase subsequent
to June 1969 in the total of shareholders'
funds, other funds from overseas
sources, and. local borrowings excluding
those to finance increases in working capital
: or to finance exports. For the sake of Companies wholly overseas-owned and
established in Australia for periods of less
than 4 years will be allowed local borrowings
of up to 21% of the increase in funds
employed for each year that they have been
, established. Such companies will hence-
, forth have a new base and a new percentage
applied each year until they have been
established here 4 years. From that time
onwards they will be allowed local borrowings
of up to 10% of subsequent increases
in funds employed. For companies in
which Australians have a share of the
equity, additional borrowings to those set
out above will be allowed. The extent of
the additional borrowings will be determined
by the share of the total equity in
the company held by Australians.
.: To meet, requirements of funds additional
' to the proceeds of new share issues and the
local borrowings in accordance with the
preceding paragraphs, a company will be
., allowed to raise in Australia a proportion
of its total new borrowings which will
accord with. the proportion of shares in
the company held by Australians. Australian
equity will be weighted on a four
for three basis so that the proportion for a
. company with 30% Australian equity will
be 40%. If for special reasons overseas
loan funds to match local borrowings can-
: not be arranged, access to local borrowings
will nevertheless be increased to take
account of the extent of the Australian
equity. In the application of this aspect of the
guidelines, the Reserve Bank will take into
account,; for purposes of calculating the extent
of Australian equity, offers to Australians
of new or increased equity ( other
than through convertible notes) which have
not been taken up but which are considered
to have been genuine and reasonable offers
of . local equity participation in the company.
If new or increased Australian equity
, is offered bona fide through the issue of
convertible notes, the Reserve Bank will
take into account in calculating the extent
of. Australian equity one-half the future
increase in Australian equity that would
result if the notes were converted.
' It should be mentioned here that
approval will not normally be granted for 
borrowings that would facilitate the remittance
of funds abroad. Consistently, moreover,
with the longstanding exchange control
policy of requiring overseas interests
taking over enterprises in Australia to bring
in cash to the full extent of the purchase
price, approval will not normally be given
to borrowings intended to finance a takeover.
Overseas interests seeking exchange
control for a takeover are reminded
that on completion, the changed
ownership of the enterprise taken over will
necessitate discussions with the Reseive
Bank of the extent of local borrowings by
the enterprise as a whole.
I move on to discuss convertible notes.
During , the developmental stages of many
major projects there are either no earnings,
or no surplus earnings available for distribuition
to shareholders. This, of course, discourages
would-be investors who need a
return on their capital at once and limits
the amount of share capital which those
promoting the venture can raise. Therefore
the alternative of fixed interest borrowings,
with a guarantee of income, has had more
attraction to many lenders as well as; to
those seeking to borrow. For the borrower
believes that by offering immediate return
on the investment as income he will increase
the likelihood of borrowing successfully. He
also knows that the interest he must pay on
fixed interest borrowings is cumulatively
deductible for income tax purposes, thus
substantially reducing the effective cost of
his borrowings.
As a step towards attaining our goal of
increasing Australian equity participation in
Australian development, we sought means
of-diverting these fixed interest borrowings
into borrowings'with-' a chance of equity
participation. It was foi this reason that the
Treasurer /( Mr McMahon) announced in
his Budget Speech our proposal to amend
the Income'Tax Law in order to restore
deductibility of interest for income tax purposes
on convertible company securities.
Before 1960 interest on all convertible securities
was deductible; but it became evident
that convertible notes were being widely
substituted for equity issues and that, in
the majority of cases, the plain purpose of
this substitution was tax avoidance. So to
protect the revenue, deduction of interest
on all convertible securities was disallowed. We do not intend to go back to a pre-
1960 situation. We shall minimise the scope
for tax avoidance and will lay down conditions
to which convertible securities must
conform if they are to qualify for deductibility
of interest. These conditions are:
1. The lender or noteholder, and not the
issuing company, has the option to
convert;
2. The noteholder's right to exercise the
option is not deferred longer than 24
months after the date of issue of
the security;
3. The convertible note has a currency
of not less than 7 nor more than
years but the company may make the
terminal date for the exercise of the
option as much as, but not more than,
12 months earlier than the maturity
date of the note;
4. The terms and conditions of the issue
are fixed and not subject to any variation
throughout the period of their
S currency; and
5. The conversion price for shares is not
less than 90% of their market price
when the convertible securities are
issued, qr par, whichever is greater.
We believe that these conditions will have
. a twofold advantage. They will give companies
adequate scope for using convertible
securities to their best advantage in business
financing and they will offer to Australian
investors a new opportunity to participate
in the equities of overseas-initiated
ventures in Australia, especially those in the
extractive industries. If such ventures issue
* convertible notes to finance development or
expansion, Australians who take up these
securities will have an assured rate of income
during the developmental period of
the project with the option to acquire equity,
and thus share in the growth of the business.
The opportunity that convertible notes opens
up for wider participation by Australians
in the ownership of such overseas-initiated
ventures has been a major consideration in
the decision we have taken to restore tax
deductibility of interest on such convertible
notes. In so seeking to widen opportunities for
Australian participation in ownership we
have sought to ensure that the opportunities
would be real and not merely nominal and
that they will not be too long delayed. We
think that the option to -convert to shares-
should remain open long enough for the
company to have established itself and for
its shares to have value enough for noteholders
to take them rather than opt for
repayment of their loan in cash. It is in
order to provide adequate time for development
and profitability that we propose that
convertible notes should have a currency of
at least 7 years and that the option to
convert should not terminate earlier than
12 months before the maturity date of the
note. We also believe that 10 years will
for all practical purposes be long enough
for convertible notes to remain outstanding.
Certainly, if the development or expansion
of an overseas-initiated venture is to lead to
an issue of equity to Australians, it is
reasonable to expect this to be resolved
within a period not longer than 10 years.
Convertible issues proposed to be issued by
companies in which more than 25% of
the shares are held by overseas interests
will be subject to examination by the
Reserve Bank to determine that the terms
of issue are . reasonable and genuine.
COMPANY TAKEOVERS
The question of Australian participation
in Australian development is not confined to
expressing a strong Government desire for
joint ventures, -or to encouraging the offer
of equity to Australian shareholders through
borrowing guidelines. The question of protection
of Australian companies against
overseas takeovers also arises. . The Government
has given special consideration to this
question of takeovers in general, whether
such takeovers are by overseas or by other
Australian companies.
We have been especially concerned to
prevent the use of takeover methods which
are unfair -to a company's shareholders as
a body. I refer to such practices as the
large-scale purchase of shares through
nominees, to first come first served offers
and similar manoeuvres. These problems
were. reported on. by the Company Law
Advisory Committee and in March of this
year the Standing Committee of Attorneys-
General agreed to adopt the report in
principle. * As the Attorney-General informed the
House on 20th May the Commonwealth
Government has considered that report and
has decided to amend the companies Ordinances.,
of, the, Australian. Capital Territory. and Northern Territory to give effect to the
Advisory Committee's recommendations,
namely: Disclosure
A person having a beneficial interest of
10% or more in the voting capital of a
company listed on an Australian stock
exchange will be required to give notice of
that interest to the company. The company
will be required to enter this information in
a special register which will be available
for public inspection. The new provisions
are to apply to, but without discrimination
against, persons resident, or companies
incorporated, outside the jurisdiction, as
well as to persons or corporations within
the jurisdiction of this Government. The
-proposed provisions are generally in line
' with the existing law in the United Kingdom
and the United States but, in view
of. enforcement difficulties,. are to be
accompanied by certain sanctions not provided
in those countries. A registered holder
who is aware that he holds on behalf of a
non-resident will be required to furnish to
that. person information as to the requirements
of the legislation.
THE TAKEOVER CODE
A. The code will be made applicable to
offers by natural persons.
An invitation to make an offer-as,
for example, in first come first served
invitations will be treated as if it were
an offer.
C. The criterion for application of the
code will be 15% of the voting power,
instead of one-third as at present.
D. An offerer who increases the price
offered in respect of some shareholders
will be obliged to pay the
increased price to those who have
already accepted.
E. Provision will be made to prevent a
bid for less than the provided limit
of 15% of shares being used to
acquire shares in excess of that limit.
F. -It will be an offence for a person to
make a takeover offer, or to give
notice of intention to do so without
having any reasonable or probable
grounds of expectation of being able
to provide the consideration for the
offer or proposed offer. 
G. All aspects of a takeover will be
governed by the law of the State or
Territory in which the offeree company
was incorporated.
It will be noted that the report does not
recommend the prohibition of first come
first served offers as such but the Eggleston
Committee -reported that these . changes will
ensure that this kind of offer will not escape
the control applicable to other kinds of
takeover offers.
There were additional proposals from the
Associated Stock Exchanges and although
these were not covered by the Committee
because it considered they were outside its
terms of reference, they will be incorporated
in the companies ordinances of the Australian
Capital Territory and the Northern
Territory. 1. One of the amendments will provide
that any amendment to the articles of
association restricting voting rights
shall require the affirmative vote of
not less than 51% in value of the
shareholders of the class of shares
affected. A similar requirement
already exists in the listing requirements
of the Australian Associated
Stock Exchanges. The present position
under the uniform Companies Act is
that any amendment of the articles
of association of a company requires
a special resolution, which in turn,
requires a three-fourth's majority of
members of the company voting in
person or by proxy.
The proposed provision will be in
the nature of an additional requirement,
which will recognise the
significance of a restriction on voting
rights. Shareholders who do not vote
affirmatively for a restriction-including
those who do not vote at
all-will, in effect, be treated as
opposed to the restriction.
2. The other additional, amendment
relates to the notice of intention that
must be given before a takeover is
made. The present position is that this
notice must be given not earlier than
28 days, and not later than 14 days,
before the offer is made. The amendment
will require the notice to be
given not earlier than 42 days and
not later than 28 days. The additional notice provided for by the amendment
will allow an offeree corporation a
better opportunity of considering the
terms of the offer and of taking steps,
if it so desires, to amend its articles of
association to restrict voting rights
attached to shares held by overseas
interests.
I turn now to takeovers which, irrespective
of the method used, may be judged
contrary to the national interest. In the past
theGovernment has acted to preserve
Australian ownership and control of enterprises
which for special reasons of national
interest or importance could not be permitted
to' pass into foreign hands.
For many years we have opposed the
entry of overseas banks into the local
industry. And . inth e areas of television and
radio broadcasting the acquisition of control
by foreign interests has been excluded by
statute. Further statutory control is not at
present contemplated and we do not believe
that it is possible now to define further
classes or fields of enterprise which we
believe should not, in the national interest,
pass to overseas ownership.
However whilst our general experience
over the years has shown that almost all
overseas investment in Australia accords
with our country's interests it has also shown
that there remains a need for the Government
to be ready to guard against the
transfer from Australian control of established
companies in particular areas of
activity. For example some few years ago
there were thought to be attempts by overseas
investors to take over an important
and long-established Australian mining company,
while more recently it was believed
that there was an attempt to take over
one of the principal Australian life assurance
organisations, which would have carried
with it the right to determine the
investment policy of assets totalling some
$ 700m of Australians' savings.
Although we expect the need to arise
only on rare occasions as a Government
we reserve the right to do all in our power
to prevent particular takeovers when, in the
circumstances of the case, we would consider
it to be bad in the national interest.
The strengthening of the takeover code
through amendment of the Uniform Companies
Act should ensure not only that takeover.
proposals proceed in a fair and open 
manner, but also that the Government will
have more time to intervene, or express a
Government view, if it considers the
national interest calls for it.
Peroration
To sum up, Mr Speaker, we seek to encourage
the flow of overseas capital into
this country. We seek-to make it crystal
clear that we look with favour on joint
enterprise and . on the offer of Australian
equity in new ventures-and that we will
' be disturbed where the opportunity for Australian
participation is not given. We seek
to encourage the growth of Australian
equity by offering more access to the fixed
interest borrowing as Australian equity in a
company increases. We seek to protect
companies against unfair methods of takeover
and to reserve to ourselves the right
to. intervene in such takeovers when we
consider it is in the national interest, and
we seek the acceptance of the basic principles.
of a code of good corporate behaviour.
Such a code was adopted by the
Canadian Government three years ago. Speaking of overseas companies, and paraphrasing
the language to our -own environment,
I think there are three essentials for
which we look as a nation:
1. A high. degree of Australian autonomy,
with Australian citizens participating
on the boards of directors
and in the management of companies;
2. The objective of a financial stucture
, which provides opportunity for equity
participation by Australians;
3. A sensitivity to the reasonable
national -aspirations of Australia
vhic6 whilst somewhat indefinable in
detail are known quite well by all
those in this House and by anybody
who is at all sensitive to these aspirations,
' and who as a company has
intentions of investing in -this ration.
By the means outlined in this speech we
believe that we will, without interfering
with the flow of capital we need so badly,
offer considerable encouragement to greater
Australian, equity participation and that,
Sir, is the objective. of this Government
and, I believe, of most of the citizens of
this country.
Priuteil for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. 0. MURRAY at tho
. Government Printing Office, Canberra 



AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE LUNCHEON
Hotel Canberra, Canberra, A. C. T. 19 September 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Group-Captain Nicholls, Mr. Buchan, Distinguished Guests, Mr.
Ambassador:-I think the first thing I would like to say to you is that I
welcome this opportunity on behalf of the Government to welcome the new
Ambassador from the United States, Mr. Rice, and his wife. We hope
that their stay in this country will be thoroughly enjoyable for them and
that it will help to cement even further the relations between our two
countries. I know they will be welcomed warmly wherever they go in
Australia, and I hope they go throughout the whole of this nation.
This gathering is a continuation of an association which
had its roots in the trials of the Second World War. It was then, I think,
for the first-time that there became a really close relationship between
the United States of America and our own nation. I know that as long ago
as 1908, Commodore Perry came out here with the Great White Fleet and
Alfred Deaki, who welcomed that fleet, spoke of " our American cousins"
And that was long ago. And there has been a continuing feeling along those
lines since that time.
Indeed, one of our most different and most well-known
politicians, Mr. King O'Malley, who was instrumental in founding the
Commonwealth Bank, came either from the United States or Canada it's
not quite clear. But at any rate, it was quite close to the United States,
if it wasn't in it: But that feeling really came to have far more deep-seated
roots in the Second World War. There are perhaps many people in this
room, or some people in this room who do not remember this because
the years are quick and memories are short, but we were threatened, as
we were, with actual invasion of our country, and that was strange to us
for we are one of the few countries in the world that has never had to suffer
an invasion. And when there was a sweep down of apparently irresistible
military power, closer and closer to Australia, culminating in ail attack
on New Guinea itself at Milne Bay, it was then that there came to our
assistance soldiers from the United States. It was then at the Battle of
the Coral Sea, which you have celebrated for so long, that the tide was
turned back. And those joint operations for they were joint operations
of our two nations, struck feelings of gratitude from the Australian people
q / 2 
-2
which I think have never withered and which I believe, even though younger
generations follow us along, will also never wither away.
This was why for so many years the highlight of the year
for the Austral ian-American Association was what was called the Coral
Sea Celebrations, and that was why for so long top admirals and generals
and air force officers from the United States were brought out by your
Association to tour Australia and to talk to your members. And I think
it right, proper and wise that you decided that the years having passed,
there should be a wider and deeper and even more significant association
than just the memories of the times when we stood together and some of
us fell together. And so you have thought it right, and I think it right, that
you should bring out here as your guest distinguished citizens from the
United States in all walks of life, that you should seek to broaden year
by year the kind of association between our two peoples, that you should
seek to see that we do not just look back to the past but accept the present
and look to changes in the future. Therefore you seek to broaden out into
student exchanges, in which young people from America come here and
young A ustralians go to the United States and you seek to have closer
cultural relationships. seeking by these means to get those who are
going in the future to be the leaders of our nation, to know more of the
United States and those from the United States who may be leaders of that
nation to know more about us. And we must never forget that each single
student who comes to Australia and spends some time here at one of our
schools and goes back to the United States is not just one person but is a
person who has a wide range of friends to whom he or she can speak, and
by speaking to them of how life is in this country, can do far more in
spreading amongst that community a knowledge of our own nation.
We have, of course, co-operation between the United States
and the Australian Government on many fronts, You have spoken of defeince
itself and I am not ashamed to say I believe that the true protection of
Australia in the years ahead while it is growing, while it is strengthening
itself, while it is strengthening its own defences, depends in the main on
the United States and on the ANZUS Treaty.
If it were not for that, we would in the charged circumstances
of the world, with Britain's shield having been removed from our North,
with the world in ferment, we would probably have to divert far more of
our resources than we should to building up to an even greater extent our
own defences. It is this Treaty which enables us to build our own defences
because as you said, the United States quite properly looks to people to
help themselves. But it also enables us, with some security, to build the
industrial muscles, to develop the industries, to bring in the population
which, in the long term, will be the real basis of our strength. And so
this is a sine qua non of our continuing development at the rate at which
/ 3 
3-
history demands we must develop over the next few years. That is one
aspect of co-operation. just recently you, Sir, from the United States fired the
imagination of the world, by sending for the first time men to wralk upon
the surface of the moon. A science fiction story which would have been
labelled, a decade ago, or fifteen years ago, by most people as nothing
but a science fiction story yet one which has turned out to be fact. And we
played some part in co-operation in that. It was Australian tracking
stations which helped in the mission. There was an Australian scientist
engaged in the planning. I am informed by reading a speech which you,
Sir, made of something which I didn't know before and that is that the
sunglasses were designed by Australians. And we even have a sample in
this country of moon rockts weighing some ounces I'm not quite sure how
many, but when you think of the distance they had to be carried, you will
realise that an ounce is the equivalent of a ton: We have them here, and
this is another example of co-operation between us.
Thinking back in this space programme to the first time
when men circled the earth and in order that they shouldn't lose their way,
the citizens of Perth turned on all the electric light available so that they
would know where they were, much to the subsequent fury of the Perth
electric light ratepayers! These are merely some examples in the field
of scientific advancement in which we are co-operating co-operating
well in that so many of the inventions we make in Australia are developed
in the United States, and co-operating indeed in other ways.
We are co-operating on the far-flung frontiers in Australia
and we are a nation with frontiers still. Those of you who have at any
stage beein in the newly -developing towns in Western Australia or the
Northern Territory or Queensland will agree with me that there is there a
feeling of excitement in the air, a feeling of endeavour. There is a feeling
of pride when the length of railway line laid in a day breaks a world record,
a feeling of enthusiasm which goes with frontiers. Mind You, they aren't
the old frontiers of the West the West as we have seen it on television.
Nor are they the frontiers that many of us, including my wife and myself
came to, when we came back to Australia from abroad, because those
were, in my case and you can duplicate it in yours the sort of frontier
in the North of Victoria. There was no electricity and you had something
called a Coolgardie safe if you wanted to keep anything cool. This was a
contraption in W~ ihich you put a lot of water at the top and which was supposed
to keep your food from going bad, but I was never able to discover in fact
that it did. But these new frontiers are not like that. In these places,
there are shopping centres houses with air-conditioning..... swimming
pools community centres. The development going on is superb and
the advantages to this nation are immense and the advantages to those
United States citizens who provide some capital towards it are also
immense a co-operation there to the benefit, I think, of both of us. A
/ 4 
-4
co-operation in bases such as the North-West Cape base, such as the
other joint defence arrangements that we have. You could go through a
whole field and we would find, I think, as we went through that there
have probably not been any other instances where two nations have so
closely co-operated for what they believe to be the good of all.
Indeed, I would like to cast your minds back to something
I once said in the White House when I was being entertained by President
Nixon because it came in for a little comment in Australia at the time.
And having considered it, I think it was quite a reasonable thing to say.
refer to something about " Waltzing Matilda With You" and I would like
to tell you the background of that. I had been talking about the difficulties
that former Presidents of the United States had had to encounter, difficulties
which Lincoln had had to encounter in his problems over State/ Federal
financial relations, and which in many respects, because there was so
much division in the country then, bore some relation to the problems
and difficulties that President Johnson and President Nixon had to bear on
Vietnam. But I finished up saying and I still believe this is true
whenever there is an attempt by the United States or the United Kingdom
or any other country to try to raise the living standards of the underprivileged
peoples of the world, to try to improve the economies of underdeveloped
countries, to try to ensure that countries will retain their independence
against attack, whenever there are such endeavours and such approaches
by such countries, then we will go " A-Waltzing Matilda" with you. Perhaps
it should have been phrased " for we will then endeavour to follow the same
road" becauc I think we would and have endeavoured to follow the same
road of trying to lift the living standards by trying to develop the economies
and by trying to see that people govern themselves in independent states.
All these things of which I have spoken are areas of closer
co-operation. We have no doubt whatever that should we ever need
assistance in time of danger to us, the United States would provide that
assistance to us as we would help in our way in troubles she might have.
We believe that the basic desires of our people and the United States
people and our Governmentl and the United States Government are the
same, both for the widening of the horizons of life for our citizens and
both for attempting to bring peaceful conditions and better living conditions
to peoples in the world outside our countries.
In all these matters, there is a basic sameness, a basic
unity between our countries. This is something your Association can
help to further and this is why the Government takes such an interest
in your Association and what it is doing.
There are, of course, other fields in which co-operation
between our countries is not as entirely close as perhaps we would like
it to be. For example, it would be very nice if the United States, having
an insatiable appetite for meat, were to enable us to export, in order to 
meet this appetite, some of the meat which at the moment we are not
allowed to send there. There are other areas such as sugar which seems
to be engraved on the heart of my friend and I say that genuinely my
friend, Senator Fulbright, as deeply as Calais was engraved on the heart of
Queen Mary. There is the long-standing question of whether it might not
be good and strengthening for both our countries if the kind of wool which
we can produce in Australia were allowed in to the United States of America
without such a crippling duty on it. But these, Sir, are merely passing
thoughts and introduced into this gathering in the hope and the belief that
all the areas of co-operation I have spelt out and which this Association
so strongly supports will be able to spread over in time into these other
areas of co-operation. But having said all that, and having at timcsendeavoured
to be not too deadly serious in saying it, it still remains completely and
irrevocably true that if this world is to be, in time, the kind of world that
we would like it to be, then the co-operation of men and women of goodwill
in the United States and Australia and in other countries must be fostered.
It must be furthered and the men and women of each of these countries
must learn more of each other, must learn more of their ideals, must
learn more of their problems. This you are doing. For this we give you
our thanks. And because of this I have been proud and honoured to have
been asked to talk to you today. 



I
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 72/ 1969
V IS IT BYAPOLLO_ 11 ASTRONAUTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Apollo 11 astronauts Neil Armstrong, Edwin
Aldrin and Michael Collins will visit Sydney on Saturday, 1 November
in the course of their world tour embracing over 20 countries.
The astronauts, accompanied by their wives, will reach
Sydney from Bangkok late on Friday night ( 31 October) and will leave
for Guam early on the Sunday morning.
It is unfortunate they cannot spend more time in Australia
and visit more than one city, but the United States has advised us that
this programme must be adhered to because of their heavy world
itinerary. Except for occasional rest days, their entire tour consists
of one-day visits.
Saturday, explorers I am sure those Australians who can be in Sydney on
1 November will give a warm welcome to these space-age
whose exploits caught the imagination of the world.
It would be my intention as Prime Minister to welcome
them on their arrival, and the Commonwealth Government will give a
Luncheon for them in Sydney on the Saturday. Other arrangements for
their stay will be discussed with the New South W~ ales Government.
CANBERRA September 1969
Background: The Prime Minister invited the astronauts to visit
Australia in a congratulatory cable that was awaiting
them when they were taken on board by U. S. S. " Hornet"
following their recovery in the Pacific. 



COMMONWEALTH OF. AUSTRALIA
SPEEC JA
BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
F Ill AIRCRAFT
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 23 September 1969]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-This House will know that the
Government recently sent a high level mission
to the United States of America to
discuss matters concerning F1 11 aircraft.
That mission has now submitted its report
to the Government and the Government
has considered it. However, before detailing
the matters discussed and the
conclusions reached there is one matter
which I believe should be made clear.
Because of the great publici * ty which has
been given to any accident in which any
Fll aircraft has been involved there has
grown up a feeling that the aircraft is itself
unsafe. The record shows that this belief
is simply* not true. The United States Air
Force fleet of Fl 11 aircraft have now
been flying for a total of more than 40,000
hours, including more than 25,000 hours in
the, operational command, and it now has
an accident record better, for example, than
the Super Sabre or the Phantom and better
than any other F century series of aircraft.
On the record the aircraft is not unsafe
and this should be known.
The matters discussed by the mission
related to the aircraft's range, its weapons
load, the assurance of a continuing supply
of spare parts during its service life and
the fatigue performance of the wing carry
through box. Our military advisers are
completely satisfied that the range and
22518/ 69 weapons load of the aircraft will meet the
requirements of the Air Force, as set down
when the decision to order the aircraft was
made. It will do the job which the Air
Force wanted an aircraft to do. Our
military advisers are also completely satisfied
that there will continue to be a full
availability of spares, readily available,
during the full period of service of this
aircraft with the Royal Australian Air
Force. Furthermore, our advice is that the Fll,
both in practice and during operations, has
demonstrated a capacity to deliver a bomb
load in any weather conditions with unprecedented
accuracy, whether the target can
be seen or not. For this purpose it is the
best aircraft in the world, and our military
advisers after evaluating other possible aircraft
types tell us that there is not in being
or in prospect any aircraft that would
approach the already.. demonstrated performance
of the Fl 11I as a strike aircraft
of the kind the RAAF requires.
The Government believes that the RAAF
must have an ultra modem bomber strike
aircraft to replace the Canberras which are
now the RAAF's only strike force. The
Government knows that the Canberras are
approaching the limit of their service life,
and the considerations which I have set
out above all point to the Fll as the best
aircraft to be this replacement, without
exception. 
But there remains the problem of the
fatigue performance of the wing carry
through box. This has been a matter of
concern to us because it indicates that we
would not get the length of service from
the aircraft which we require, or anything
approaching it; and our concern has been
shared by the United States Air Force,
although the United States already has over
120 F111 aircraft operating with the
present wing box.
As a result of this concern two matters
are in progress. Firstly, the wing box which
gave an insufficiently long life under test
has been modified as a result of information
gained and is to begin a new series of
fatigue tests next month. Secondly, more
far reaching activity has been undertaken
to overcome the fatigue problems identified
as limiting the service life of the aircraft.
Action has been comprehensive and has
included the participation of groups of
technical experts from universities, industry
and government, all. participating in detailed
reviews of the test results and the proposed
actions to resolve those technical problems.
These groups, Mr Speaker, have been
assisted by Australian structural experts.
As a result of these investigations a new
design of the wing carry through box is
under way and it is intended that this new
design will be fitted to Fill aircraft by
1972. But, of course, the new design box,
which our mission has advised us it confidently
expects to be successful, has not yet
been proved in practice. The question posed
now is whether we should accept our F 1 ls
with the modified wing box which is due
to begin testing next month. If we do it
is expected that this box will give our Fl 1 ls
a longer service life than the present wing
box but not the length of service life we
require. Modifications seen to be required
would be made to the wing boxes already
fitted to our aircraft without additional cost
to the RAAF.
The Government has decided that, provided
the modified wing box to be tested
next month lives up to expectations, we
should accept the aircraft. This, however,
is conditional on an agreement which has
already been reached that whatever ii
needed to finally overcome the wing bo
problem will'be incorporated in our aircraft
at the appropriate time and at no
increase to the ceiling price under the formula applicable to the purchase of our
aircraft. That is to say that unless the
modified wing box we now propose to
accept meets the endurance requirements
for which it is designed, the United States
Air Force will replace it with the new
design box to be available in 1972-again
with no increase to the ceiling price under
the formula applicable to the purchase of
the aircraft.
A further safeguard is the agreement that
should one or more of the wing boxes we
now propose to accept become unserviceable
due to a design deficiency before the
new design wing box is ready for fitting
then the United States will replace those
boxes at no cost to us-and as often as
may be necessary until the new wing box
is available for fitting.
As a result of these agreements we have
therefore decided to accept delivery of our
FllIs as soon as the fatigue tests to begin
next month have proved successful. We
believe that in so doing we will be greatly
strengthening the defence capacity of Australia
and that the remaining problems of
the aircraft which is not one of safety but
of service life will have been overcome by
the arrangements to fit new boxes or to fit
replacement boxes until the new boxes are
ready. I believe I should, in this statement,
remind honourable members that the
arrangements made with the United States
Air Force for these aircraft were that the
ceiling price was to be $ US5.95m plus
escalation of labour costs and materials
after 1965, plus modifications requested by
the RAAF and improvement modifications
proposed by the USAF and accepted by the
RAAF. The combined effect of this item
will approximate $ USI. 5m per aircraft. I
would also add that the USAF has decided
to go to an RF1 I IA version for the reconnaissance
aircraft and that this decision now
makes it possible for the RAAF to proceed
to a reconnaissance version of the F lC,
as originally contemplated, which will be
common with the reconnaissance aircraft in
the USAF inventory. Before, however, the
Government makes a decision on this
matter we would require far more information
as to costs.
Sir, I hope the House and the country
iwill agree that our Air Force needs a strike
Sbomber most effective in operations. I hope 
they will accept the advice of our military
experts that the F111 is far and away the
best such bomber available, and I believe
they will agree that our acceptance of the
bomber subject to the conditions I have set
out will be a powerful addition to our capacity to defend ourselves in time of
need. May I add, Mr Speaker, that should
the Deputy Leader of the Opposition ( Mr
Barnard) wish time to study this statement
and to reply to it tomorrow, then that time
will be accorded to him.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MuKAY at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALl I ,1
SPEECH
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
COMMONWEALTH AND QUEENSLAND SUGAR
AG REEMENT
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates, 25 September 1969]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-The negotiations between the
Commonwealth and Queensland governments
for a new sugar agreement have
been satisfactorily concluded and the basis
on which that formal agreement can now
be drafted has been arranged. The agreement
between the two governments will be
the most recent in a very long line of agreements
which go back to the 1 920s. They
assumed their present form in 1934. The
basic objectives which the sugar agreements
were designed to serve had been endorsed
by every Commonwealth government, and
no less by the present Government. These
were to regulate the marketing of sugar
in the interests of both sugar producers and
consumers. The agreement which has now been
negotiated will be substantially the same as
the one it replaces. It will run for 5 years,
during which the Commonwealth has agreed
that it will continue the present embargo
on the import of sugar and sugar products,
and the Queensland Government will control
raw sugar production and meet Australian
needs for refined sugar and sugar
products at agreed maximum prices as a
first priority. The assurance of supplies for
relatively long periods at fixed prices for
a stable commodity is of inestimable benefit
22650/ 69 to both sugar producers and domestic consumers.
Australian domestic prices have
remained constant from 1960 to 1967
despite very wide fluctuations in world
prices. The domestic sugar rebate scheme, which
has been a feature of sugar agreements for
a very long period, will be continued in the
new agreement but the rate of rebate will
be increased from $ 10 to $ 15 per ton from
1st July 1969 to bring it back towards the
position it held before the 1967 sugar price
increase of S25 per ton. This will be the
only change of any substance in the new
agreement. To finance the increased rate
it has been agreed that the funds made
available by the State, on behalf of the
raw sugar industry, to pay the domestic
rebate will be increased to $ 924,000 a year.
Although on the face of things it might
appear that this imposes an additional
burden on the raw sugar industry, this is
far from the case. The sugar industry's
interests are best served when consumption
in the domestic market-its best marketis
maximised. The increase in the domestic
rebate is designed to serve the interests of
both the fruit processing industry and the
raw sugar industry. In the case of the
former industry, this assistance takes the
form. of the provision of an additional 
incentive to processors to purchase fruit for
processing at reasonable prices. In the case
of the sugar industry, the advantage of
maximising domestic consumption is
patently clear when it is realised that the
alternative to domestic usage is exports at
the vagaries of the world market price.
The maximum wholesale domestic prices
for sugar and sugar products, which are
prescribed in the existing agreement, will
remain unaltered in the new agreement.
The export sugar rebate arrangements,
which had also been a conspicuous feature
of past agreements, will continue to apply.
This rebate ensures that exporters of products
in which sugar has been used will
obtain their requirements at prices related
broadly to the Australian import parity
price or, in other words, what they would
have paid had there been no embargo on
the importation of sugar. This will continue
to ensure that the unique position granted
to the local sugar industry did not react
to the detriment of exporters and is in keeping
with the Government's policy to do
everything possible to encourage the
maximum exports of both the products
using sugar and, as a consequence, the
sugar contained in those exports. Since the
export of sugar in manufactured products
is not a charge against Australia's quota
under the International Sugar Agreement,
the maximum utilisation of sugar in
exported manufactured products is of vital
interest and great benefit to sugar producers.
Experience in operating the provisions of
the existing agreement, since the last major
review in 1962, has indicated that some
changes can make it more effective in its
operation and clearer in its expression.
During the drafting of the new agreement
the opportunity will be taken to effect these adjustments, which are largely of a technical
or drafting nature and will have no
bearing on the principles on which the
agreement is based. This, as previously
indicated, will follow the traditional lines
of previous agreements. Action is in hand
to prepare a formal new agreement and the
two governments have agreed to extend the
operation of the present agreement to give
time for this work to be completed. They
have also agreed that the new agreement
will have retrospective effect from 1st July
1969. Since it is not possible to bring the new
sugar agreement before the Parliament in
its present session, and since it was agreed
by both the Commonwealth and the State
of Queensland that it is in the interests of
both producers and consumers that it
should be brought into operation as soon
as possible, it has been agreed that it will
come into full force and effect upon its
signing in order that the benefits could commence
to flow without delay. The new
agreement would need to be brought before
the new Parliament early in its life.
I am confident that Australian sugar producers
and domestic consumers will find
the terms of the new agreement acceptable
and in their long term interests. In the
case of sugar producers, it gives them the
assurance of sole access, at remunerative
prices, to their largest single market for a
reasonable period. Domestic consumers are
assured of constant supplies at stable prices.
In conclusion, it has been agreed between
the parties that, since Commonwealth
parliamentary debate on this agreement is
not possible this session, printed copies of
the formal agreement, when signed, would
be prepared by the Commonwealth for distribution
to interested parties.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. O. MumAY at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY 2O2* C T~ 9
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
POWER HOUSE FOR CENTRAL QUEENSLAND
( Minlisterial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 26 September 1 969]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-In September 1968 the Premier
of Queensland wrote to me concerning
negotiations between the Queensland
Treasurer and industrialists interested
in major development in Queensland. The
Queensland Government intended to build
a power house in central Queensland to
feed electricity into the Queensland grid,
and proposed that the Commonwealth
might provide capital so that the power
house would be larger than one required
solely for this purpose, and so that the
additional capacity could be used to attract
industries to central Queensland. The basic
requirement for such industries, if they are
to be so attracted, is the provision of large
blocks of power on a continuous load basis,
at tariffs comparable with those offering in
major industrial centres overseas. If this
could be attained it appeared there was a
real possibility of the development, in that
underdeveloped area, of a new industrial
complex that would grow and become a
tangible expression of our interest in decentralised
development.
At this point I stress the advantages
which this underdeveloped part of Australia
possesses. There are vast coal deposits and
cheap steaming coal is available as a byproduct
of the coking coal export industry.
There are extensive brine deposits as raw
material for a power intensive chemical
industry producing caustic soda for the
22750/ 69 alumina industry and chlorine for export.
The existing alumina industry will expand
with consequent opportunity for aluminium
production, which requires large amounts
of power. A deep water port and harbour
facilities suitable for bulk carriers are
ready at hand in Gladstone. All in all it
is an area crying out for that development,
and for that use of its natural resources,
which will benefit the area itself and add
to the greatness of the nation. It offers an
exciting opportunity for a great stride forward
in national development. And it offers
opportunity to increase our exports.
After preliminary consideration I
arranged with the Premier that Commonwealth
and State officials should examine
the proposal. In March 1969 our officials
met with their Queensland colleagues to
consider the technical proposals prepared
by the State Electricity Commission of
Queensland. These official discussions continued
in April and May. At that time the
Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority
was retained as consultants to make an
independent study of the proposal. The
Authority presented a comprehensive report.
Following study of it by the officials, the
Premier of Queensland, on 25th August
1969, presented the State's financial proposals
for the development of the project.
An interdepartmental committee, after
examining the project in depth, reported to
us on 19th September. 
The Government is greatly impressed
with the potential of the project both for
the development of central Queensland and
for the development of exports. We are
convinced that the project is feasible from
a technical point of view. We believe the
estimates of cost are soundly based technically
and financially. We believe thatgiven
the establishment of certain key industries-
there is a real prospect of
attracting a variety of other important
industries in the future. Given an initial
stimulus we think that growth will continue.
We believe that the wide spaces of
central Queensland, which are presently
underpopulated, will be able to develop
natural resources to the full and will see
towns grow to cities. Therefore, on behalf
of the Commonwealth I have advised the
Queensland Premier and Treasurer that we
are prepared to advance up to $ 80 million
to the State over a 6 year period to help
with this scheme. It is proposed that the
advance should be repayable over 30 years
and that it should bear interest at the semi-
Governmental rate. This offer is made for the purpose of
financing that part of the power station
which will meet the requirements of the
special industrial development envisaged
and it is hoped that this will enable the
power station to sell bulk supplies to the
industries at rates which will enable them
to compete in world markets. The offer will
enable the Queensland Government to proceed
further with its negotiations with
industry and to settle with the Commonwealth,
as a result of such negotiation, the
exact amount of the advances which will
be required and the final terms and conditions
for the servicing of the loan. The
offer is, of course, conditional on the State
being able to satisfy the Commonwealth
that it can attract a viable export-oriented
industrial complex in central Queensland
with a demand appropriate to the output of
that part of the station which the Commonwealth
contribution is intended to finance.
Should this proposal come to completion
I believe it will provide a great strengthening
of Queensland and of the Commonwealth
as a whole.
Printed for the Governmezit of the Commonwealth by W. G. MURAY at the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



HIGH COURT JUDGMENT ON STAMP DUTY
Extract from speech made by the Prime Minister, Mr-'
John Gorton, in the Boothby Electorate, South Australia
27 September 1969
( The Prime Minister handed over a cheque for $ 200, 000 as a Commonwealth
contribution to Adelaide's Festival Hall).
" Of course, this is not going to solve by any means the
problems that your Premier and all the other State Premiers have just
recently run into. You will recall, all of you, that a short time ago there
was a High Court Judgment which cast doubt on the legal validity of the
taxes which the States, all of them, were levying in the way of their own
taxation field of stamp duty. If this legal judgment I'm not quite sure
whether it will but if it does cast doubt and possibly make invalid this kind
of State taxation, then this is something which is going to affect the Budgets
of every State in Australia in greater or lesser degree, certainly the Budgets
of this State, and it is going to have a fundamental effect on the taxation
capacity of the States to raise the residual revenue they want.
I think your Premier and other Premiers would agree with
me that they are now facing, because of this uncertainty, a very grave
problem indeed. I would like to say to your Premier, who is going to meet
all the other Premiers tomorrow in Melbourne to discuss this matter, that
we do not think it just a matter which is a problem for the States. This is
a problem for the Commonwealth just as much as it is a problem for the
States, because it casts the whole relationship into the melting pot.
I don't know what the Conference of Premiers may decide
to do tomorrow. But I do know and I want to make this perfectly clear,
that we, as a Federal Government, realise that it is a problem extending
beyond the States. If possible and if we are asked, we would be prepared
to pass validating legislation to enable the States to continue to do what
they have been doing in the way of taxation, if they wish to do it, though we
do not know whether that validating legislation itself would in fact be
constitutional and would stand up to a challenge. But what we can do in order
to support the States in the problem they are now facing, we as a Commonwealth
Government will do. And if we cannot pass validating legislation because of
the Constitution this is not clear then we will certainly confer with all the
Premiers in order to ensure that their Budgets are not wrecked and that
some other way is found for providing the revenue they may lose as a result
of this Judgment in the High Court. This is of great significance to all of
us and this, I think, should be known and established." 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 73/ 1969
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION APPOINTMENTS
Statement by t e Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, announced today
the reappointment to the Commonwealth Grants Commission for a period
of one year of Mr H. J. Goodes, CBE, and Mr W. R. Lane.
Mr Goodes has been a member of the Commission since
1965 and Mr Lane has been a member of the Commission since 1966.
CANBERRA, 28 September 1969 



FOR PR SSS: PM. NO. 74/ 1969
HIGH COURT JUDGMENT ON STAMP DUTY
EXCHANG3 OF CORR ESPONDENC3 BETWEEN PRIME MINISTSR
AND SIR HSNRY BOLTS
Following are texts of the letters exchanged between the P ime Minister, Mr.
John Gorton, and the Premier of Victoria, Sir Henry Bolte, in regard to the High
Court judgment on stamp duty: 2R September, 1969
" The Righ: Honourable John G. Gorton, M. P.,
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth.
Dear Mr. Gorton,
I %; riteto you on behalf of all the State Premiers, who have met
together in Melbourne today to consider the implications of the recent
High Court decision inThe Stat? of NWestern Australia v Hamersley
Iron Pty. Ltd.
W'e have had the benefit of a careful consideration of the judgments
and their implications by our Solicitors-General and Under ' Treasurers
and their advice to us in the light of that considration.
This advice confirms our fears that the terms of the judgments are
such that, if the d-. cision prevails, the lhgislation in all S ates in
relation to stamp duty on receipts must be considered to be beyond
State legislative pov; er, at least in respect of the r eceipt of money for
the sale of goods, In practical terms this places at immediate risk
revenue amounting to some 7C to 73 million dollars in a full year for all
States, and this is at a time when all States are already experiencing
acute budgetary problems.
The S: ate of West-rn Australia is making application to the High
Court of Australia for a certificate granting leave to appeal to the Privy
Council in the I-IHamersley case. It is expected that this application
will be heard in Melbourne on Octo'ver 7th, 19.9, or soon aftervwards. / 2 
2.
The States will all seek to appear on the application to intimate to
the High Court that their support Westem Australia and that, if a
certificate is granted, they will seek leave to intervene in the Privy
Council hearing.
On behalf of all the Premiers I now ask that you should, on behalf
of your Government, authorise the Solicitor-General for WVestern
Australia to intimate to the High Court that the Commonwealth also
supports the application of WVestern Australia.
We have discussed the matter of subsequent action which may be
n'cessary but it "' ould be premature to raise this V: ith you until the
outcome of th application is known. Hovfev r, the Premiers " werc
gratified to know that you v. ould b? pr-parc-i to me-t them at short
notice to discuss the situation.
The immediate problem hovwever is the application to the High Court
and I '' ould be glad to have your decision on the request v'e have put in
the previous paragraph as a matter of urgency. Yours sincerely,
HENRY BOLrE,
Premier and Treasurer.
29th Sptember, 1969
" Dear Sir Henry,
I refer to your letter of 28th September, written on behalf of all the
State Premiers, about the recent High Court decision in the State of
Western Australia v Harmersley Iron Pty. Ltd. The view taken by the
Commonwealth Government in this matter is:-
1. The Commonwealth has abolished appeals from the
High Court to the Privy Council in all Federal matters
except '" inter se" cases.
2. It is therefore still legally possible for the H.. gh Court
to allov, appeal to the Privy Council in " inter se" matters
if it so desires. And the r.: lcent jud'ment of the High
Court in the Stamp Duty case is an " inter se" matter. / 3 
The judgment raises questions of great importance to
the States, and to their Budgets and capacity to raise
taxation. For that reason it also raises matters of great
importance to the Commonwealth.
4. The Commonwealth believes the question should be
settled as quickly as possible so that the Stat. es may
know exactly where they stand and so that discussions
betvween the Commonwealth and the S: ates v'hich will
be necessary if the High Court's judgment prevails
may begin as soon as possible.
Every S. ate Government is seeking leave to appeal, under
the provisions of Section 74 of the Constitution and
because of this, and because of the importance of this
matter to all State Governments and th-Commonwealth,
we agree that it is proper for th.: States to make the
application and wvill a" ait the outcome : ith great
interest. Yours sincerely,
J. G. GORTON
The Hon. Sir Henry Bolte, M. L. A.,
Premier of Victoria.
M LBOURN VIC. O0(' 0
CANBERRA, 29 September 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 75/ 1969
ROYAL VISIT 1970
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
When The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh visit
New Zealand and Australia next year they will be accompanied
for some of the time by The Prince of Wales and The Princess
Anne. Exact dates will be released in due course, but
it is probable that Prince Charles will have to return to the
United Kingdom before the middle of April to resume his studies
at Cambridge.
CANBERRA September 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 76/ 1969
SURVEY OF MUSICAL COMPOSITION IN AUSTRALIA
In Sydney this afternoon, the Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton,
presented the first set of a Survey of Musical Composition in Australia
to the President of the Fellowship of Austral ian Composers ( Miss
Dorothy Dodd). The presentation took place at a reception arranged by
the Advisory Board, Commonwealth Assistance to Australian Composers.
This Survey project was made possible by Commonwealth
funds provided through the Advisory Board, and has also been supported
by the Australasian Performing Right Association. It is the first of a
series of Surveys being arranged by the Advisory Board which will be
sent to major musical and educational organisations and radio networks
overseas to publicise the work of Australian composers. Copies of this
first Survey are being despatched immediately.
The composers represented are John Antill, Nigel
Butterley, Clive Douglas, the late Alfred Hill, George Dreyfus, Robert
Hughes, Richard Meale, Peter Sculthorpe, Felix Werder and the late
Dorian Le Gallienne. Each Survey set comprises an historical review of musical
composition in Australia, a catalogue of Australia's important composers,
their publishers and recordings, the transcript and rec ordings of their
talks, the scores of their works and commercial recordings of their
works. Copies of the printed material are available in English, French
and German.
CANBERRA 2 October 1969 



TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, FOR
CHANNEL 10 NETWORK
Recorded on 24 September for screening on 5 October 1969
Interviewer: Michael Peterson
Q. Prime Minister, what do you see as being the issues which
will win and lose votes on October
PM. I don't know what will win and lose votes but I think the
issues that are important are the questions of the different approaches
to defence by the Labor Party and ourselves defence and foreign affairs,
the responsibility of the suggestions I made to the Australian people-as
to how their general levels of living can be increased and their judgment
as to whether wild irresponsible promises are made or sensible promises
are made.
Q. You speak of foreign affairs, do you see it as being as
important as it was in 1966 Vietnam?
PM. I don't think there will be the same concentration on the
question of Vietnam as there was in 1966. I think the reasons why we
went there were good and the reasons why we are there are good. This
is not something that I would say encompassed the whole of the field of
defence. The real differences as I see them are, for example, that the
Opposition would reduce the size of our army by one-third because they
would abolish National Service training. They would pull out the Navy,
Air Force and Army from our association with Malaya and Singapore.
They would, I think, weaken the ANZUS alliance by arguing in a
pettifogging way about the establishment of bases in Australia for our
joint defence. Matters of this kind, I think, are more important.
Q. You are also completely on the opposite side of the fence
to them with nuclear non-proliferation, aren't you?
PM. Completely. We believe that we should not sign this
treaty until we are assured that other countries have also all signed,
and also that we have proper protection for Australia, something we
can really rely on. I am shorthanding because there are other matters
as to peaceful uses of nuclear energy, inspection of our defence sites
and things of that kind. They would rush in to sign it straight away, and
hope for the best for the future. That I think is the difference.
Q. Still on defence the DLP bases a great deal of thinking
on defence. Are you concerned in any way that the DLP might withdraw
preferences? / 2 
-2
PM. I would be disturbed. It would be a pity from our point
of view if the DLP withdrew their preferences. But we can't tailor our
policies to what any other party wants. I don't quite know how the DLP
could with honour and principle support a party that would immediately
withdraw all troops from Vietnam, that would immediately sign the
Non-Proliferation Treaty, that would immediately withdraw all forces
from Malaya, that would immediately abolish National Service training.
It seems to me that these fly directly in the face of what they would
expect to happen. But this is for them to decide.
Q. But would you expect, though, that their preferences
would all go your way again because of these reasons, because they
might not like your foreign policy but they liked the ALP's a lot less?
PM. I cannot see how it is possible for them not to dislike
the ALP's defence and foreign policies far more than they dislike ours.
Now it is for them to decide what they will do. One of the items in
this field which has never really been worked out is that we have said
that we think we must defend Australia, we must show that we are
prepared to take action ourselves to bring up our own defence forces,
to build them up if we are to expect support from the United States or
the United Kingdom for that matter. There has never been an indication
from the Labor side of the House what their approach to defence would
be, except that they would abolish National Service training and except
that they would do these other things I have mentioned. Whether they
would devote resources to it or not, I don't know and nobody else in
Australia does.
Q. Still on the DLP and how they may or may not support
you on certain things. If, for instance, and I have posed this to
Senator Gair already, they withdrew their preferences and directed
them to the ALP, would this almost put you out of office?
PM. I don't think so, no. But it would make a difference to
I can't tell you the number of seats 6 or 8 seats or something of
that kind.
Q. Do you see the possibility it might be a foolish question
to ask of losing any seats in the House of Representatives this year?
In other words, can you repeat 1966?
PM. Well, I . let me put it this way. It would be a
very great achievement to repeat 1966 because the 1966 vote was the
highest vote that the non-Labor parties have ever received. And since
that time at least four of our seats have been adversely affected by
redistribution. So if we did repeat 1966, we would be doing better
than we did in 1966 and that means we would be doing better than the
all-time record. And I hope we do: / 3 
3-
Q. There are those political commentators who say if you
personally don't repeat 1966, then you have failed to a certain extent.
How do you view those comments?
PM. I would think that was rather absurd. If commentators
are saying that, what they are saying is if somebody doesn't achieve
better than an all-time record, then they have
Q. Can we perhaps go back in time to the time when you
became Prime Minister. The public image that went out at that stage
was of the ex-fighter pilot, one of the boys, etc. The image these
days my image of you is that you are looking considerably more
tired than you were at that time. Are you in fact Is it taking toll of
you physically?
PM. I don't think it's taking toll of me physically oh, I
suppose I wouldn't know. It might be to some extent because I
have travelled all round Australia almost constantly and spoken to
people I don't know how many meetings we have had this year but
something like 80, speaking to people all over the place. But after all
this is a fight and even when one was flying aeroplanes as a fighter
pilot, one occasionally got tired but one kept on fighting and one did it
just as well as ever, and I propose to do it just as well as ever.
Q. Coming to October 25, we've talked a considerable
amount about defence, etc. Is this, I take it, the issue the defence
and foreign policy that you would like to go to the electors on?
PM. This is one of the issues which I think will be of most
importance in the elections. I hope it will be because I think it is of
most importance to Australia. But there are many others as well
questions of development, questions of social welfare and questions of
trying to build a society that lives with the greatest amount of national
unity that is possible.
Q. Do you see this year I was just thinking of State Aid
and it led me to think of the Independents and people standing on the
question of State Aid do you see it as being a year when. maybe an
Independent or two could be returned to Parliament?
PM. I don't believe there will be Independents returned to
Parliament. No. There will be quite a lot of Independents standing
anti-State Aid people and some group called an Australia Party or
something like that. I don't quite know where that springs from but
you could regard them almost as Independents. There are a number
of others but I would doubt very much whether any of them would in
fact get elected. / 4 
-4
Q. On the question of State Aidi do you see any point in
anyone standing on an anti-State Aid ticket, with the thing being a
matter of fact with almost all major parties?
PM. Yes, I see some point in it from their approach. You
see, we as a Government are providing aid to independent schools which
I think is going to be of great assistance not to the schools themselves
but to the individual pupils who are in those schools, and we are
providing it on a different basis from that which is suggested by the
Opposition. We are providing much more than the Opposition.
Q. Would you care to explain the basis for it?
PM. Yes, well. May I go back a little when I explain?
Previously, when we provided capital grants for science blocks, we
divided that money up so that 25 per cent of it went to independent
schools and 75 per cent of it went to State schools, because that was
the ratio of enrolment. And we did the same thing in libraries when
we provided capital grants. Then we looked at the whole field generally
and it became quite clear that the vast amount of public money, the vast
majority of public money that was going to education was going into the
state school system, and that if people were going to go to independent
schools, and they are, then it was essential for Australia that they
should be well taught and that they should have the facilities for education
which they required. So we said, right, we will help the state school
system by providing teacher training, by increasing the amounts we
are providing for teacher training and in other ways. But we will give
a grant per capita to the pupils at independent schools, and not divide
it up. To put the thing in a nutshell, the Opposition is prepared to give
far less assistance to independent schools than we are prepared to give
and at greater cost to the community. So if an anti-State Aid candidate
got a signif icant vote then they could regard that as a vote against the
provision of assistance to independent schools.
Q. Can you also draw the line of distinction for us between
your policy and that of the ALP on health?
PM. Yes, we hope to retain a voluntary health scheme and to
improve the benefits which come from that voluntary health scheme.
Now, at the moment the hospital benefits are really no problem. It's
the medical benefits which need to be improved. The Opposition
proposes to introduce a compulsory scheme and this scheme involves a
levy of I-L per cent, not on the taxation which you pay but on the taxable
income you have, which would work out at about an 8 per cent increase
in your income tax. For that, the Opposition would give you minimum
coverage. And again, to use figures to try and put it in a nutshell, a
single man now, once he earned any more than $ 52 a week, would be
paying more than he is at present for a minimum coverage. But also, 
the Opposition scheme means there would be no tax deduction, and
taking that into consideration, the result is that a single man who earns
more than $ 39 a week would be paying much more under the Opposition
scheme than he is under ours. A married man earning more than $ 63
a week would be paying more for a compulsory scheme giving minimum
assurance than the voluntary scheme we now have. Now we believe the
voluntary scheme can be improved and we don't think it necessary to
put this great impost upon the people which the Opposition proposes to
put on them.
Q. In what areas do you figure the current system can be
improved?
PM. In the areas of paying doctors' bills and particularly
specialist bills and bills for complicated operations.
Q. Still on money matters, it was said after the Budget that
It had inflationary tendencies. This was said by many people including
the Opposition. Can we look forward to any surprises, anything new in
your policy speech to add or subtract from what was drawn up in the
Budget?
PM. Well, I don't think it had any inflationary tendencies
myself because after all it did draw off about $ 500 million as a surplus
internally in Australia. It is fascinating that the Opposition should say
that it has got inflationary tendencies because as far as I can gather
they propose to make available an untold number of additional millions
which can only have great inflationary effect unless, of course, they
greatly increase taxes.
Q. We have talked about defence. We are now on domestic
things. Would you like to see I'm sorry. You have already said
you would like to talk about defence. Would you figure that the ALP
would like to fight this election on domestic issues?
PM. Oh, yes, I think so.
Q. Why is this? For the Australian electorate?
PM. They would like to fight it on domestic issues because
they have such a bad defence policy.
Q. In addition, do you feel that the Australian electors
understand domestic issues more readily than they do foreign policy? / 6 
the Opposition scheme means there would be no tax deduction, and
taking that into consideration, the result is that a single man who earns
more than $ 39 a week would be paying much more under the Opposition
scheme than he is under ours. A married man earning more than $ 63
a week would be paying more for a compulsory scheme giving minimum
assurance than the voluntary scheme we now have. Now we believe the
voluntary scheme can be improved and we don't think it necessary to
put this great impost upon the people which the Opposition proposes to
put on them.
Q. In what areas do you figure the current system can be
improved?
PM. In the areas of paying doctors' bills and particularly
specialist bills and bills for complicated operations.
Q. Still on money matters, it was said after the Budget that
it had inflationary tendencies. This was said by many people including
the Opposition. Can we look forward to any surprises, anything new in
your policy speech to add or subtract from what was drawn up in the
Budget?
PM. Well, I don't think it had any inflationary tendencies
myself because after all it did draw off about $ 500 million as a surplus
internally in Australia. It is fascinating that the Opposition should say
that it has got inflationary tendencies because as far as I can gather
they propose to make available an untold number of additional millions
which can only have great inflationary effect unless, of course, they
greatly increase taxes.
Q. We have talked about defence. We are now on domestic
things. Would you like to I'm sorry. You have already said
you would like to talk about defence. Would you figure that the ALP
would like to fight this election on domestic issues?
PM. Oh, yes, I think so.
Q. Why is this? For the Australian electorate?
PM. They would like to fight it on domestic issues because
they have such a bad defence policy.
Q. In addition, do you feel that the Australian electors
understand domestic issues more readily than they do foreign policy? / 6 
6-
PM. No, I don't. I think the Australian people have an
instinctive feeling and knowledge that we are becoming more&amp;= and more
isolated in the world and therefore we need to build up our own defence
forces, not necessarily to fight some other large country but as an
indication that we are interested in our own defence and that we are
doing something about it and that we are deserving of our Allies to come
to our assistance. I believe they have this instinctive feeling. Labor
policy is to break down our own defences.
The F -ill comes under defence, and in the last couple
of weeks you have made the announcement that we will buy the F -ill
subject to conditions. I don't see that as being anything new if it is
still subject to conditions. Can you perhaps explain that for me?
PM. Yes, because there were a number of factors concerning
the F-Ill1 which were not entirely resolved until the last six or eight
months or so, or even less than that. That is whether the range was
what we wanted or whether the bomb load was what we wanted. Above
all, whether the United States was going to have sufficient aircraft of
this kind flying around for the next period of time so that we could get
our spare parts whenever we wanted them. This was a very significant
factor. The one remaining significant worry, too, was the wing box.
Now, we needed a service life for this aircraft which would carry it
through into the 1980' s. If a wing box wouldn't do that, then some way
had to be found by which either new wing boxes were fitted or new wing
boxes were developed. Now this has been found and there still remains
the testing of these things, but at least we have reached a stage where
we know that when a wing box becomes unserviceable it will be replaced
at no cost to us.
Q. If, to quote an hypothesis, another F-ill crashed between
now and the elections, or one or two, is it delicately enough poised to
do harm to the Liberal Government?
PM. You are asking me to make a political judgment on what
people would think...., but it certainly ought not to be, because the
accident record of this aircraft Is not bad. People think it is but it has
got a better accident record than the Phantom, for example, given the
number of hours it has flown, or the Super Sabre or any other of the
F-100 series aircraft. It is not a dangerous aircraft at all.
Q. You would agree, I assume, that it has had tremendous
publicity and must be something well in the forefront of Australians'
minds? / 7 
&amp; 7
PM. Every time it has had an accident, there has been
tremendous publicity I agree entirely publicity which has never
been directed to any other aircraft as far as I know. I think it would
be well in Australians' minds, but what they have to decide is whether
they think the Australian Air Force ought to have a strike bomber,
whether they think that strike bomber ought to be the best available,
and if they do think that, then they must decide that we should buy the
F-111 because it is the best available strike bomber in the world today.
Q. Prime Minister, briefly, if you wouldn't mind summing
up for us why Australians should vote Liberal on October
PM. I think during the last twenty years under Liberal
Governments, Australia has progressed at a pace at which it has never
progressed before. I think we have shown that we are responsible,
that we are not willing to make wild promises which can't be carried
out, except at the expense of the people themselves. I think that if
you look at Australia today, you will see that there has never been such
a state of full employment, never been such a state of prosperity, never
been such a state of opportunity, and I think it would be difficult for the
Australian people to risk this by going into the wild schemes which are
put forward by the Opposition. Further, I think that the defence of
Australia rests better in our hands than in the hands of the Opposition
and I believe the arguments put forward on both sides show this clearly.
I also feel that sections of the Labor Party not the Labor Party as a
whole are influenced in their attitudes by Communist-dominated
unions affiliated with them and this is completely absent from the
Liberal Party itself. On the record, on the existing situation, on the
programmes put forward for the future, I think the Australian people
should vote Liberal. Prime Minister, thank you. 



EMBAGOEDEMBARGOEDEMAGD
FEDERAL ELECTIONS 1969
POLICY SPEECH
PRESENTED BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON
NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA UNTIL 8 P. M.
WEDNESDAY 8 OCTOBER
EMBARGOED. EMBARGOED 
INTRODUCTION: A little less than twenty years ago the Australian people
dismissed a Labor Government and installed a Liberal/ Country Party
coalition. They were tired of controls, for the sake of controls. They
were dismayed by unemployment and general strikes. They were frightened
of the doctrinaire socialist approach of a Labor Party strongly influenced
by communist unions. They were sick of stagnation.
So they turned to us who believe the individual is the basis
of the state, and that the state will best progress if the individual is given
the greatest possible amount of freedom and of opportunity to take risks
and to reap rewards. Since that time Australia has progressed at a rate before
undreamt of.
In the last ten years alone our exports have doubled.
Our work force has grown from under four to over five
million and they are fully employed.
There has been, and there continues to be, a spectacular
rate of growth due to a high rate of capital inflow, yet
inflation has been kept in check.
A little less than two years ago, I became the Leader of
the Liberal/ Country Party coalition, at a time when Australia was faced
with new problems and changing situations at home and abroad. And I
report to you that, in less than two years, we have done much.
We have decided that even though Britain withdraws from
our North we shall keep ground, sea and air forces there
as a visible expression of our continuing interest in helping
to preserve that region against possible external attack.
For we believe that to meet our needs at home we must
be prepared to accept insofar as our power allows
our responsibilities abroad. We cannot choose one, and
reject the other. We must try to meet both our
responsibilities or we may meet neither.
In 1968/ 69 our economic growth, at 8. 7 per cent at constant
prices, has been greater than at any previous period in
our history.
Last year dwelling construction reached an all-time record
with 138, 000 commencements and 130, 000 completions. / 2
L 
-2
* More migrants were brought to Australia than in any previous
year.
* We have removed the financial fear of those faced with long-term
illnesses in hospitals.
* We have increased the basic rates of all social welfare pensions
by unparalleled amounts.
* We have introduced a tapered means test and provided taxation
concessions as an incentive to saving and to thrift.
* We have provided greatly increased sums for education and
have broken through the cobwebbed barrier which previously
prevented us helping the running costs of independent schools.
* We have made known the terms and conditions which we expect
overseas investors to observe when contemplating new
ventures in the development of Australia.
* We have sought to protect Australian-owned companies from
unfair take-over offers.
* We have established an overseas shipping line so that Australian
produce can begin to be carried in Australian ships and so
that we will know what are fair freights to charge Australian
producers.
* We have added half a billion dollars to funds available for roads
and ensured that much of this money will go to alleviate the
urban traffic problems which have been clogging our cities.
I have given a necessarily brief and incomplete account of
our stewardship over the last twenity months. And I am proud that we have
achieved what we have.
As a result:-
* We find ourselves with the respect of the United States, and of
Britain, for not reneging on our responsibilities to stand
ready to counter the threat of communist expansion through
the use of force.
* At home we enjoy that strong, growing and balanced economy
so vital to the achievement of our national destiny.
But the jobs, the development, the growing material strength
essential as a basis for defence and for social welfare all of these depend
on an economy most delicately balanced, on an economy in which we must
take care that the demand for labour and pressure on resources does
not exceed present pressures. 
3-
For if this happens as a result of irresponsible promises
being made and accepted, then all these things will be in jeopardy.
We cannot get something for nothing.
And the result of the Opposition's promises would be either
a great increase in inflation which will hit the wage earner and the pensioner
most severely or an increase in taxation which would hit all Australians.
In the result we would have gained nothing and paid a great price for it.
You see around you the results of what we have done and
the increasing opportunities for greatness because we have done it or
rather because you have done it under the conditions of Government we
have provided. Do not risk this. Do not put it all in jeopardy turning to an
Opposition which still believes in nationalisation, in direction for direction's
sake, which is strongly influenced in at least one state by communist
influenced unions and which makes promises they cannot keep.
I believe there is too much at stake for Australia to risk
a Labor Government still controlled by non-elected outside bodies a
Government which would make us falter in our steps towards greatness.
I turn now to the specific policies we shall follow if you
re-elect us as a Government.
But, I repeat, we must apply these policies against the
background of that responsible economic management of which I have
spoken and against a background not only of our needs as a Government
but also of the needs of the states as Governments.
Our task is to protect Australians against inflation and
increased burdens of income tax. Our task is to continue immigration,
to continue the inflow of development capital, to continue full employment,
to ensure that we do not try to do more than we have the men and resources
to accomplish. This must and will be overriding. Others may make
glittering and irresponsible promises for which you will, in one way or
another, pay. We will not. / 4 
4-
DEFENCE: Adequate defence is the rock on which national security
stands. Without it, debate on internal matters could be academic. Over
the years ahead we shall maintain and increase our defence capacity.
There are more Australians under arms today than ever
before in our history except in time of major war. They are better equipped
and they have greater mobility.
We shall keep the Army up to at least its present strength
of nine battalions. We shall retain National Service training in order to do
it. For it will no-. otherwise be done.
We shall improve the capacity of theAirForce, in fighter,
reconnaissance, and strike aircraft and shall see that aircraft provided frr
Australians to fight in are the best obtainable in the world.
We shall strengthen the 1Mvy with the types of ship the Navy
advise us that they most require including the new light destroyers and
the fast combat support ships asked for by that Service.
We shall progressively increase the sums spent on defence
in the years ahead, for to do less would weaken our own security and invite
the suspicion of our allies both within the region and without.
We have already announced that Learmonth Airfield, in
Western Australia, is to be upgraded to an operational base on the Indian
Ocean. We believe that broad considerations of Australia's
geo-political position and national development point to the conclusion that
naval support facilities in Western Australia will also be required in the
future. Our fleet numbers will increase and we will have to take an
increasing interest in the Indian Ocean as the British withdraw. Therefore
we have decided that we should begin the planned development of a naval
base at Cockburn Sound in Western Australia.
The first step, as recommended in the study made by our
consultants, is the construction of a causeway linking Garden Island
( Garden Island, Western Australia) to the mainland. We shall at once
proceed to the detailed design of this causeway and will begin construction
next financial year. Thereafter the naval facilities will be progressively
installed over a period. 0 
Our alliance with the United States under the ANZUS Pact
is vital to our defence. It requires that we should be true allies, that we
should be prepared to give, as well as expect to receive, assistance.
Therefore we shall continue to co-operate with the United States in the
construction of bases, for our joint defence. Bases of value to us both,
in Australia. We shall not sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
until we are sure that it is an effective Treaty, that it provides real
protection to its signatories, and that Australia's security in the future Is
not endangered.
VIETNAM: On Vietnam, we believe that we were right to help the
people of South Vietnam resist aggression. And we believe we are right
to continue to do so.
The immorality in the Vietnam War lies in the aggression
of the North against the South. We do not seek the conquest of North
Vietnam, nor domination of North Vietnam.
What we seek is an opportunity for the people of South
Vietnam to choose the kind of government under which they wish to live.
We believe this to be a proper aim, and that to leave Vietnam before
the South Vietnamese people are assured of this right would be a tragedy
in itself and would hold the seeds of future tragedy.
Should there be developments which result in plans for
continuing reduction of United States forces over a period then we would
expect to be phased in to that programme and would see that we are. But
we will not unilaterally withdraw. To do so would be to abandon an
objective to betray our allies, and, I believe, to imperil our future security.
MALAYSIA / SINGAPORE: Australia cannot fail to be affected by what happens in the
nations in the region to our North.
What affects their security can ultimately affect our security.
We will ther-efore adhere to our decision to maintain in the region of
Malaysia/ Singapore forces of all arms and will maintain in Australia a
capacity for swift additional assistance. / 6 
-6-
We willcontinue to support the concept of a regional security
pact in that region in which we will participate.
But we will exert all the influence at our command to prevent
participation by Russia in such an arrangement. We believe that our
security would be threatened by the establishment of any Russian naval
or military bases in that area. We believe that any military alliance or
arrangement between Russia and a country in our region would pose a
threat to ourselves. For we cannot forget Czechoslovakia and Hungary
and other occupied nations, and we believe that Russian communism still
has as its objective the spreading of its system throughout the world. / 7 
-7-
TAXATION REFORM:
I turn now to a subject that is of great concern to the
average man. That is income tax.
In recent years many changes have been made to meet
specific needs. These include increases in wives and dependants'
allowances, deductions for education, larger deductions for life
insurance and so on.
But with rapidly rising incomes the existing taxation
structure needs to be reformed.
The operation of the present progressive rate scale has
shifted a growing proportion of the weight of taxation on to
personal income taxpayers, especially wage and salary earners.
A Iarge number of taxpayers in the lower and middle income groups
with incomes ranging from modest levels up to those earned at
executive, administrative and professional levels are involved.
To correct thi s will be a maj or task of great complexity.
We have and are still studying this problem so that beginning in
the next budget we can bring forward speci fic proposals aimed at
improving the system and correcting the inequities which have
developed. As a responsible government we must proceed within
the limits of what is economically feasible at any given time. But
our aim wi 11 be so to reduce personal income tax, over the three
year period beginning with the next budget, that at the end of that
time we will be providing relief, to lower and middle income
earners, of the order of $ 200 million as compared with the amounts
which would be payabl e by them under the present income tax
structure. / 8 
-8-
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
We shall adopt new specific proposals for National
Development. Because lack of water is one of the greatest limitations
on Australia's growth, we shall set aside $ 100 million
over the next five years, to be spent in co-operation with
the Stat es under t he national water resources development
programme, This money will be available for water
conservation including conservation in small dams for
flood prevention and mitigation and for carrying out
surveys of underground water resources.
We shall, during the next Parliament, take Australia into
the atomic age by beginning the construction of an atomic
plant at Jervis Bay, to generate electricity. We believe
that Australia will make increasing use of atomic power in
the years ahead and that the time for this nation to enter
the atomic age has now arrived.
We will embark on developing the Port of Darwin at a cost
which is estimated, together with ancillary services, at
some $ 16 million.
We shall build the Port Augusta/ Whyalla Railway at an
estimated cost of $ 8 million.
We shall build the Port Pirie/ Adelaide Railway, at an
estimated cost of $ 30 to $ 50 million over two years.
/ 9 
9-
-DUCATI ON:
Our direct assistance to education throughout Australia is
great and growing. We are providing science blocks and libraries for
all schools. We are providing $ 10 million a year for secondary technical
schools. We have allocated $ 10 million a year for state-controlled
teacher training colleges, and we are now engaged in a co-operative
study with State Education Departments into the future needs of
education at the school level and this survey covers both state and
independent schools.
When that survey is completed the States and ourselves will
discuss the assistance we should each provide to promote the ftvrther
development of education in all schools. And the survey will include
the provision of in-service training for Australia's primary and
secondary teachers.
There is also a clear need for more educational research, a
need for greater co-operation and co-ordination of effort in particular
fields, and we shall provide $ 250, 000 a year, beginning in the next
budget for this purpose.
We shall introduce, under the control of the Department of
Labour and National Service, vocational training schemes for married
women and single women who have been restricted by domestic
responsibilities but who have now reached a stage where they may wish
to enter employment. And we shall set up a scheme to give vocational training to
workers displaced by technological change who may need training to
convert their existing skills into skills required for alternate service.
And in recent years the government has greatly supported
scientific activity at all levels.
We now intend a new and significant step.
Vie are an island continent and we need a much greater
knowledge and understanding of the biological and physical
recources in and beneath the sea around us.
We shall therefore establish an Institute of Marine Science
at Townsville. 
10
EDUCATION: PAGE 2
The Institute will have an independent directorate, and
research in the area of the Great Barrier Reef will be one of the first
priorities of the new Institute.
The capital cost is estimated to be of the order of $ 3 million
and we expect that it will become a centre of excellence that will give
Australia the world reputation in marine science which she already
enjoys in the field of astronomy.
SOCIAL WELFARE: I do not believe that there has ever been, in such a concentrated
period, so much done to improve social welfare as has been done by my
government. We promised and we have matched performance to that
promise. We shall continue general improvemait in social welfare as
and when we can responsibly do so, without causing inflation or
increasing tax burden. And we regard increasing the help given to
poor families as of greater importance than abolishing a means test
so pensions can be paid to rich families.
During the next Parliament we shall pay special attention to
the needs of the young family; to the positive rehabilitation of the
handicapped and invalid so that they may return to normal life; to a
more fruitful partnership with voluntary bodies, including both church
and lay bodies, who serve the old, the sick, and the needy.
We shall pay pensions at standard rates instead of at married
rates to aged couples who lose the economics of living together by
reason of failing health for example if one or both of them is in a
nursing home. We shall give capital assistance on a 2 for 1 basis to approved
institutions which give training for the various kinds of handicapped
children the blind, the deaf, the spastic, the crippled and the mentally
retarded. / 11 
11
SOCIAL WELFARE: PAGE 2
The results already achieved through the aged persons
homes and sheltered workshops encourages us to expand our policy
of partnership with voluntary bodies.
The Meals on % ieels organisation is one of the worthiest
such bodies in the community. In the next budget we will make
available to each separate organisation in the Meals on Wheels
organisation a $ 1 subsidy for every 10 meals served in the past year,
such money to be used for the expansion of their activities, or to be
donated to another Meals on Wheels organisation of their choice.
HEALTH: In health, the removal of financial hardship arising from
illness has had a high priority with us. Today we not only describe
our objectives, we can point to our achievements:
Full hospital benefits for hospital patients who are
chronically ill;
Supplementary nursin-i home benefits for patients needing
and receiving intensive nursing care;
Special benefits for handicapped children under 16;
Medical and hospital benefits, without payment of
contribution, for persons receiving unemployment or
sickness benefit, or for families with incomes below $ 39
a week and for migrants during their first two months in
Australia; Special financial assistance to the States for the development
of co-ordinated programmes cf home care to strengthen home
nursing and home care services, particularly for the frail
aged. All this has been done. It has gone far to eliminate financial
hardship for people with special needs. Only one problem of any
significant size remains in relation to people with lengthy illnesses.
Some people after paying health insurance contributions for many years
find that they are obliged to spend long periods under intensive care in
/ 12 
12
HEALTH: PAGE 2
nursing homes as distinct from hospitals.
We shall negotiate with the health insurance funds to arrange
for the payment of increased benefits, properly related to reasonable
nursing home fees, for persons who have been regular contributors
to health insurance funds and who need intensive nursin-1 home care.
At the same time we have been moving to bring in improvements
in the Nhtional Health Scheme so that it will operate more efficiently,
more economically and more satisfctorily for the community as a
whole. Vie have the Nimmo Committee Report which defines the areas
where reforms are needed for example, more economical management
by some of the health funds and a reasonable, orderly policy in the
alloc-ation of reserves. We shall attack and overcome these problems
and will bring about the reforms that are necessary.
WY,-e are well advanced in negotiations with the medical
profe ssion and the health insurance funds so that all patients will be
assured of medical benefits more closely related to doctors' charges.
Commonwealth medical benefits and fund benefits will be
increa Fred so that the difference between the benefit entitl ements and
the common fee charged by doctors will not at any time exceed
even for the most complicated and costly surgical procedures. For
simpler procedures which are less expensive, the difference between
the benefits and doctors' common fees will be very much less.
This is estimated to cost the Commonwealth some $ 16 million.
The successful introduction of these proposals will mean that no
section of the community which is prepared to insure itself need
flear hardship from the cost of medical services. 
13-
HOUSING: The Home Savings Grant Scheme has already benefited
some 153,000 young couples.
Hitherto the grant was only payable if the value of the home,
including land, did not exceed $ 15, 000.
We shall increase this limit and the grant will now be
payable for houses which, including the cost of land, do not exceed
in value $ 17,500.
This amendment will apply to people who contract to buy
or build their houses on or after Monday 27 October 1969. 
14
IMMIGRATION The factor which prevents Australia doing all that we, and the
State Governments, wish to do is not primarily lack of money or indeed
pressure on materials. It is that we do not have all the manpower we need.
Bringing increasing numbers of migrants to this country, and
providing conditions which induce them to stay here, and to become
Australians, is therefore one of our fundamental tasks.
280,000 settlers have come to Australia since I took office in
January 1968 and in this last year a record 175, 600 arrived.
We shall in the next three years intensify our efforts in this
field. And, internally, we shall take new initiatives.
Because of the importance of the English language to migrants
the Commonwealth, recognising its obligations, is prepared to take the
initiative in promoting, and to accept responsibility for financing:
1. The expansion of existing facilities for the instruction
of adult migrants;
2. The provision of intensive full-time English language
courses for those who must know English in order to
follow occupations for which they have been trained;
3. And, special classes in existing schools for migrant
children of all ages to ensure that they achieve the
education to which their intelligence and natural skills
entitle them.
Further, within our community there are people in need and
unaware of information which could relieve them from worries they need
not endure. Their own knowledge of the range of benefits, services and
assistance available to them is inadequate and we will propose to the States
that grants be made through the municipal authorities to subsidise the
employm ent of suitably experienced people who might provide the
information and the guidance which these migrants need. 
15
ARTS We believe a nation not only expresses itself through its
material achievements, but also through its participation in, and its
development of, the arts.
The late Prime Minister established the Australian Council for
the Arts and this year we increased by 70 per cent the money available to
foster the development of music, ballet and theatre, in Australia. We
established an Interim Council to inv stigat and report on the establishment
of a National Film and Television Training School.
We believe that it is time Australia developed its own film
industry and we shall, in our next period of government, establish an
Australian Film and Television Development Corporation to administer a
film and television fund which will invest in, and make loans to, film and
television producers for the making of quality films and programmes in
Australia with a significant Australian content, and otherwise to encourage
the production and distribution overseas of A ustralian-made films of high
quality. An amount of $ 1 million will be provided as the initial capital
for the Corporation and supplementary grants will be provided during the
early years of its operation so that the Corporation will have available, at
the beginning of each financial year, one million dollars and amounts
repaid from its investments or advances will be retained by the Corporation
for further development. / 16 
16-
TRADE: Australia has begun to emerge as an industrial nation. More
and more we look to the continued healthy growth of our manufacturing
industries for our strength and our security.
The Government believes it is essential to ensure that its
policies adequately reflect the important role manufacturing industry plays
in the nation's economy.
Industry cannot be expected to achieve the full development of
its efficiencies and skills alone. In today's world, industry needs the
support of effective government policies.
In the life of the next Parliament, we will re-examine present
government activities and policies in this important area with a view to
strengthening the Gov ernm ent's programme of assistance to Australian
industrial creativity and efficiency.
But the development of manufacturing industry ultimately
depends on the protection given to industry in the Australian market against
import competition. Australia must have continued industrial growth to create each
year the new jobs required to sustain a growing population and a dynamic
immigration programme. The Government regards its tariff policy as a vital
factor in providing a firm basis for this industrial growth. The traditional
policy that reasonable and adequate protection should be given to economic
and efficient Australian industries has served this country well and will not
be changed. The Government retains full responsibility for Australian tariff
policy. The Government recognises that in cases involving relatively high
protection the benefits have to be weighed very carefu'jy against the possible
effects on other industries and the community generally. But, the Government
does not accept any pre-determined upper limit to the level of protection
which might be accorded. The decision in each case must be determined
by the Government and by the Government alone in the light of all
circumstances of any particular case. / 17 
-17
PRIMARY INDUSTRY: The Department of Primary Industry which will issue a
supplementary statement is continuing its intensive study of the long-term
problems of rural industries.
The Government has recently had before it special reports on
these questions and in the recent budget speech announced a number of
measures to assist primary producers.
The policy of providing compensation in the case of primary
industries that suffered from British devaluation, in cases where loss is
unavoidable and demonstrable, will be continued in 1970 on the same basis
as it was in this year.
The A pple and Pear Industry has submitted a proposal for a
stabilization scheme; and the Government will give full consideration to
these plans.
SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT:
In the past, the Commonwealth Government has encouraged
several forward-looking transport policies, for example railway standardisation,
the development of beef cattle roads, and container shipping. It will continue
to implement measure s which will lead to the reduction of internal transport
costs. The-problem of traffic cong: estion in the citie-s is on-2 of great
urgency. We have made a significant contribution to easing that congestion
problem through our allocations for urban art-: erial and sub-arterial roads.
But there is a great deal more to be done, espe cially in improving public
transport systams. The populations of the major cities ar. e growing so that by 1981,
Sydney could have C-population of 3.3 million, and M-elbourna 3. 1 million
and with this prospect, it is vital that public transport service2s do not decline.
/ 18 
18
SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT Page 2
We will direct attention to this and to shipping and to port
problems. In recent years the shipping industry has undergone major
changes the introduction of roll-on roll-off ships, specialised bulk
carriers and container ships. It is important that the trends towards more
modem ships should be continued because it means lower freights.
The changes in shipping technology have in many cases made
existing port facilities obsolete. There is therefore an urgent need for an
extensive study of port needs and for putting work in hand which will provide
what we need over the next ten years.
We shall do this and we shall set up a Bureau of Transport
Economics, to analyse the costs and economics of transport in Australia,
and, in co-operation with the States, where necessary, will seek to take
measures to reduce such costs. / 19 
19
On October 25 you will make your choice.
You will choose which defence policy you prefer,
You will choose which foreign affairs approach you prefer.
You will decide whether to continue with that responsible
economic management which has brought us such prosperity, growth and
employment opportunity or whether to accept irresponsible promises for
which you will, in one way or another, pay,
You will choose between growth with stability and our opponents
proposals designed to bring inflation.
You will decide whether our record on social welfare and health
is such that you believe we will make further advances as soon as possible.
You will choose between our proposals to lighten income tax
on the family man and proposals which must prevent such a lightening
and are likely to lead to an increase.
The future is in your hands.
I ask you to consider your choice very carefully.
For Australia's sake I ask you not to put all our present
achievements at risk not to put all the great possibilities for the future
and present at risk.
For Australia's sake I ask you to support the Government on
October 
19
On October 25 you will make your choice.
You will choose which defence policy you prefer,
You will choose which foreign affairs approach you prefer.
You will decide whether to continue with that responsible
economic management which has brought us such prosperity, growth and
employment opportunity or whether to accept irresponsible promises for
which you will, in one way or another, pay.
You will choose between growth with stability and our opponents
proposals designed to bring inflation.
You will decide whether our record on social welfare and health
is such that you believe we will make further advances as soon as possible.
You will choose between our proposals to lighten income tax
on the family man and proposals which must prevent such a lightening
and are likely to lead to an increase.
The future is in your hands.
I ask you to consider your choice very carefully.
For Australia's sake I ask you not to put all our present
achievements at risk not to put all the great possibilities for the future
and present at risk.
For Australia's sake I ask you to support the Government on
October 



ABORIGINAL POLICY
In-May, 1967, as a result of the Referendum, the Commonwealth
received a new responsibility for Aborigines. During the lifetime of the
last Parliament we have fashioned a policy to meet that responsibility. In
the next Parliament we intend to develop it still further.
My predecessor, the late Harold Holt, first set up the Council
for Aboriginal Affairs, and I took the next step by appointing a Minister-in-
Charge within my own Department.
Our basic aim is to give our Aboriginals the opportunity to be
self-supporting, and to end the " mentality of the hand-out". We want them
to choose for themselves their own future, and to regain their initiative and
independence. Not all will make the same choice, since their various
circumstances are so very different.
The constitutional powers of the Commonwealth in this field are
not exclusive, but we share with the States. It is not our intention to usurp
State functions, particularly because we believe that decentralisation and
regional administration will be in the interests of the Aborigines themselves.
Our grants to the States last year for A boriginal advancement were
5 million: this year they will be 4 million. These grants are used for
the purposes of housing, education, health and employment.
We have sponsored training schemes, education schemes and
schemes of regional development. Through our Aboriginal Enterprises
Capital Fund, we are making it possible for Aboriginals to own their own
businesses, whether on an individual or a group basis.
We believe that Aboriginals should be able to retain features of
their own culture where they so choose. The work of the A ustralian Institute
of Aboriginal Studies, which was set up by us, will help here. We are
encouraging Aboriginal handicrafts and arts. We aim to create a higher
degre., of mutual respect between Aboriginal Australians and other
Australians. We gratefully acknowledge that, towards these ends, there is a
great deal of work being done by non-Governmental organisations, including
both Church bodies and lay bodies. We aim to utilise the great reservoir
of goodwill towards the A botiginals which exists throughout the community. 
ABORIGINAL POLICY Page 2
Our plans for the next phase are as follows:
1 Regional schemes such as we have worked out in
collaboration with the A boriginals themselves for
Prnhem Land will be followed both in the Northern
Territory and in conjunction with State administrations.
2. Increased allocations will be made for Aboriginal
housing in both the States and the Northern Territory:
in addition we shall be encouraging Aborigines to make
use of our Aged Persons Homes programme and of finance
through co-operative building societies.
3. Where a State has land for Aboriginals, we will provide
through our Capital Fund the resources to develop it for
Aboriginal advancement and under Aboriginal ownership.
4. We intend to involve Aboriginal communities in their own
local government and in the maintenance of law and order
among themselves to the greatest possible extent.
We shall continue and expand our programmes for
Aboriginal health and education, with the aim of ensuring
to them, in practice as well as in theory, all the
advantages enjoyed by other Australians.
6. In recent years, most discriminatory legislation against
Aboriginals has been abolished. We intend to see that this
process is completed in the life of the next Parliament upon
both State and Federal levels.
7. Our policies of research into all aspects of Aboriginal
welfare will be continued. We shall continue to fost. r
Aboriginal culture and to give them a chance to participate
in sport. We shall press on with our programme of
helping other Australians to appreciate both the value
of their culture and the problems which face them.
We do not intend to take the easy way of deciding everything for
the aboriginals, and telling them what they are to do and what they are to be.
Instead, we will take the slower and better way of consulting them, and
working out plans in accordance with their real wishes. 
PRIMARY INDUSTRY
Following its established and proven policy of consultation and
negotiation with the primary industries, the Government has continued and
will continue to introduce measures designed to stabilise and strengthen
these important industries and thereby to strengthen the economies of the
countries, towns and cities which depend on them.
The Government is well aware of the cost pressures which national
policies of rapid growth and development have brought to bear on the primary
industries and has constantly sought to devis e new measures to offset these
pressures. Coupled with low and in some cases, declining prices on overseas
markets, these pressures have caused considerable difficulty for many
primary industries. In addition to the many established methods of offsetting these
special difficulties such as production subsidies, stabilisation schemes,
bounties on fertilizers, equalisation of petrol prices, tax concessions,
building of beef roads and establishment of water conservation projects, the
Government has recently introduced significant new measur-s designed to
further lighten the cost burden falling on primary producers.
One of the most important of these is in the area of estate duty
where for the first time the Commonw calth has moved to give special
concessions on the estates of primary producers by raising the existing
statutory exemption by 20% and in addition reducing the amount of estate
duty payable in proportion to that part of the duty attributable to the value of
real assets such as land, livestock, plant and machinery.
Further measures introduced in the recent Budget included
increases in both the superphosphate and nitrogenous fertilizer bounties
bringing the cost of these bounties up to $ 65 million a year. Tax concessions
for primary producers have been extended to allow the cost of all structural
improvements for conserving water or fodder to be deductible in full for tax
purposes in the year in which the expenditure is incurred. This measure is
seen as a very strong incentive to farmers to conserve more water and fodder
on their own properties so they can better cope with the droughts which are
a feature of Australia's weather pattern. For direct relief of drought effects
the Commonwealth over the last four years has provided by way of grants
and loans a total of $ 119 million.
Australia's biggest foreign exchange earner, the wool industry,
is on the threshold of big and important development. The Government,
again to help wool growers to meet their cost problems, has offered to almost
double its contribution towards research and promotion while halving the cost
to growers. This would mean that the Government, if this offer is accepted
by the industry, would provide up to $ 27 million a year for research and
promotion. 
PRIMARY INDUSTRY Page 2
The wool industry also is now examining the Government's
offer of finance for the industry's new marketing proposals. These
proposals came forward from the Australian Wool Industry Conference and
the Government, after careful examination made certain changes in the
proposals and offered up to $ 7.3 million a year to assist in their
implementation $ 1.2 million more than the assessed cost of the original
proposals. The Government's offer has been formally conveyed to
representatives of the A. W. I. C. for consideration and the conference will
have the assistance of the cost/ benefit analysis now being revised by the
Australian Wool Board in coming to a decision. The Government believes
its offer, if accepted by the industry, will be a means of helping the
industry to take a vital first step in the modernisation of the wool industry,
without interfering with its traditional and well proved method of selling
through the auction system.
With the wheat industry facing serious difficulties because of
very hard production and diminishing world markets, the Government has
responded to the industry's request for help in introducing a delivery quotas
scheme to bring production and markets more into balance. The Government
agreed to the industry's request to guarantee finance totalling $ 440 million
to allow a first advance of 10 to be paid on all quota wheat this season.
Recently, the Government arranged with the A ustralian Wheat
Board for an additional 60 million bushel of storage space to be provided
so that all wheat produced this season can be taken into storage by the
middle of next year. Last year the industry's stabilisation plan was
renewed for a further five years. Under the plan, the protective cover over
the industry has been increased by extending the guaranteed export price to
200 million bushel'-of wheat, compared with the 150 million bushel,
previously. The plan also fixes prices for wheat consumed in Australia and
these are subject to annual variation as a result of movements in certain costs.
The Government has entered into strenuous negotiation to ensure
that Australia's access to the United States Meat Market is maintained and
if possible increased. These negotiations led to a worthwhile increase in
the quantity of meat entering that market from Australia although Australia's
share of the total market declined. The Government has provided at a cost
of more than $ 5 million a year an export inspection service to ensure that all
meat leaving A ustralia meets the highest standard of quality demanded by
overseas consumers. This service has helped Australia keep markets it
could otherwise have lost. Support to the Dairy Industry has continued, this
year including substantial compensation for losses resulting from Britain's
devaluation of her currency two years ago. Total devaluation compensation
paid or committed to all Australian primary export industries has now
reached approximately $ 86 million. 
PRIMARY INDUSTRY Page 3
The Government has actively assisted the sugar industry
by taking a leading part in the negotiation which produced the new
International Sugar greement and by entering into a new domestic
agreement with the Queensland Government on the domestic pricing
arrangements for sugar. In addition the Government has made loans
totalling about $ 24 million to the industry to assist it in recent periods of
difficulty. These are examples of the many ways in which the Government
is continually working to ensure the stability of Australia's primary
industries. One which has attracted a great deal of attention is the rapidly
developing fishing industry in which the Government has taken a number of
steps such as the claiming of an exclusive 12 miles fishing zone for
Australian fishermen; the establishment of Navy and Air Force patrols to
police the zone; the enactment of laws . o give Australia control of the
living marine resources of the Great Barrier Reef; the conclusion of an
agreement with Japan, providing for the phasing out of all Japanese
fishing operations within the 12-mile zone and the closing of Australian
ports to foreign fishing vessels. The Government has acted to assist a
number of other primary industries in a variety of ways and is currently
examining the problems of others in an effort to find ways cf helping the
industries concerned to overcome these problems. 
PRIME MINISTER'S POLICY SPEECH 1969
Supplementary Statement on Health
Commonwealth medical benefits and fund benefits will be
increased so that the difference between the benefit entitlements and fees
most commonly charged by doctors will not exceed $ 5 even for the most
complicated and costly surgical procedures. For simpler procedures,
which are less expensive, the difference between the benefits and doctors'
common fees will be very much less.
At the same time, we firmly believe that the patient should
carry a personal responsibility for a portion of the cost of medical services
he receives. Significant reductions in the proportion of the medical
charge that will be met by the patient will be achieved by making substantial
increases in both Commonwealth medical benefits and fund benefits. For
our part we are proposing an overall increase of 30 per cent in
Commonwealth medical benefits at a cost of $ 16 million a year.
The health insurance funds will also increase their fund
benefits and to do so small increases in the rates of contributions will be
necessary. In most States these increases will not exceed 5 cents a week
for a single person and 10 cents a week for a family contributor to the
highest table available. In N. S. W. where doctors' charges are higher
than in other States, an increase of 7 cents per single contributor and
cents a week respectively for family contributors will be necessary. In
order to simplify the scheme and to ensure an adequate coverage for
contributors only one medical table will be available in each State when
the new arrangement commences.
The increased benefits will be applied selectively so that
the biggest increases will be made for the high cost services where the
need is greatest. We are confident that contributors will willingly accept
the small increase in contribution rates in the knowledge that it will bring
them a far better medical benefits coverage than they have ever had before.
We are aiming at the following margin between total benefit
entitlements and doctors' common fees:-
General Practitioner Services
Surgery consultations 80 cents
Home visits
Other services graduated up to
For the more costly services the margin of $ 5 to be met by
the patient will be as low as 2 per cent or 3 per cent of the cost of the service. 



EMBARGO: 7. 15 p. m. 10 October RADIO TALK NO. 1
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
OVER ABC NETWORK ON FRIDAY 10 OCTOBER
Proper defence is the foundation on which any nation'ss
security is built. If we are to run our own affairs in our own Australian way
if we are in the future to be subjected neither to attack nor the threat of
attack then defence is essential. It is the more essential to us now we
are becoming increasingly isolated, and the adequate defence of Australia
demands two approaches. One is that we should build up, over the years ahead, our
own defence forces; that we should have a standing Army of at least its
present size backed by a modern C. M. F. that our Navy should grow;
that our Air Force should have the best aircraft obtainable; that, in short,
we should look to our own efforts for our own defence.
The second is that we should retain and strengthen the
alliances we have; that we should play our part in such alliances,
particularly with the United States, and should be prepared to give, as
well as expect to receive, help.
You know that we, of the Liberal Party coalition, will
maintain and strengthen our own forces. But you have been told by the
Opposition that they will not. They have undertaken to abolish National
Service training, thereby reducing our Army by a third.
They have undertaken not to acquire the F 111 strike
aircraft, even though the Air Force advice is that Australia needs this
aircraft and that it is the best strike aircraft in the world today.
They have undertaken to equip the Navy not with what the
Navy wants but with a few patrol boats only.
So under Labor, our own defences would deteriorate just
when they should be improving. This is bad enough but even more
disastrous would be the effect of Labor's policies on our alliances. o. / 2 
-2-
They propose to withdraw at once from Vietnam unilaterally,
just at the time when President Nixon is calling for steadfastness, so that
the enemy will negotiate a peace giving the South Vietnamese a choice of
government. I can think of nothing more calculated to damage our standing
or to drive America into isolationism.
They propose to withdraw all our forces from Malaysia/
Singapore and, in practice, to wash our hands of helping in the military
defence of the region to our North. Again, there could be nothing more
calculated to deter Britain and the United States coming to the help of that
region, the destiny of which affects our destiny, in case of attack.
They propose to quibble and cavil and renegotiate the question
of defence bases in Australia, even though these bases are for common
defence, to help our defence, as well as that of the United States.
So their proposals boil down to reducing and rendering
less effective our own defence forces and to taking international action
which will weaken ANZUS, strengthen isolationism in the United States,
deter Britain from helping Malaysia/ Singapore and damage severely our
own standing. We will do none of these things. The Labor Party undertakes
to do them all. This is perhaps the greatest issue for you to decide on
October I hope and believe that for our nation's future security you
will decide our policies are best for Australia and for Australia's future.
Note: This talk will be broadcast by the ABC National Network at
7. 15 p. m. ( EST). 


EMBARGO: 10 p. m. Sunday 12 October 19691969 FEDERAL ELECTIONTELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIMEMINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, FOR" KEVIN SANDERS REPORTS" 12 OCTOBER 1969Q. Mr. Prime Minister, judging from the tempo and thepace of the campaign to date, it would seem that the Governmentexpects this to be a tougher fight than the 1966 election. Do youexpect it to be a tougher fight?PM. I don't think the tempo and pace of the campaign areany harder and tougher than the 1966 campaign was, so since thetempo is approximately the same, let us hope, as I hope, that theresults will be the same.Q. There has been already some fairly sharp verbalexchanges between yourself and the Leader of the Opposition.PM. Yes, I gather that is thought to be the case, althoughwhen I used the word " meretricious", I was seeking to describe thespeech rather than the man.Q. Well, isn't it true that the Labor Party has emergedfrom its last Federal Conference with at least an appearance ofgreater unity, led by a new Leader with a new image, articulatingnew policies? Doesn't this represent a greater challenge to theGovernment than say the 1966 Labor Party?PM. I am glad you used the words " appearance of unity",because, of course, there is not even appearance of unity as far as Ican tell on the significant matters of defence and foreign affairs.There is an appearance of unity in other fields, although thatappearance is getting a little dented at the moment with the AWU inNew South Wales falling under Left Wing control and making peoplewonder whether the New South Wales outside body which dictates tothe Labor Party might not become as powerful as the VictorianExecutive.Q. But rightly or wrongly, don't you think more votersfeel more confident about the Labor Party now than they did in 1966?PM. I will tell you on October 26: .9./ 2
2-Q. Well, on one issue on which you and the Labor Partyare very distinctly divided on Vietnam isn't it the case that theLabor Party's policy which is " out of Vietnam by the middle of nextyear'" now reflects the public feeling in Australia as reflected byPublic Opinion Polls, whereas your policy to remain there is inopposition to what most people in Australia feel?PM. On Public Opinion Polls and on the feelings that mostAustralians would have, I would agree that most Australians wouldlike to have the Vietnam war finished. But I don't think that they wouldlike us to betray our allies and in fact surrender and not seek to ensurethat a proper and just peace was negotiated and that the South Vietnamesepeople had a right of choice. Now there is a difference betweenwishing that a proper peace could be achieved and wishing thattherebyAustralians would not have to fight there is a differencebetween that and between saying, " Well, whether a peace is achievedor not, whether our allies are still engaged or not, whether ourobjectives have been attained or not, we are going to just unilaterallywithdraw our forces". There is a difference, I think.Q. Well, on the subject of Vietnam, while the LaborParty's policy is quite explicit in regard to the middle of next year,the Government's policy, it seems, is not quite as explicit. Iwonder if I could ask you is there some sort of time scale, howeverbroad, for an Australian withdrawal?PM. No, there isn't. We would like there isn't witha qualification which I will put in later. We believe that the objectivesof the South Vietnamese and of the United States and of Australiabecause we think it is of interest to Australia should be attained andwe think that that objective is there should be negotiations which leadto the people of South Vietnam having a chance to choose theirgovernment free of terrorism and free of attack. This is what we wouldlike to see happen. Now if there should be a withdrawal of.. acontinuing plan for withdrawal of United States troops and I don'tbelieve there is, but if there should be then we would certainlyrequire to be phased in to that withdrawal and not stay there until thef inish.Q. You couldn't suggest any point at any Americanwithdrawal where Australia would withdraw?PM. Not at this stage, no. Not at this stage. But we wouldexpect to be phased in with a withdrawal and not to be left thereamongst the last. / 3
3-Q. On another issue on which the Government and theOpposiion-are ver-y sharply divided, is this very complex questionof rival -heeit-h schemes. Now it could be, I think, conceded that theLabor Party has come forward with, if not a winner, at least a muchbetter framed policy than it has had in the past and it has put itforward fairly explicitly, very clearly and it could be attractive.Now I know the big pro~ blem, of course, is costing. Without goinginto too many details about the costing, what is it about theGovernment's health policy which you would suggest would make itmore attractive than the Labor policy?PM. Well, in the first place, I believe that it will becheaper. The Labor Party's requirements are for a 14 per centlevy, not on tax paid, but a 141 per cent levy on a person's taxableincome. This is the base from which they s tart with a limit of$ 100. Now, this is going to cost any single person who is earningmore than $ 40 a week, it is going to cost them more than they areat present paying. And it is going to cost married people earning$ 63 a week more than they are at present paying, so it is going to bemore costly fcr the contributor. Secondly, you say it is very explicit.I am not sure that it is. It covers people to public ward standards.People might well have a preference to be able to cover themselvesto intermediate standards or private ward standards if they areprepared to pay a little more. As I read the alleged health planof the Opposition, it is intended to pay 85 per cent of doctors' fees.We are seeking to reach a stage, and we will, where the most thatanybody would have to pay for doctors' fees would be And in thecase of a costly operation or something of that kind, this would meanthat the patient would have to pay only one or two per cent of his fees.And, of course, the contributor would have the right of choice underour scheme. He wouldn't have to depend on a Government Department.He would be able to choose the Fund to which he wishes to go and fromwhich he thinks he will get best service.Q. But if the Labor Party scheme is going to cost more,isn't it also offering more overall, to more people?PM. I don't believe it is. I can't see how it is offering moreoverall. It is offering 85 per cent of doctors' fees to be paid andaccommodation in hospitals up to public ward standard. Now it isgoing to cost the contributor more to get that than it is costing himnow, or will cost him to get what we are providing, and he will bemade to pay, and he will be made to pay to a Government Department.Q. Another linked issue which is also a subject of divisionbetween the Government and the Opposition is Labor's proposal for anational insurance scheme. Now isn't it true that this scheme wasoriginally proposed by Sir Robert Menzies, very vigorously? a../ 4
4-PM. Yes it is. How long ago Twenty-three...twenty-four years ago, since when very close studies have shown thatit is virtually unworkable and not in the interests of the ordinary person.It is very interesting that the Labor Party are proposing this schemeof national insurance, but not putting any proposals before the peopleat all as to what it would cost them. There has only been one costingof this that I know of, and it was done by a professor, arid originallythe Labor scheme was said to be based on that. That would require$ 1300 million a year in contributions, a 6 per cent levy on payrolltax and an increase of a number of dollars a week on people earningincomes of up to $ 90 a week. Of course, a self-employed man wouldhave to pay both. Now it is interesting that this has been dropped atleast for the purposes of argument during this election.Q. Isn't it true that despite the complex problems of costingwhich understandably could go over the heads of many voters, perhapsit is only an economist who could really grasp these very complicatedissues, that the proposal for a national insurance scheme could bevery attractive to many voters?PM. It could be attractive to a number of voters but would itbe attractive to people who are at present in superannuation schemesand taking care of their future needs, particularly since we havebrought in a tapered means test which allows such people to getpensions until they are receiving $ 80 a week? Would it be attractiveto a self-employed man who would have this money taken from himinstead of being allowed to invest it in insurance, if he wished to orsome other means of caring for himself? Would it be really of suchattraction to a worker to have to pay $ 3 or $ 4 a week more, in effect,in tax, taken from him compulsorily. I doubt if it would. And becauseI think it wouldn't, I think that is why the L-abor Party aren't costingit for the Australian public.Q. Your continuing criticism of most of the Labor proposalsin this election has been the rhetorical question: All right, wheredoes the money co~ me from? Couldn't Mr. Whitlam reply equallyrhetorically: The money would come from the same place as themoney to finance the, in many cases, quite expensive promisesthat you have offered in your campaign speech?PM. No, I don't think the promises that we have offered inour campaign speech come within cooee of the promises that Mr.Whitlam has made in his campaign speech. Nor do I think you couldjustify the suggestion that they did. Would you care to try?Q. Well, it is going to cost the Australian Governmentmore than had been budgeted for in the last Budget to implement theschemes that you have promoted in the Policy Speech, isn't it, Sir?Taxation...... 0.
PM. In the next Budgets, yes.Q. $ 200 million, for example, in tax reliefPM. $ 200 million at the end of three years in tax relief;$ 16 million from the Commonwealth on our health proposals asregards to doctors; $ 100 million over six or seven years for atomicplantQ. These are substantial amounts, aren't they?PM. But nothing like the $ 800-odd million a year which theLabor proposals which can be costed propose..Q. They challenge this costing, of course.PM. Well, they can challenge it, but I can sustain that, andthat costing leaves out of account their proposals for a nationalinsurance scheme for which they give no cost at all but which theprofessor suggested would be $ 1300 million a year. There is no.costing for an unspecified grant for education. There is no costing for anunspecified amount provided to buy land around cities. I am justtalking of the things that have actually been specifically said and canbe specifically costed.Q. If we can move out of this complicated field of costingand economics, Sir, and on to a probably equally complex subject offoreign affairs. Now in your policy statement you seemed to ignorecompletely the tone and emphasis in the now famous August 14statement by External Affairs Minister, Mr. Freeth, and shift backto a hard anti-communist line in regard to a Soviet presence in theIndian Ocean. Do you concede that this can be interpreted as aback-down under DLP threat?PM. Yes, I think it could be interpreted that way but it isn'tthat way, and I think the only reason it could be interpreted that waywas because Mr. Freeth's original statement was misinterpreted. Henever, for one moment, suggested that we might have a militaryalliance with Russia, or that we would like to see Russian bases inour North, or that we would like to see a Russian military alliancewith the countries in our North. Never for one second did he suggestit, and therefore whatever interpretation may be placed upon whatI have said, I think it is due to a misinterpretation of what Mr.Freeth said.Q. Would you concede that in your policy statement,however, you did ignore the subtle and sophisticated diplomatictone of Mr. Freeth's earlier statement? / 6
N. -6-PM. Well, I don'tknow wlieV= a it was a subtle andsophisticated dip lmtic Wile. Jx seemed to me to be a statementwhich wartskel put of context and completely blown up and completelymisinterpreted.Q. We will come to the Liberal Party itself now, Sir.There have in the twenty months or so that you have been in officebeen some strains in Cabinet, between the back bench and Cabinetand between yourself and other members of the Party, insideParliament and outside. Do you think these strains and problems arelikely to damage the vote for the Government in the coming election?PM. I wouldn't think so and I can't recall strains in Cabinet.I can only recall newspaper people reporting that there were strainsin Cabinet, alleged strains between Mr. Hasluck and myself, whichnever existed, or between Mr. Fairhall and myself which neverexisted. But there have been new proposals put forward, new thoughtssuggested, suggestions of examining what previously were taken asdogmas and this has, in the Branches of the Liberal Party which isexamining these things, caused what I think is a very satisfactorydialogue, a very useful dialogue of examination of the pros and consof something which previously were taken to be sacred cows. Ithink this is good rather than bad.Q. Has this also caused some tension, though?PM. I don't know that it has caused tension. It has causeddialogue and discussion, and in some extreme cases, perhaps, itmight have caused some tension but that would be from theultra cons ervat ive.Q. You referred to some of the reports, and there havebeen widespread reports of conflict in Cabinet, and you have deniedthese reports, but the fact that there has been such widespreadreporting of conflict within the Liberal Party, could this reporting initself have created an impression in the public mind that there isdisunity in the Liberal Party which could react againstPM. It might have because people don't know. They onlyread what they read in the papers and they assume it is true, but soit might have had that effect but if it did, thern it is an unjustified effect.Q. Now, in your campaign speech, you seem conspicuouslyto avoid reference to what in the Liberal Party is also the subject ofsome disagreement, particularly between the Premiers and yourself,and that is the thorny question of Commonwealth/ State finances. Whydid you deliberately sidestep this issue in your campaign speech?
7-PM. I don't know that I sidestepped it as much as myopponent did. I did point out, if you remember, in the policy speechthat all the promises made by the Labor Party, running into thesehundreds of millions made no provision whatsoever for such thingsas defence, for such things as development and, specifically, forsuch things as the increasing requirements of the States. And thoseother promises didn't, so I did mention the need to think of theincreasing requirements of the States. Now the present arrangementbetween the Commonwealth and the States on reimbursement grantsis running out and we will be meeting in February as the PrimeMinister and the Premiers we will be meeting in February tonegotiate a new agreement, a new arrangement for a period of timeahead. That will be coming up and the work will be being done on thatquite soon. And in other areas, the Liberal Party itself is examiningthe workings of the Constitution, and the power divisions under theConstitution and both these things are in train. I don't know how thatwould enable one to come into a policy speech on these matters, butat least I did point out in my speech that the States would haveincreasing needs, which needed to be taken into consideration and Imight remind you that our opponents didn't.Q. Allow me to ask you to make a prediction about theresult of the coming election can I ask you how do you react to theagain widespread reports I don't argue that they are more than thatbut the widespread reports that the Government is going to lose betweensix and ten seats in the coming election? Has this affected Partymorale, or your morale?PM. It hasn't affected mine and it hasn't affected the moraleof the people in the seats concerned. We have had a number of seatswhich have been damaged as a result o~ f redistribution in WesternAustralia, in Queensland, in Tasmania, in Victoria a number ofseats which have been made harder to win as a result of redistribution,but I hope and expect that we shall win them.Q. Do you think that the redistribution has worked againstthe Government or against Labor?PM. Not overall. I would think it was fairly even overall,perhaps with a shade of disadvantage to the Government. But W~ erallis one thing. Picking a number of seats is another, and there were atleast six seats quite severely of ours quite severely damaged byredistribution.Q. If you were to lose several seats overall in the election,would you blame redistribution?
-8-PM. Oh, it would depend on the general level of the voteoverall. If, for example, we dropped very much on the vote that wehad in 1966, one would say well, this is not entirely due toredistribution. It is also due to a lowering in the general vote. Icouldn't answer that question until we had all the figures in.Q. Well, if you dropped say, six or eight seats, as is,I say, widely predicted, would this cause you to re-examine or alterany of the policies that your Government has been so far pursuing?PM. No, I don't think it would. I don't think it would causeus to re-examine any because, we have, I believe, brought Australiato its greatest peak of prosperity it has known, we have providedcompletely full employment, we have provided unprecedented growth,we have provided a situation where inflation is kept in check. WhenI say we have provided we have provided the conditions under whichthe Australian people can do this, and this, after all, is the end andultimate aim of government.Q. Well, this is your first election as Prime Ministerand it has been widely seen as a test of your personal leadership.If you do drop seats, do you think this might encourage any criticswithin your Party, within Parliament, to try to replace you as Leader?PM. I don't think so. But the position of Leader is alwaysin the hands of the Parliamentary Party as a whole. But I am notworried about it.Q. Thank you very much, Sir.Note: This transcript has been released in Canberra only.


Interviewer: Mr. Patrick Tennison
13 October 1969
Question: . Prime Minister, a first impression from your policy speech was that you were offering us two kinds of soups one lot was clear, the other had a lot of good ingredients though was less clear. For instance, you gave a figure of $ 3 million to set up the Institute of Marine Science at Townsville but you didn't say what would be spent to set up the atomic energy plant at Jervis Bay. Is there a figure?
PM. Yes, I think the figure is estimated at $ 120-$ 130 million for the atomic plant, but it can only be an estimate at this stage, and of course it would be spread over quite a number of years seven years.
Q. Why Jervis Bay for this? I am thinking this is so close to the Snowy Hydro-Electric Scheme which is a major power source now.
PM. Well, for a variety of reasons. This is a pilot plant, as it were the first plant that is coming into Australia and we wanted it to be on Commonwealth Territory so there was no question of Constitutional problems about its control, or its safety, or anything of that kind. We wanted to have it on territory which belonged to us. The site was recommended by the experts as being a very good one because of its proximity to water which apparently is required in large quantities, and because it was close to a large electrical consuming public which would enable the electricity it generated to be fed into that grid, and at the same time, of course, take care of the expansion of Canberra as it grows.
Q. Coming closer to the voters' hip-pocket nerve, which as one of your predecessors said was the most sensitive, there are some unclear points about your taxation reform proposals. Now, at what point does a middle income-earner stop being a middle-income earner? 
PM. Well, we haven't given any benchmarks on this. If you read the policy speech you will see that we said that we are studying it and it requires more study, but as a very rough guide at this stage and only as a very rough guide at this stage, I would say it would start at the $2,000-$3, 000 a year mark, probably something over $2000 or $2000, very roughly, and would cut out at the middle income range, at say $15,000-$ 16, 000 a year. That would be a very rough and ready guide.
Q. Now, these people are going to be saved $ 200 million a year eventually. Where is this money eventually going to come from?
PM. How do you mean. ,. thr will be a lack of collection of that amount of money, we hope. That is our aim and our objective in three years' time. Now it can come from a variety of sources. It could come from not spending all the amounts that have at least promised to be spent by our opponents leaving it in the hands of the people themselves to decide whether they should insure themselves or whether they should be compulsorily insured. Or it could come as a result of expansion in revenue in other areas. There are a number of ways it could come.
Q. But will the people on the higher brackets of income be more heavily taxed to make up at least some of this anyway?
PM. Well, we haven't suggested that that would happen, and indeed, the people on the higher levels of income tax are comparatively few and there would be comparatively little return from increasing the revenue there. You couldn't by increasing taxation on higher levels of income make up for what revenue you would lose on the lower to middle levels of income.
Q. You also gave the figure of $ 16 million as the Government's estimate of its cost to bring medical benefit refunds closer to actual medical costs. Now this is less than 50 a year for every person in the community. It will take more than that I would imagine. Will people have to pay higher premiums?
PM. Yes, the Funds.... . this is the cost to the Commonwealth,$ 16 million. The Funds will have to pay more, and in order to bring the scheme fully into operation, we believe that people will probably have to pay something like 5 cents a week more in their contributions. For that, they will get complete protection, except for the against the really costly illnesses which must be the most worrying things they have to face.
Q. Well, we are really getting closer to a national health scheme, such as Labor has proposed, except this is a contributory one? 
PM. Well, we have had a contributory health scheme for quite a long time. What we are doing is making the contributory health scheme work far better. We are leaving it as a voluntary scheme. We are allowing people to continue to have the right of  choice as to where they wish to insure themselves, as to where they think they will get the best service, rather than make them go to just one Government Department. We are taking care of the very heavy costs which surgery could cause to people. After all, what a health scheme should do is take care primarily of the worries of people about heavy medical expenses, and medium-sized expenses but it isn't necessary for it to buy every bottle of aspirins or something of that kind.
Q. Would you agree that this seems to epitomise the whole policy? There is no sign of any overall tax relief. I don't think Government is going to get any cheaper, apparently, but this money will go out to the areas where you feel it is most needed, or most deserving?
PM. Yes, all our revenue, of course, has got to be split up, and divided between the requirements of the State Governments which we have got to pay a lot of attention to. Our opponents, of course, are paying no attention to them at all, apparently. But we have got to take into account requirements of that, requirements of the demands of defence, of national development projects, of social welfare, of a whole variety of fields. And in the social welfare field itself, it is necessary to pick where the money and resources available will bring the best results for the people of Australia.
Q. On defence which you just mentioned, the Government has pledged in your speech to progressively increase defence spending. This is just two months after a Budget which cut defence expenditure by 5 per cent. Isn't this rather a switch in attitude towards defence?
PM. Not at all. The very first Governor -General's Speech that was made from The Throne when I became Prime Minister said that we would, year by year, expect to increase the amount of money that was to be spent on defence, though not necessarily the amount of GNP. And this therefore is no switch whatsoever from the policy which we then enunciated and which we still believe to be the right one. In this particular year, the proposals put before us by the Defence Department were only enough to require the amount of money which we provided for them. But they are working in a new cost-benefit analysis, if I can put it that way, of a lot of the propositions that come up, and I have no doubt at all that these will be coming in to us in the next year.
Q. You stressed the importance of the American alliance and the ANZUS Treaty in your policy speech, but unlike the Labor policy, you still won't agree to signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, though I notice you leave the pen within reach, as it were.
PM. Well, we won't agree to signing it until we are sure that it is an effective Treaty, that it really is going to do what it sets out to do and that its signature which in our case we would expect to be followed by ratification we wouldn't want to sign it unless we ratified it that its signature would not endanger Australia's future security. We do need to be satisfied on those that we have full protection. And we are not satisfied on those.
Q. Paradoxically in this age of prosperity, poverty is an important issue in this election. Now, basically, where does your policy disagree with the Labor Party' s in tackling areas of poverty?
PM. Well, there are only a certain amount of resources which you can t'ake from people in order to help the less well off, in order to help the needy and the sick. You must leave the wage-earner and the salaried man with his own family with his own incentives to live a better life and be able to afford more, so there is only a certain amount that you can take. One great difference is that we do not believe it right and proper to spend say, $ 370 million on abolishing the old-age means test alone. This is a proposition that Labor puts forward. It would cost $370 million to abolish the old-age means test without one cent going to help the less well-off. Now we believe that resources should first be devoted to such areas as handicapped children, to the handicapped and invalids, to improving the base pension as and when we can do it and make sure that what we do is of real benefit and not an illusory benefit; to co-operating with voluntary institutions, and above all to helping the needs of the children of needy families. We would sooner devote our resources there than to abolishing the means test for old age and pay pensions to the rich.
Thank you, Prime Minister.



ElMARGO: 7. 15 p. m. Wednesday 15 October RADIO TALK NO. 2
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
OVER ABC NETWORK ON WEDNESDAY 15 OCTOBER
In my last talk to you, I spoke of the disastrous effects which
Labor's approaches would have on our own defence and on our overseas
alliances and on Australia's future security generally.
Tonight I will talk of domestic approaches.
The essence of our own approach is that we regard it as our
first task to maintain full employment, to maintain the inflow of overseas
capital for development, to continue immigration at least at its present
level, to continue growth, to protect Australians against inflation and,
gradually, to lighten the burden of income taxation.
In short, our first task is to protect and promote our present
prosperity and, at the same time, to seek to lighten income tax burdens.
In the field of social services, we have done much indeed,
I think, more than any comparable Government has done in any comparable
period of time. And we will obviously do more as it becomes economically
responsible to do so.
But we will not put our present prosperity at risk. We will
not put greater income tax burdens on the wage and salary-earning family
man. We will not risk that inflation which hits the pensioner and the wage
and salary-earner hardest, but which hits all Australians and which will
inhibit that immigration, that growth, that capital inflow which job
opportunity demands should continue.
The Opposition, on the other hand, is prepared to put all
this in danger. They have made promises which will require hundreds of
millions of dollars a year to keep, hundreds of millions of dollars a year
without any provision for increased defence, without any provision for
national development, without any provision for the growing needs of the
States. And those hundreds of millions will come from you the present
income tax payers. / 2 
-2-
They will come either by way of increased taxation or by
way of a lack of reduction in taxation or by way of inflation hitting your
pocket. But one way or another you will pay for there is no way of getting
something for nothing. Apart from this general difference of approach between the
Opposition and ourselves, there is a particular matter on which we and the
Opposition differ. As you know, we have already introduced the tapered means
test and age taxation concessions which are real incentives to thrift and
which give real rewards to the thrifty. And now we believe that the first
call for the future on resources for social welfare should be the alleviation
of the lot of those who are still poor.
The Opposition, on the other hand, will provide $ 370 million
a year, not one cent of which will help the needy but all of which will go to
pay pensions to the well-off, for $ 370 million a year is what their plan
will cost if it is put into operation.
We believe that this is essentially wrong and we reject it
because we believe, as I have said, that the lot of the needy should have
first call on our resources.
Our efforts in the next Parliament will be devoted to helping
the children of needy families, to rehabilitation of the handicapped and the
invalid so that they can return to normal life, to giving capital assistance
to institutes helping handicapped children, to ensuring that the buying power
of the pensions we have recently raised does not, over the period, fall, and
to increasing social welfare generally as economic conditions permit.
This to us is a worthier aim than that of the Opposition and
we hope that you on October 25 will agree with us and agree that it is
better for Australians and for Australia.
Note: This talk will be broadcast by the ABC National Network at
7. 15 p. m. ( EST). 



EMBARGO: 8.50 p. m. THURSDAY 16 OCTOBER PARTY TV INTERVIEW NO. 2
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION.
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, OVER ABC
TELEVISION NETWORK
Interviewer: Mr. George Wilson 16 OCTOBER 1969
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, there has been a lot of rattling
and roaring about this Naval Base at Cockburn Sound. Even Mr.
Caiwell, the former Opposition Leader has said the Labor Party would
have built it ten years ago. Is the building of this Naval Base a real
election issue or a part of the defence mechanism of this country?
PM. It's part of the defence mechanism of this country, but
it wouldn't have been ten years ago. We have now reached a stage
where our fleet is growing, and we have also reached a stage where
the British are withdrawing from the Indian Ocean, and it is therefore
time to begin to construct a base in Western Australia. It will take
some years to complete it but, clearly, in the new situation in which
we find ourselves, in the growth to which we can look forward, this
will be a necessity and therefore this will be started. We set up
consultants, Maunsell Partners, a couple of years ago to advise
us on this, and the report has been with Navy and Defence and the
recommendation is that this should happen. We agree with the
recommendation. I don't know whether it is an election issue because
I haven't heard any indication from the Labor Party that they would
build such a base. They have spoken of " maritime facilities"
Q. Well, so much for the Naval Base. Can we talk about
Vietnam?
PM. Sure.
Q. According to your policy speech you are now prepared
to admit for the first time that if America continues to withdraw troops
from Vietnam, then Australia also will phase down its involvement?
PM. I don't know that I would phrase it that way: " I am
prepared to admit for the first time", but quite clearly and I have
stated this if there were to be a continuing programme of United
States withdrawal, if they were to have a plan that there would be so
many troops getting out in such and such a time, and others at another
9 / 2 
-2
time and so on, and that were to be implemented, then we wouldn't
stay there until last. We would expect to be phased In to such a
withdrawal plan and at a stage which would be the subject of discussion
between us. But we wouldn't unilaterally withdraw just by ourselves
and leave the United States and South Vietnamese in the lurch. We
would, if such an eventuality as I have spoken of occurred and I
don't think it will, but if it did, if there were such contingency plans
then we would expect to be phased into them, and indeed, we would
see that we were phased into them.
Q. These taxation reforms in your policy speech has
the Federal Treasurer, Mr. McMahon, been a party to discussion
about taxation reforms?
PM. Oh, yes, he has been in fact he has been speaking
about them quite frequently around the country, about the need for
trying to do something about the inequities which have developed in
the taxation law. One of the first things I did when I became Prime
Minister was to ask him to look into this and ask the Treasury to look
into this. It is a very very complex matter.
Q. We will come back to your record as a government in
a moment, if we may. But you are virtually offering a dollar a week
to the lower and middle income wage-earners during the life of the
next Parliament, providing, of course, your Government gets back in.
PM. Oh, I don't think you can work it out that way. I
wouldn't work it out that way.
Q. Well, in your policy speech you have said you are
prepared to give $ 200 million back to Australians in taxation concessions,
on a year by year basis, admittedly, during the life of that next
Parliament. Well, with a workforce of 2 million people in Australia,
perhaps in this category of lower to middle income group earners,
this is going to work out between $ 1 and $ 2 a head.
PM. No, this would only work out that way if everybody were
earning the same income and everybody got the same tax rebates and
so on, and they don't. Rates are different for different classes of
income and the whole matter would be far too complex to try and say
it would be a dollar a week for everybody. It would be relief for
everybody. But at this stage, and until studies are completed, you....
I would like to agree with what you suggest, but I am afraid I couldn't.
Q. Any taxation concessions that come, they would not be
until the Government brought down its next Budget?
PM. They would be starting in the next Budget, yes. 9 / 3 
3-
Q. I see. Right. Is the Government really offering
substantial benefits for pensioners? After all, the Labor Party,
with its policy speech a couple of weeks back, offered a dollar a week
rise to pensioners.
PM. We have given it is not a matter of promising we
have given very substantial assistance to pensioners of all kinds.
Indeed in the last two Budgets, which is just a little over a year, the
base rate pension has been raised by a total of This we have
already done and this is old age pensions I am talking of. And we
have paid particular attention to widows with children and to the
handicapped. We have given a whole range of very, very significant
benefits and we have brought in the tapered means test which is an
incentive to thrift, so that people just don't get cut out of a pension
altogether because they have got some kind of superannutation income.
So this we have already done. What we think is that what we have done
will be accepted by the Australian people as an earnest of what we
propose to do as soon as it is responsible to do so. We want to see
that the benefits they get are real benefits and not illusory.
Q. And you have singled out organisations, such as the
Meals on Wheels organisation, to give Government aid to?
PM. Well, we think this is a very, very good, voluntary
organisation, and that its expansion would be of benefit to people
they serve and to the organisations themselves.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, country viewers who saw your
policy speech on television, will be interested to know that you are
going to find $ 100 million over five years to help water some of
Australia's distant farms. Would you like to expand on this one?
PM. Yes, it's not merely f inding water for.. it's not
merely conserving water in dams. The money is to be made available
for conservation of water, yes, but also for flood prevention and
mitigation, which is quite an important matter in various parts of
Australia. And it is also to be available for surveying our underground
water resources, so that we may have a much better idea of where
artesian water is and what quantity we have got and what opportunities
for development it will give to us. Water is one of the major factors
limiting the growth of Australia and this is why we have made a
significant attack on it.
Q. The name of Chips Rafferty is probably one that is
known to perhaps every person that is watching this telecast this
evening.
PM. It's known to me, yes. / 4 
4-
Q. Chips Rafferty has been urging the Government for
several years to try and find some sort of subsidy for the production
of Australian films and Australian television. Now I understand that
you would like to do something about this?
PM. Well, we would like to do something about it and we
are going to do something about it. We are proposing to set up a
corporation which will invest in films with a significant Australian
content, made in Australia, or lend money to the producers of such
films. It will have an initial capital of $ 1 million and it will have that
capital replenished so that at the beginning of each year it would still
have $ 1 million. And the profits which we hope it will make, and
the returns we hope it will get from its successful films would then
be paid to it in the hope that it would be able to be self-supporting
after a while.
Q. Well, let's ask you a curly one for the last one. You
have talked about an 8. 7 per cent growth in the economy. You have
talked about a record number of houses being built by your Government.
You have talked about more migrants more this and more that.
Well, do you want to go to the public on your record, or do you want
to go to the public on what you propose to do for the benefit of Australia?
PM. I think we would like to do three things. We would like
to go to the public on our record, on our record of achievements which
is really quite great; on the preservation of the present state of the
economy, the preservation of the present prosperity; the avoidance
of inflation; the continuance of growth and immigration and all
those things of which you spoke. In other words on our record, on
the results our record has achieved, and also on the new proposals
which we are making for the future and which we are sure we can keep
without inflation, or without increasing taxation. The new proposals
you've mentioned some of them the relief in income tax, for example,
bringing Australia into the atomic age, paying particular attention to
the children's needs and needy families, continuing on those paths, but
retaining the present full employment and state of economy we have
got.
Q. Thank you very much for answering these questions
tonight, Mr. Prime Minister. 



0. E MBARGO: 7. 15 p. m. RADIO TALK NO. 3
19 69 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, OVER ABC NETWORK
ON FRIDAY 17 OCTOBER
In my previous talk to you, I dealt with the lack of
policy of the ALP in matters of defence and of foreign affairs. Also
I spoke of how I believed their policy of running out of our overseas
obligations and then cutting our own defence forces imperilled
Australia's future security and, indeed, made it quite possible that
the existence of Australia as an independent nation might, in the years
ahead, well be threatened by these policies.
And so, naturally, they have in their policy speech no
provision for increasing Australia's defences at all. Rather, as
would be expected, do they have a proposal to cut Australia's Army
by one-third by abolishing National Service Training, and this we
will not do. And also they have a proposal to deny the Air Force
that strike aircraft which the Air Force and all our military advisers
say Australia's defence needs. So they have no policy in those
directions. But when you examine the propositions put before you,
they don't have policies in other directions either. There arc no
policies for development which have been put before you by the Labor
Party. We, on the other hand, have put specific proposals.
We have proposed to build railways in South Australia.
We propose to establish an Institute of Marine Science so we can
learn about the Barrier Reef and help to protect it. We propose to
take Australia into the atomic age by establishing an atomic plant
at Jervis Bay. We propose to help the film industry in Australia so
that our talent can be employed, so that the pictures we make can be
exported and so that people overseas can see what the real Australia
is like. These are some of the specific proposals that we have put.
There are no such specific proposals to counter them from the
Opposition. Further, we have in what we have said, made it clear
that we realise that the State Governments will in the years ahead as
our revenue rises, need more and more revenue themselves so that
they can, as their population grows, provide the schools, the roads,
the hospitals, the other services they now give. e. / 2 
-2-
There is no indication whatsoever in the speeches of
the Opposition that they realise there will be this need. No indication
whatsoever. All there is is an indication that they will bypass the
States; that they will in education, for example, set up a Commission
to examine ten thousand schools and assess the needs of each. Whereas
we are already working and have been for months been working with
the States not to bypass them, but with each State Education Department
to assess, so that they could assess, the needs of their own schwls.
This surely is a better way to do it.
Then we have in one field only these large promises
in welfare large promises, very costly promises, promises which
will lead to inflation and yet promises which Dr. Cairns, one of the
economists in the Labor Party, has already said may be so costly that
they won't be able to be carried out. It is not surprising he should
say that because in the Opposition, no matter what the Leader wants
to do, he is told what to do by an outside body.
Let me give you one example of that. In Bendigo nct
long ago, the Leader of the Opposition went to the people saying,
" My policy is to make a grant for education. I will give half to State
schools; half to independent schools. Elect my candidate". And a
few scant weeks later he had to change that under dictation.
You cannot rely on what a Parliamentary party, dictated
to by an outside body, will do no matter whatever they may promise
to do. 


EMBARGO: 9.30 P. M. ON SUNDAY 19 OCTOBER 1969" THIS WEEK"TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THEPRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, ONCHANNEL 7, MELBOURNERecorded on 16 October for release on 19 OctoberInterviewers: John Boland and John FitzgeraldQ. Prime Minister, what is your reaction to the latestGallup Poll figures favouring Labor?PM. Well, one is always much happier when the GallupPolls are running in one's favour than when they are running againstone, and at the momen?, the Gallup Polls are running against one.They are usually accurate within two or three per cent, and thereforeone is much happier. We can't detect it in the electorates, butnevertheless, it is there, and it would be silly to pretend one washappy about the way they are running.Q. Did you expect it to be as big as it has been in the lastI think something like 7 per cent....PM. No, I don't I can't imagine actually what isthe basis of the poll. I didn't expect it. The people in the electoratesdon't seem to sense it but there it as a poll, and it would be muchnicer if it were going the other way. I didn't believe them when theywent our way completely, bur, 2ill, it is much pleasanter when theydo. The major thing is to D f what h: ppens on theQ. Prime M?'. lster. one gets the impression, reading thereaction, particularly news-aper reaction that the Prime Minister isalmost on the floor and everybody is standing around waiting for himto get up again after the 3allup Poll. Now, are you on the floor?PM. Well, I don't think so. We have had a couple of goodmeetings in Adelaide and Hobart.....Q. You would always d-aw as Prime Minister, though,wouldn't you? You would always draw the crowd?PM. Not necessarily the kind when I say a good meeting,I don't mean a large meeting. I mean a meeting at which peoplesought to put one on the floor, and instead, I think, were put on thefloor themselves; the kind of Labor Party supporters who came alongto try and shout you down, to try and prevent our arguments beingheard. This is what I mean..... / 2
r*
Q. What type of meeting do you prefer? Do you preferone where you have a number of interjectors?PM. On the whole, yes, I do. I think it is much nicer tohave something to fight against than a whole hall full of people whoeither agree with you or don't say anything at all. I don't mean thesort of organised stamping and shouting and chanting that goesalthough I don't mind that in the very least. It is an indication ofthe approach of the Opposition. But I do mean that there needs to bea liveliness in a meeting, I think.Q. You raised this point. Were you disappointed withthe " yes" type of crowd which listened to your policy speech ontelevision? What did you think of your policy speech on television?It has been criticised.PM, I thought it was all right myself and there have beengood reports about it. The only reason we had anybody in the studioat the time was because I like to talk to people. I like to have somepeople in front of me to talk to, to look at, to move one's eyes roundabout. I thought I made that quite clear at the outset of the policyspeech. This was a studio speech. There were a few people there.I wanted them there because I like some human contacts to talk torather than just a television camera which is pretty inhuman whenyou look at it.Q. Now, Sir, I wonder if we can get down to the crux ofyour policy. I think you have made and foreign affairs thetwo keys in your whole policy,PM. Yes.Q. Now, a lot are saying that you have bowed to DLPpressure here. What is your answer to this?PM. I'd like people to look at the record to see whether....to make their own minds up. This is what they are supposed to do inan election. But if they do look at the record, they will see that thefirst speech made by the Governor-General when we became aGovernment said that we felt we needed to build up our defences,that we would be spending more each year on our defences notnecessarily in terms of GNP but in terms of money. This is onrecord. This is what we sa-id, I have made it clear on a number ofoccasions in the House in reply to questions that we felt it wasessential to retain National Service Training. I made it clear thatwe are not going to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty untilwe are sure it does not damage Australia's future security. I havemade it clear we believe it right and proper to continue with jointdefence arrangements and bases with the United States in Australia.All these things are on the record for a long time back. / 3
* I.J7 2 k Ii Lr Iii i
Q. You certainly have brought the DLP more around toyour way of thinking, since you have decided to make this they keyto your whole policy.PM. I thought you were asking had something been doneespecially as a result of DLP suggestions, and all these things areon the record as having been done long ago. There are only twothings which could lend any colour to this at all. One is the beginningof a base in Western Australia, a naval base in Western Australia.....Q. Which is what they wanted. They wanted that, didn'tthey?PM. Of course they wanted that. And we had startedinvestigations into that two years ago. We put Maunsell Partnerson to report how the thing should be gradually built up, and it is goingto be gradually built up. We had the report from them. I had beenquestioned in the House as to whether we had turned it down. I hadsaid quite definitely we hadn't, and it is the beginning of somethingwhich I think Australian defence needs. It wasn't suddenly broughtout of a hat. For more than two years we have been considering this.So there it is. You asked me a question. That is the answer I give you.Q. Well, now what about your attitude to the Sovietpresence in the Indian Ocean? Now, the interpretation is that youchanged your tack here,PM. I think the interpretation is wrong. If you look atwhat Mr. Freeth said, there was never any suggestion in it for oneminute that we wanted to have or would have or would contemplateany military alliance with the Soviet Union, or that we would wantSoviet Union bases there or that we would want the Soviet Unionmilitary presence there. Never any suggestion of any kind.Q. He said: " It is natural that a world power, such asthe Soviet, should seek to promote a presence and a national influencein the Indian Ocean". Now how else could they do that?PM. They could d by assisting in the economicrehabilitation of those nations in building them up. They coulddo it, for example, in the case of the Soviet Union by renegotiatingthe debts which Indonesia, for example, owes them, and givingIndonesia a chance to build up its own economy instead of having todrain off to the Soviet Union for war material which they bought inthe days of Sukarno. This is one way they could go about it.Q. And is this the sort of thing which we could havepractical dealings with them in? / 4
-4Pm. We would be happy to see a situation in which stepswere taken, as long as there were not a lot of technicians involvedin going into the country or a lot of so-called experts or militarypeople going in, in which take that Indonesian example inwhich the Indonesian economy was helped as a result of a renegotiationof the foreign exchange which had to be paid by Indonesia.Q. Well now, Mr. Prime Minister, let me lay it straighton the line. Weren't we in fact, with the Freeth statement,' followingthe American lead in announcing our willingness to get along with theRussians? Didn't Secretary of State Rogers ask that we do this?Pm. I don't remember Secretary of State Rogers asking meto do this. When you say " get along with the Russians" this is quitea different thing from wanting to have a Russian military presence inour own area. Surely it is. Clearly we have things on which we musttalk to the Russians. We have things like fisheries agreements forexample, which are quite important. We have things to do with trade.We have things to do with civil aviation. This is not to be interpretedas wanting to have a military presence. I think that the Freethstatement was misinterpreted.Q. Isn't it State Department policy that the only way wecan get extricated out of Vietnam is to use the Russians to putpressure on Hanoi, and the only way we can prevent insurrectionsin South East Asia is to have a Russian presence in South East Asia?Pm. I don't believe it is for a moment. I don't believe theUnited States wants to have a Russian presence, if by that you meana military presence in South East Asia. If they did, I believe that aRussian military presence there would be against our interests anddangerous to us. Now, Prime Minister, linked dramatically with ourdefence pol icy i s t he F-ill1. Now, ca n it be sa id beyond all doubtwe are finally committed to this aircraft?Pm. As long as the latest tests on the new wing boxes ormodified wing boxes show that it will give the length of service whichwe require it to have. The interesting thing on this F 1i and indeedour whole defence policy is that we have a policy and our opponentsdon't. Perhaps they do. Their policy is to alienate our allies, to cutour Army and to deny our Air Force the strike aircraft which our AirForce and our military advisers say they want to have. Now if ourAir Force says this is the best strike aircraft in the world, this iswhat Australian defence needs, surely that should be taken somenotice of rather than vague suggestions that some other aircraft notrecommended should be obtained by Australia.
6-PM. I don't believe there is. I don't believe there is anythingin it. The United Kingdom makes up its own mind as to where it shouldbe and it decided that for reasons of its own it should withdrawQ. But did Mr. Healey put a $ 50 million fee on staying?Pm. No, he didn't. Never, ever. It has never beensuggested.Q. Finally, Prime Minister, on defence. Is CockburnSound now a firm plank of your Government's policy?Pm. Yes, it is. We are going to build it up gradually.We are taking the first step of a number of phases recommended byour consultants and that is the building of the causeway. And graduallywe will be building up the other requirements for naval facilities sothat there can be as our fleet grows in the years ahead as it will,some elements of that fleet based in that area.Well, now getting around to your personal image,Prime Minister. Mr. St. John has campaigned against yourcredibility and the personal conduct of your office. Now what doyou say in reply to him? Are you prepared to reply to him?PM. I don't think so. Anybody can make any allegationsagainst anybody else. I understand the shipping line, for example,was supposed to have been brought in without consultation withCabinet, and yet all Cabinet knows there were at least four meetingson it. This theory of dictatorship and so on, I think, is refuted bysome suggestion that was made to me in Launceston the other daythat I was overruled in some other matters. I believe that there areother reasons why Mr. St. John is conducting this campaign. Butsomething that decides the future of Australia and the conduct of agovernment of Australia seems to me to be something that ought tobe decided on the policies put before the people and the good or illof those policies for the future of Australia.Q. Except that you have campaigned on a personal image.The Gorton image has become something in this country.Pm. I haven't campaigned on a personal image. I havecampaigned on ideas. I have campaigned on achievements and theachievements have been pretty considerable. I don't believe Icampaign on a personal image at all. It wasn't a personal imagethat led us into the entry into overseas shipping. It wasn't a personalimage that led us into doing more for social welfare than has beendone by any other government in a comparable period of time.These were things one wanted to get accomplished. I could go onwith the list but you haven't got the time for it.
7Q. What about the appointment of a public relationsofficer to your secretariat?PM. I haven't appointed a public relations officerQ. Your secretariat has.PM. No, it hasn't.Q. Well the Liberal Party has.PM. No, it ha sn't.Q. Well who has?PM. Nobody has.Q. But he is working there.PM. There is a man who has been lent to do research andbackground notes for speeches for a fortnight and this is riot in anyway at all anything to do with a public relations..Q. But it is on the basis of your personal associationwith a PR man.PM. It's not on the basis oh, you mean because EricWhite is a friend of mine and said, " Would you like somebody to dospeech notes or research for you?" and I said, " Yes. All right,but it is not doing public relations work.Q. Well the interpretation has been that the PrimeMinister isPM. Oh, I can't help the interpretation. He is doing nopublic relations work.Q. He is not trying to swing the country in ten days tofollow the Prime Minister at the poll?Pm. No, he is trying to help me in the same way that, forexample, Mr. Whitlam's large staff which I haven't got helps him.You see, I have never delivered a speech that I haven't written myself.I doubt very much if Mr. Whitlam has ever delivered a speech hewrote himself. I need some research assistance, some backgroundspeech notes and this is what this man is doing and that is all he isdoing. / 8
-8Q. Returning now to points on your policy. I think sinceyou have become Prime Minister, you have been very keen to expressconcern about the middle and lower income groups. Now particularlyfrom the point of view of taxation, you have made promises that overthree years there will be some relief for middle income earners. ButI think or do you feel there has been a certain amount ofdisappointment that you haven't been able to offer anything immediatelyto these middle income earners and that you are going to wait untilthe end of this financial year which is July 1st.Pm. I don't know whether there has been any disappointmentor not. I don't know whether people would have expected us in presentcircumstances to make some large step to introduce a whole lot moreof purchasing power, a whole lot more of money into the economy. Idon't think any thinking person would expect or would have expectedthat we should have taken the first steps before the next Budget. ButI would imagine and I would hope that the thinking Australian wouldrealise that we are going to take these steps over this period to reducethe burden of income tax on the lower income earner, the middleincome earner, the man with the family to bring up and the man payingoff his home. And that if we are to believe the suggestions put forwardby our opposition there would be no hope of doing this with anyeffective benefit to the people so helped.IQ, You don't think you can come in a bit earlier than theend of the financial year?PM. No, I don't. I think that the latest employment figures,for example, show that our economy is fully employed at the presentmoment; for the first time in Australia's history there are more jobsoffering than there are applications for employment. We have ourresources fully employed. Now don't you think, wouldn't anyreasonable person think in those circumstances, throwing moremoney into the economy would riot provide any single person withany more employment?Q. I think, I think Prime Minister, if I get taxed, Iwould like some sort of relief on this....PM. Sure, but you wouldn't like to have immediate taxrelief with the result that inflation cut it out straight away. I don'tthink.Q. I'd like immediate reliefPM. PAM. s long as it didn't have the other aspect in it.
1~
9-Q. On the social services question, now, this has beensomething you have taken a considerable time over. There appearsto medical and hospital benefits.., your plans mean increasedweekly payments here. Also, of course, we had last Friday theHospital Benefits Association raising, even for the lowest familyunit, their fees from something like $ 37. 80 to $ 52. 20 a year.PM. Are you talking about hospital alone or are youtalking about hospital and medical?Q. I am talking about both. I would like to bracket themboth if I can in the period of time. For this increased medical helpwhich you are suggesting, the obv'ous thing here is that you have topay more to get it. Now where is the relief here?PM. Where is the relief? Well there aire two alternateplans that are placed before the public at this election. Let's takethe State of Victoria because we are speaking in Victoria. Yes, aperson would have to pay more in order to get.. pay more fortheir medical table in order to get the medical benefits which weoffer, but we have taken care of all families who have incomes of$ 39 a week or less. Now, in Victoria, it would cost to get publicward cover and to get the medical facilities that are offered, itwould cost a single man m--ore im -diately he reaches a wage ofunder the Labor scheme. It would cost under the Labor schememore for $ 40 and above for a single man. For families a Laborscheme would cost more for families earning between $ 60 andI can't tell you exactly where between there but somewhere betweenand $ 70. It would cost them More. It is not a question of havepeople got to pay more because the Opposition's plans are going totae 4per cent not of the tax at present paid but of the total taxableincome compulsorily. That is going to raquire people to pay more.That is going to require people to pax! more than our scheme requires.But the great benefit of our scheme as I see it is that it will havethe AMA co-operating with it, whereas they won't with the Laborscheme and you may remember back in 1949 when Labor tried tobring in a scheme and the doctors wouldn't co-operate with it.it will have the doctors' co-operation with it peoplecontributing to it will know that they will be relieved from the fearof very expensive illness, because however expensive it may be,the medical fet-s will not require them to pay more thanQ. Have you been assured of AMA co-operation?PM. The Minister for Health has been assured of AMAco-operation in this line. The proposal is that there should be acommon fee known and that the policy of the AMA is that that commonfee should be told to any patient who asks, and the patient if he wantsto choose a doctor who charges more will have to bear the extrahimself. But he can get this treatment at a common fee, and
10statistics show that more than half the doctors charge the commonfee or less already. This is quite different from Whitlam'scommonly-charged fee. This is going to be a common fee knownto people and publicised by the Commonwealth Health Departmentso everybody knows what it is.Q. Well, you reject Labor's argument that you will haveto shop around for a fee that is acceptable?Pm. Yes, I think that that is a spurious argument. I supposeit is based on this that if a patient went to a doctor and said, " Areyou going to charge the common fee which I know to be the commonfee because it has been made public" and the doctor said, " No, I amgoing to charge more", you don't take that doctor. I suppose that iswhat this is based on. But of course the alternative is thenationalisation of medicine which, of course, is what Labor is after.Q. Prime Minister, I would very quickly like to turn toeducation and ask you two questions here now. On your State aidproposals, and the Government's proposals, it would seem that thericher schools are getting richer and the poorer schools are gettingpoorer. Now there is a comparison here with Mr. Whitlam'spromises, of course, of a schools commission. That is the firstpart of the question. The second part of the question is: What doyou feel or what do you think is against Mr. Whitlam's $ 12 millionproposal for free universities?PM. Well, the first part of the question you asked me isa proposition put forward by the Opposition to set up a centralcommission in Canberra to examine the needs of 10, 000 schoolsthroughout Australia. Our proposition, on the other hand, is alreadyin train, in which each State Education Department is examining theneeds of the schools within its own State, and we think that is a betterway to go about it. That is already in train. And they are not onlyexamining the needs of the State schools but also co-ordinating intoit the needs of the independent schools. People sometimes call mea centralist, but if there is anything I could see designed to takecompletely out of the control of the States the running of the educationsystem, then this schools commission, so called, would be the onedesigned to do it.Don't you feel, though, that with this schools likeWesley, Xavier, these schools that don't really need grants andmoney are getting a lot of money
11-PM, They don't get the grants. Who gets the grants arethe parents who send children to schools. Now there are a lot ofparents who want to send their children to a particular school andwho are not rich people. But who for reasons of their own, and theyare entitled to have these reasons, scrape and save and denythemselves other things in order to pay school fees. I don't seewhy those people should have a means test put upon them whichis what in fact is inherent in the suggestion you made.Q. Free universities. Can we afford them? Can yourGovernment afford them?PM. Yes, I think you could afford free universities. Atthe moment it would cost $ 14 million a year from your pocket. Youwanted some relief from taxation. It would cost that much or a partof that much extra out of your pocket for the extra taxation. But whyshould you pay it? We seek to reduce the burden of taxation, not toincrease it for this purpose and we have got to remember that someper cent, around 25 per cent of all the university students havetheir fees paid by you and other taxpayers anyway. Now I don'treally see why the ordinary taxpayer who has say his own childrento bring up, his own house to pay off should be charged extra in orderto provide for those who can't get Commonwealth scholarships. Itis a matter of where you levy your imposts and for what purposes.Thank you Prime Minister.



EMBARGO: 7. 15 p. m. on 20 October RADIO TALK NO. 4
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, OVER ABC NETWORK
ON MONDAY 20 OCTOBER
Good evening. What do you see as the needs of Australia
in the years ahead? What do you see of the opportunities for Australia
in the exciting 1970' s we are just entering? How do you believe we
can make the most of these opportunities and satisfy these needs? I
see it this way. I believe that if we are to grow at the rate that history
demands, if we are to continue the development towards greatness
which we have so much advanced in the last twenty years, then we
will need in these years a continuing inflow of development capital
from abroad. This is so that our iron ore can be mined, our nickel
can be used, our oil can be used instead of importing oil, our factories
can be improved, our industrial muscles can be strengthened and
more and more employment and more secure employment can be
provided. Of course we want to participate with Australian capital
in this development, but in the years ahead we will not be able to
save from our own resources as much as is required for the ? ace of
development that history demands that Australia should have. So the
first need, I believe, is for this continuing development anid that will
depend on a continuing development capital coming to Australia.
Side by side with that need, and not to be put second
to it, is the need Australia has for more people, for greater
population, for more and more migrants coming to Australia, for
more and more Australians being born and growing up and working
for their nation. My Government has brought in record numbers of
migrants in this past year, but in the 1970' s we will need more and
more and more if the development and the employment and the
prosperity we now enjoy are to grow as they can with the opportunities
now facing us. / 2
6 
1 -2-
Both this development capital and the inflow of
population will be threatened should inflation strike this country.
If, as our Opposition suggests, hundreds of millicns of dollars
should be thrown into the economy when there is not manpower to
match it, when there are not resources to match it, then there will
be little new built, and what is built will cost more. And there will
be burdens placed on the fixed income earner, on the pensioner,
on the primary producer and that being so, there will be a diminution
of the growth and of the prosperity we now enjoy.
The real growth of Australia depends on a properlymanaged
economy, and it is a properly-managed economy which
these false and worthless Labor promises now threaten to damage.
For if you accept these propositions, then what will happen will be
that there will be a paper printing press, turning out worthless money
to meet such worthless promises.
But it is not only the development and the growth. It
is not only the increasing population Australia needs. We will need,
too, in these years ahead, strong friends. While we continue to look
after ourselves, while we continue to improve our own defence, we
will still need strong friends. We will not get them by reneging on
our alliances with the United States, by walking out of Malaysia/
Singapore, by niggling about joint defence bases in Australia, by
slapping our allies in the face and cutting our own security.
These are the needs of Australia in the 1970' s. They
can only be met by a Liberal Government. Don't be misled by
promises which can't be kept and which can be broken on the dictates
of an outside body. 



EMBARGO: 8. 50 p. m. on 21 October 1969 PARTY TV INTERVIEW NO. 3
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, FOR
ABC TELEVISION NETWCRK
Interviewer: Mr. Patrick Tennison
Q. Prime Minister, the Labor Party says domestic issues
are the main point in this election. Do you agree?
PM. The Labor Party would like Australians to think that
because they don't want Australians to consider their complete lack
of any foreign affairs or defence policy at all. The real issue at this
election, the overriding issue at this election, is the policy of cut and
run which the Labor Party has got. They will walk out on our alliances
with the United States and with the South Vietnamese, and their attempt
there to get democracy working they will walk out on that, unilaterally,
without consultation, without agreement. They will withdraw from
Malaysia / Singapore, break our word there and show that we have a
lack of interest in the region to our North and having alienated our
alliance, having alienated the United States, having, I am quite sure,
deterred Great Britain from ever coming back to the region to our
North in time of need if we won't take any part in it having done all
that they then propose to reduce our own efforts in defence. Perhaps
I shouldn't say " cut and run" perhaps I should say " run and cut" for
they first run, then reduce our Army by a third and deny the Air Force
the strike bomber which our military experts say we need. Of course
they say domestic issues are the most important. Cf course they run
away from discussing defence. This is the overriding thing, because
on this the future, really the future security of Australia depends.
Indeed, the future capacity of Australia to be an independent nation
may depend on these issues.
Q. Well, let us look at it from outside. We have
commitments in Malaysia and Singapore. Do the people of these
countries want us there?
PM. Indeed they do, and indeed they are very disturbed at
any prospect of a change in policy such as the Labor Party proposes.
Let me give you some quotations to indicate this. Tun Razak is the
Minister in Malaysia who is in charge of these affairs, and this is a
quote from him concerning whether our forces should be there or
/ 2 
2-
whether they shouldn't. He says: " If forces are in Australia ( that's
Australian forces) I don't think they would be much help in modern
conditions. If we in. Malaysia are attacked, it would be a matter of
hours, not days". And Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, the Prime Minister of
Singapore says, " Those who subscribe to the theory that Australian
ground forces should not be in the Singapore/ Malaysian area have no
conception of what is required by the area itself". Now these are
things that people in the area are saying.
Q. But does the Labor Party want to withdraw completely
from Asia? Mr. Whitlam has said he would keep the RAAF at
Butterworth in Malaysia for training purposes anyway.
PM. The Labor Party platform and policy must be carried
out by Labor Party parliamentarians. And the Labor Party platform
and policy is quite distinct. It says: " No plans for the stationing of
Australian armed forces in other countries are now feasible or
acceptable. No Australian troops may be stationed outside of Australia".
It is all very well for Mr. Whitlam on one day to say well, perhaps,
he would leave some Air Force in Malaysia, but we might note that on
the same day Mr. Barnard said Labor would bring the Air Force back
from Malaysia. But this sort of disagreement is not really important.
What is important is that the outside body that runs Labor says there
must be no Australian forces stationed in Malaysia and Singapore.
That will prevail.
Q. Well let's come back home now. You have been criticised
for not saying much about Commonwealth/ State relations in this campaign.
PM. Well, I have said more than the Opposition has said
concerning Commonwealth/ State relations. just have a look at tinat. In
my policy speech I pointed out that there would be in the future a need
not only for increased defence, not only for increased development, but
a need for the increasing requirements of the States as the population
grows and they have to provide the hospitals and the schools and the
other services they provide. I made that clear. And we believe in doing
this in a Federal way. Now we are quite happy to look at the Constitution.
We think it is time it is looked at. But we believe basically in doing it
in a Federal way. What is suggested from the Opposition is to bypass
the States in education completely by setting up some commission to
examine ten thousand schools, ignoring the State Education Departments,
to bypass the States in the development of suburbs, to make the most
massive attempt yet made to centralise in Canberra the running of things
which up till now have been State functions. Not to help but to
centralise them.
Q. Isn't inflation one of our major problems domestically?
What can your policies do about this? / 3 
3-
PM. No, inflation isn't one of our major problems domestically.
One of our major problems domestically is to make sure inflation
doesn't get out of hand. And we have done that. In spite of the fact
that our workforce is fully employed, in spite of the fact of the growth
that everyone can see, we have still managed to contain inflation and
keep it under control. But it will be one of our major problems. It
will be if the Opposition injects hundreds of millions more into the
economy. Look, the last figures published on employment showed
that for the first time in Australia's history we had more jobs offering
than there were applicants for jobs. Now with your workforce fully
employed like that, with your resources utilised, any thinking person
must know that throwing more money into the economy won't produce
any more, but what it will produce is higher costs and inflation. That's
an easy word to use " inflation". Perhaps the connotations aren't
fully known. What it means is that people on fixed incomes get badly
hit. What it means is that the modest wage-earner gets badly hit.
And of course what it means is that the primary producer has these
extra costs and can't recoup them because he is selling on an overseas
market and on the prices given by an overseas market. This is the
danger posed by the Opposition. It is not a problem now because we
have contained it. It will be an overriding problems if the Australian
people are taken in by what is suggested by the ALP.
Q. There are obviously very vast differences on all or most
of these policy points. Is there some overall philosophy you can see
as distinguishing these differences between the two parties?
PM. What are these vast differences on policy points put
before the people this time? I have had a close look at the Opposition's
policies. There are no precise provisions, no precise suggestions for
development at all. We do have. We propose to build two raiiways.
We propose to take Australia into the atomic age. We propose to set
$ 100 million aside over the next five years for water conservation.
Those are specific proposals. On the other side there are none at all.
We do propose to spend more money increasing our own defences. The
Opposition are completely silent except that they are going to reduce
them by the steps they say they would take. Nowhere in the ALP policy
is there any specific proposal except in the field of welfare and an
already discredited and broken-back health plan. Now, we do have
proposals. They have been spelt out. The establishment of a marine
science institute to let us know more about the Barrier Reef so we
can protect it. The establishment of a film industry. All these things
are in our proposals. There are none none in the proposals of the
Opposition. So it is a bit difficult to say there is a great difference
between them. I think perhaps, though, the major difference is in the
field of economic management. We are determined that we will
maintain the employment we have, maintain the growth we have, the
prosperity we have, and that we will not let inflation spoil these things.
/ 4 
-4-
Because if it does, not only are employment and growth in jeopardy,
but overseas capital will not flow here in the way it has been flowing
here, migrants will not be able to be brought in in the quantities in
which they have been brought in. We are determined to avoid that.
Now that is why this year we had to budget for a $ 500 million internal
surplus. What do you think the situation of Australia would be now
the employment situation, the cost situation, the price situation-if
we hadn't done that; if there was another $ 500 million. This would
have got out of control, and it would have made it impossible for us to
do what we are going to do and that is to reduce the income tax burden
on the lower and middle income tax earner. After all, it is the
taxpayer who pays for all these promises. You can't give them and
at the same time allow the taxpayer not to pay them. We have given
an earnest of our interest in social welfare, but we also want to pay
attention to people who have children to bring up, houses to pay off,
and who are themselves earning and need an incentive to earn more.
Perhaps those are differences.
Thank you, Prime Minister. 



EMBARGO: 8. 30 p. m. on 22 October 1969 FINAL PARTY TV INTERVIEW
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, FOR ABC TELEVISION NETWCRK
Interviewer: Mr. George Wilson
Q. First, Prime Minister, how successful do you think you
have been in your attempt to make foreign affairs and defence the main
issues in this election?
PM. Foreign affairs and defence are the main issues in this
election. It is not a matter of my attempt to make them so. They are
the main issues in this election. Any domestic programme that is put
forward for Australia can only succeed provided Australia is secure
against attack from abroad, provided Australia retains its alliances
with its powerful friends. The foreign affairs and defence area is
overriding at this election and I have no doubt at all that the people of
Australia fully realise this. The real question is: Why is the Opposition
so frightened to talk about foreign affairs and their defence policy? You
haven't heard anything from them at all or I haven't. I haven't heard
their Leader mention it at all because he is running away from the
question because he knows it is overriding and because, as I believe,
he knows most Australians realise it's overriding.
Q. What do you think of Mr. Whitlam's timetable for
withdrawal from Malaysia?
PM. Oh, it's merely a restatement of the withdrawal to
isolationism which he said before " all Australian troops will be
withdrawn by the time all British troops are withdrawn from that area".
There is nothing new in it except I think there is an extraordinarily
impertinent attempt to mislead and to confuse the Australian people as
to what is involved in what he proposes. You see, he said, " All that is
at stake is a different destination". It's worth looking at that because it
is a very strange way of putting it. You see, what is at issue is: Do
Australian troops remain in that area in Singapore in that area ground,
air and naval forces or do they all withdraw to the isolationism of
Fortress Australia. That's what is at issue. And he is going to bring
them all back to the isolationism of Fortress Australia. What he says
is: " Oh, the only thing at issue is the destination". The only thing at
issue by that, he means, is whether they stay there or whether they
come back to Australia, but what a way of putting it, and what an attempt
to confuse and mislead. / 2 
-2
Q. But don't you think that many people might find a certain
amount of attraction in Labor's plans to abolish National Service and to
withdraw from Vietnam?
PM. I think there would be a number of people who would be
attracted by the suggestion of the abolition of National Service, I believe
there would be many many more who would not be attracted by that idea
and who would not want it to be brought into effect. And I am positive
that Australia's requirements are that we shouldn't abandon National
Service. It would immediately mean a cut in the Army by one-third and
there is no way ever put before us in which our armed forces can be
maintained at the strength we need unless we do retain National Service.
Now, we will retain it and the Opposition will not and that is their first
real blow at Australia's security. There are many others but that's a
real blow. On the question of Vietnam, I think all Australians would
want to see a peace in Vietnam which provided an opportunity for the
South Vietnamese people to elect the sort of government they want and
which would enable all foreign troops to withdraw. I am sure they
would. I would. But that is a different proposition from unilaterally
withdrawing, abandoning the United States and the South Vietnamese,
giving up what was a proper objective of getting a proper just peace for
the South Vietnamese people and cutting and running and leaving our
allies in the lurch. Now that is a different proposition and I don't
believe most Australians would want to see that happen, particularly
when they took into account the effect it would have on the world, and
on Australia's credibility in the world, and I think the effect it would
have on our alliances with the United States.
0. What is your reaction to those critics who have been
saying that you want to concentrate on foreign affairs and defence,
simply because your domestic proposals are no nebulous*.,
PM. I think it is utterly ridiculous, because our proposals
are not nebulous in the least compared with the Opposition's proposals.
Let us take national development as an example. There isn't one
proposal that I can find in their policy for national development. None
at all. Oh, setting up a commission here, or a committee there, but
nothing that isn't nebulous. Now we have got specific proposals to take
Australia into the atomic age, to set aside $ 100 million for water
conservation, for exploration of water resources, to establish an
institute of marine science so that we can find out more about the waters
around our coast and know more about the Reef we wish to protect. All
these are specific requirements as are the suggestions for building
railways. There isn't one in the Opposition's policy speech. If you go
through our proposals, you will find they are specific. And they do take
some account we do realise that there is going to be in the future a need
by the States for more revenue for their own requirements. This is not
mentioned in the suggestions put forward by the Opposition, the nebulous
suggestions. / 3 
p 3r
Q. What would you say has emerged as the main domestic
issue?
PM. Oh, I think without question it is whether we continue
with that kind of responsible economic management which has led to
the unprecedented growth that we see around us now, to the prosperity
we see around us now, to the employment situation we see around us
now, to the general excitement in Australia, the general growing in
Australia, and the general building of Australia's population, The
question is whether we can continue with that kind of management and
keep inflation under control as we do or whether we put all that at risk
by injecting hundreds of millions into the economy when there isn't
manpower to match it, there are not resources to match it. It is
injecting hundreds of millions into the economy for the sake of making
specious promises at an election. Look, if these specious promises
are accepted, there is no doubt at all that either there will be heavier
taxation required or that inflation is going to run rampant in Australia.
There is no choice between those two. This will happen must happen.
Now what is the result of that. If inflation runs wild, then there will
unquestionably be first, damage and hardship done to pensioners, low
income earners, to primary producers, to all those who have no way
of meeting cost rises which run from inflation. Also, there will
undoubtedly be a diminution of that growth capital we need, that
development capital we need from abroad. And if there is a diminution
of that, then we won't be able to keep our immigration record at the
record heights we have it at now, and there will not be the same job
opportunities which we have now. All this the growth, the employment,
the building up of our population, the stability of those on fixed incomes
depends on good economic management. Now Australia has seen the
results of good economic management and we can see this around us
now. All this will be put at risk if the specious promises are accepted.
Q. Finally, Prime Minister, with only a couple of days before
the poll, what is your final message to the electorate?
PM. Well, I would say this: I think that at this poll on October
Australians are making a momentous choice which is going to have
an effect on the future security and possibly the future existence of this
country. And so they have to choose which defence policy they prefer.
First, do they wish to alienate our allies? Do they wish to retreat
unilaterally from Vietnam? Do they wish to retreat from Malaysia/
Singapore? Do they wish to argue about joint defence bases with the
United States? Do they wish, having driven us into that kind of
isolationism, then to cut our own defence forces so we can't defend
ourselves? This is the first choice they have to make. Secondly, as I
said, the maintenance of the existing prosperity and economic
advancement of Australia which has been shown to be in good hands
and which is at risk and threatened by the proposals made by the
Opposition. This is what the electors must decide on October 25. And
I hope for Australia's future security, for Australia's continuing growth,
for Australia's future name in the world, the electors will choose that
Liberal/ Country Party coalition which has made our name stand so high
and which at home has brought the benefits we see around us vvery day.
Those are the choices for the electors and I have little doubt what their
choice in fact will be.
Q. Thank you, Prime Minister. 



PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR JOHN GORTON AT SHERATON MOTOR HOTEL;
MELBOURNE. 24 OCTOBER 1969
PM: P'am always happy when Gallup Polls are runiiing for rather
than against. I can only repeat what I said previously that the real
poll we are interested in is the poll on Saturday the
Q. Would you care to forecast the election outcome, Mr Gorton?
' PM: I wouldn't like to forecast by how many seats we will win it,
but I don't think there is any doubt but that we will win it. The only
reason I wouldn't like to forecast by how maany seats is because I
leave that to the political experts and pundits. I wouldn't like to be as
wrong as I think some of them might be.
Q. You don't feel you might have been better having more
public meetings. than you -have held in this campaign?
PM: No, I don't think so, or if so, perhaps one or at the most
two more-. I have had public meetings in Perth and Adelaide and
Hobart if you count the sort of thing to which the press came in
Evans; it was not really a public mee ting, but I think those sort of
things do in Melbourne and Sydney and Brisbane and Townsville
and Rockhampton. I might have had one more if I had replanned because
it was planned to have the majority of them towards the end of the
campaign.
Q. Would you -have had them in a capital, Sir?
PM: Well, I don't think we would need to have another meeting
in a capital city/ After all, we had a fairly good one at Moonee Ponds
and a good one in Sydney the night before. I don't want to go around to
the suburbs and have a couple of hundred listless people like Whitlam
does.
Q. There have been a lot of people ringing up in Melbourne
and saying what a scurrilous campaign it is. Do you think it has
been rougher.... ./ 2 
K'"
2.
PM: i think there has been for a long time a sort of fairly
organised smear campaign going
Q. Aimed at you personally or other candidates?
PM: No, think mainly at me. t don't know about the other
candidates.
Q. Would ; you like to say who might be behind it?
PM: No.
Q. Do you think it has b een effective?
PM: t would hope not. I don't think there is room for this sort
of thing in Australia.
Q. How do you stop it, then?
PM: I don't think there is any way to stop it except to believe
that Australian people are not affected by it.
Q. Does it distress you?
PM: I think it is rather revolting that that sort of thing should
happen. IL reminds you of little white frog-bellied things scurrying
around in a sewer. But I don't think it has got a proper place and
t wouldn~ t say that it unduly distressed m . e personally.
Q. What are the symptoms of such a campaign?
PM: I don't know what you mean by symptoms.
Q. Where do you see it reflected?
PM: Oh, in the sort of literature that is put out, photographs
put ouit and that sort of thing.
Q. This is separate, you feel, to any allegations that St. john made?
Or do you think it is part of the same thing.
PM: PM: t hink it is all part of the same picture. 
3.
Q. Do you think St. John himself.
PM: I wouldn't want to comment on Mr St John.
Q. You me n t ioned earlier in the week, it was in the
Sun-Pic. I think last Saturday that there were two people
running a campaign against you. It left us with a guessing gameand
you mentioned in Brisbane that they weren't politicians.
Are these people in public life and are these the sort of people
you think are running this campaign against you or ' Eese just
individuals who are oppos ed to you or they journalists
PM: Oh, I think we can leave this as a guessing game.
Your guess would be as good as mine. I am fairly sure it would be.
Q. Have you learnt any lessons from this campaign is
there anything you would have done differently....?
PM: No. I don't think I would have given the Policy Speech
in any different way because a Policy Speech as such ought to be
one that can be put before people in a composed and coherent way
without being broken up. There are meetings I like better than
doing that sort of thing, but I still think it is probably the best
way to do it if a Policy Speech is to. be regarded as putting programmes
before the people for the next three years. We can't have the
staged faithful at a public meeting the way our principal opponent
can. So I think we will continue to do it that way.
Q. Why not Sir?
PM': Well in the first place, we don't go along and attempt
to bust up
Q. We are talking about having it on stage. Why couldn't
this be done in the same way?
PM: I suppose you could if you filled the hail by tickets
only admission tickets only but that is about the only way you could
do it, because if it was a meeting where tickets were issued to the
faithful only it could scarcely be called a real public meeting.
[ f it is a real public meeting and the likelihood of interjections
and noise and so on which I like the likelihood of At a meeting
we hold is much greater than at a Imeeting they hold, and I think this 
4.
would interfere with the proper presentation of the Policy Speech.
But after that, I would sooner be out speaking publicly. I think the
meetings I liked the strect meetings we had in Queensland, at
Tow nsville and Rockhampton. t would not be sure and this
is just thinking; it is not to be attributed to me you are asking
me the approaches and these are not decisions... I might possibly
have a couple more meetings earlier on, but I am not sure in my own
mind whether it is better to have a few and then concentrate them in
the last five or six campaigning days.
Q: On the question of campaigning, Sir, has this campaign
brought home to you the absurdity of the Broadcasting and Television
Act in respect of the broadcasting and televising of political material?
What are your inclinations towards the amendment of that Act?
PM: tI think the absurdity was first brought home when there
was to be a by-election for some State seat, and the question arose
wie
Q. Curtin, wan't it?
PM: lIt was a State by-election somewhere... in theory that
was supposed to have prevented in some way the covering of the
0 . Curtin one. I can't imagine why these restrictions were brought in.
tI can't see any practical reasons for them.
I don't think it is terribly important. It is very nice for the
S newspapers. It is strange to hear a newspaper complaining'
Q. Are you going to change it?
PM: We will have a look at it.
Q. Senator Greenwood seemed to think this week that what
the na tion needed most rather than a five cent cigar is a censor to
watch the way we write about politics....
PM: H-e has denied that, you know.
Q. Did he deny it publicly?
PM: Yes.
Q. He denied that the report was accurate, did he?
PM: Yes. I haven't gone into it in any depth but he has
denied that the report as it came out was accurate and said what he 
PM: PM:
Q.
PM: was trying to say. I am repeating what a newspaper reported what
he had to say so I won't vouch for the truth of it'. It was reported
that what he had to say was he didn't say that at all because he thought
there should be some way of seeing that policies put forward were not
distorted or were reported or something of that kind.
1 ' 11 , Argue it out with him later.
I would be a bit surprised if he said there should be any
censorship because I am quite sure we wouldn't. I am sure I don't.
Are you happy with the reporting of your campaign?
Not particularly ' Unhappy with it. Not particularly unhappy
with the reporting of the campaign. But I query some of the comments
of some of the reporters. I am not disturbed about this but you asked
me and it is in my mind. I think I had. a good meeting, for example,
at Forrest Place. We had interjectors and that was rather fun. Somebody.
went over with Mr Whitlamn and said Fare st Place was a much better
meeting because he had more people and he didn't have any interjectors,
and he had won the battle hands down. Fair enough. But if that is to
happen, then when I go to Townsville and have 1, 000 people on the same
street corner that he had 85 that might rate a mention too. That's
what I meant. But I don't feel deeply about it. It's a small thing.
This -limitation of candidate's expenses has come up again.
I think it is $ 500 isn't it?
Quite frankly, I wouldn't like to tell you with complete
surety what it is because I know when I was standing for the Senate,
for example I always used to as ~ itxxisx everybody else on
both sides did sent in their returns and said they hadn't spent
anything or just spent their hotel bills, which in fact was true. We
hadn't. Somebody had. They had put advertisements in and put things
on. Whether, legally, somebody doing that means that you have done it,
I don't know. It can't I don't think. I suppose the basis of it of
putting a limitation on spending out of one's own pocket is to try and
give everyone a fair go, to try and stop a chap with a whole lot of
money from overwhelming somebody who hasn't. That I am sure must
have been the genesis of it. But whether you can extend that to say 
that nobody can help a candidate is rather a trickier sort of
a question.
Q. As it is the law is being thrown rather into contempt
by the fact of some candidates, for example, refusing to sign
a declaration that they have spent particular amoits. There
has neveK been any suggestion that anything should be done about
them. Doesn't it seem a bad law
PM: Whether the law only applies to spending out of one's
own pocket is something. fairly significant, and I haven't had a
legal interpretation of just whether it does. I would think there
would be very few candidates who would spend out of their own
pocket more than was allowed, but I would think that every candidate
would have people collecting funds for him or donations being given
to him which he would use in his'campaign. Whether that is a
breach of the law or not, I doubt, but I am not giving a legal
opinion on it.
Q. Will 18-yiear-olds have a vote at the next Federal
election?
PM: t believe they will. There is the question as you know
of getting uniform with the States,, so that we can have a uniform
electoral~ roll and ther-is, so the conference of Attorneys -General
tell me, other problems which come up and which they are
discussing well, all right, if somebody is deemed to be a major
and not a minor, what about inheritance of property and all those
other kinds of things. But I have little doubt at all but that that
will be ironed out.
Q. . By the time this three years is up?
PM: Yes. I would have little doubt that that would be so.
Q. You think they will be voting next time round
PM: I think so.
Q. Are you happy with that prospect from your party's
point of view?
PM: Who knows what the situation will be in three years'
time. We certainly wouldn't lose by 18-year-olds voting, but
I don't think that ought to be the deciding factor 



DECLARATION OF HIGGINS POLL
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton NOVEMER 1969
The first thing I would like to do is to express my gratitude
to the electors of Higgins for the majority they gave me. I also want to
express my gratitude to all those who worked so hard during the eleCtion
campaign, manning booths, sending out literature and doing all the work
required for a successful election. I thank you very much indeed for that
and I pledge that I will try to be a representative in the new Parliament
worthy of your work and support.
I am pleased to see that the Government has been returned
with a majority which looks as if it will be a good working majority of
seven or nine, because I feel it would have been, as I said in the campaign,
dangerous indeed for Australia if the Government had not been returned.
And that is the second point I want to make.
Having said that, I think that I should point out that there
was undoubtedly a swing against the Government during the election
campaign. It was a swing greater than would be expected. One had to
expect a swing of some kind back from an all-time high but not one
sufficient to lose 13 or 14 seats, and not one of the magnitude, particularly
in States outside Victoria, which was shown.
I think this is an indication that while the Government has
been returned, the electorate has not been completely satisfied. There
is some dissatisfaction shown by the vote and it is necessary for that to
be identified and rectified. This will be the task of my Government
assuming it is my Government after Friday, and I confidently believe it
will be to do this and to examine our policies searchingly so that in the
next election we can win overall as convincingly as you have allowed me
to win in this division. This we pledge ourselves to do; to examine all
our policies searchingly for that purpose.
Thank you very much. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 79/ 1969
IN~ TERIM COUNCIL FOR A NATIONAL FILM
AND TELEVISION TRAINING SCHOOL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Earlier this year ( on 13 August), I announced that the
Government had accepted the recommendation of the Australian Council for
the Arts that an Interim Council be established to investigate and report on
the form and location of a National Film and Television Training School.
I have invited the following persons, who have accepted my
invitation, to become members of the Interim Council:-
Mr. W. P. Coleman, M. L. A. ( Chairman)
Mrs. Dudley Erwin
Mr. Phillip Adams
Mr. S. G. Hawes
Mr. Barry 0. Jones
Sir Robert Madgwick, 0. B. E.
Sir Ian Wark, C. K C. B. E.
I am sure that each will make a valuable contribution towards
the establishment of the National Film and Television Training School.
The first function of the Interim Council will be to confer
with appropriate representatives of the educational and film fields and to
recommend to the Government an appropriate location for the School. The
Council will then consider the matters necessary to bring the School up to
the point of actual operation.
CANBERRA 14 November 1969
( See background attached) 
FILM AND TV TRAINING SCHOOL: BACKGROUND
Extract from 13 August Statement:
" In regard to film-making in Australia, the Government has
accepted the recommendation of the Australian Council for the Arts that an
Interim Council be established to investigate and report on the form and
location of a National Film and Television Training School, and has provided
100, 000 for this purpose. The membership of the Interim Council, which
will include a representative of the National Institute of Dramatic Art, will
be announced shortly,
Notes on Members of Interim Council:
Mr. W. P. COLEMAN, M. L. A.
Member, Australian Council for the Arts and Chairman of its Film Committee.
Barrister. Editor of QUADRANT; a former editor of THE BULLETIN.
Sometime Lecturer in Government and Public Administration in the
University of Sydney.
Mr. Barry JONES
Deputy Chairman, Australian Council for the Arts. A graduate in Arts,
Education and Law of Melbourne University. Barrister and Solicitor.
Lecturer in History at La Trobe University. Extensive experience with
radio, TV and major art forms.
Mrs. Dudley ERWIN
Member, Australian Council for the Arts. A graduate in Science and Arts
of New York University. Has organised and produced for stage and television.
Has a vocational interest in Modern Dance and is a Council Member of the
Ballarat Fine Arts Gallery.
Sir Robert MADGWICK, 0. B. E.
Chairman, National Institute of Dramatic Art. Chairman, Australian
Broadcasting Commission since 1967. Chairman, N. S. W. State Cultural
Grants Advisory Committee. Sometime, Vice-Chancellor, University of
New England, Director off Army Education.
Sir Ian W. WARK, C. M. C. B. E.
Chairman, Commonwealth Advisory Committee on Advanced Education.
Sometime, Member of the Executive, C. S. 1. R. Director, Chemical
Research Laboratory, C. S. I. R. 0. / 2 
-2-
Mr. Stanley G. HAWES
Member, Film Committee, Australian Council for the Arts.
Producer-in-chief of the Commonwealth Film Unit. Governor of the
Australian Film Institute. Member, Australian Film Board.
Mr. Phillip A. ADAMS
Member, Film Committee, Australian Council for the Arts. An independent
film-maker. Television critic for " The Australian" newspaper. Also writes
for " The Bulletin" and " NATION". 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 80/ 1969
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE ON RECEIPTS DUTY TAX
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The purpose of today's meeting was to discuss the
problem posed by the recent decision of the High Court regarding
the validity of the receipts duty tax levied by the States.
It is the intention of the States, in order to obtain a
definite and final decision, to take another case to the High Court
to decide whether this tax is still held to be invalid in some or all
circumstances. Both the States and the Commonwealth hope that in
this important matter a final decision can be arrived at as soon as
possible. Further, at the request of all the State Premiers, the
Prime Minister and Treasurer agreed to put to Cabinet a proposal
that, in the event of the present taxes being found invalid in some or
all respects, the Commonwealth should pass legislation, on a uniform
basis, imposing a like tax and enabling the States to receive it. This
would prevent the loss of revenue to the States which would otherwise
occur during the present financial year.
If this were done, it would be sought to make the
Commonwealth legislation retrospective to the date of this statement.
CANBERRA 18 November 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 81/ 1969
FURTHER DROUGHT ASSISTANCE TO QUEENSLAND
The Prime Minister announced today a further important
measure of relief for drought stricken farmers in Queensland.
Mr. Gorton said that the Premier had advised him that, with
the increasing severity of the drought, many hard hit primary producers
will find difficulty in meeting the Crown rentals on their land and their
local authority rates.
Recognising that neither the State Government nor the local
authorities can suffer a loss of revenue by deferring or remitting these
payments due from farmers and as much as $ 2 million could be involved
this year the Commonwealth Government has undertaken to make
non-interest bearing advances to the State Government. From these moneys
advanced by the Commonwealth the State Government will be able, in
appropriate cases, to make carry-on loans to the drought stricken farmers
from which they can meet their payments of Crown rentals and local
authority rates. Mr. Gorton said that these advances by the Commonwealth
to the State Government would be free of interest and that it would be a
matter for the Queensland Government to determine whether or not, as with
their present carry-on loans to drought stricken farmers, they should
charge interest at concessional rates in respect of the advances which they
made because they will be meeting administrative costs and, within reasonable
limits, any losses which may arise.
CA NBERRA November 1969
BACKGROUND: The Commonwealth has already agreed for 1969-70 to
meet on a dollar-for-dollar basis expenditure on eligible drought relief
measures up to $ 4 million and to meet the full cost in excess of $ 4 million.
It was anticipated that payments under this agreement would cost the
Commonwealth $ 8 million in 1969-70, but on the latest available information
it is now estimated that the Commonwealth Government's share of drought
relief measures in Queensland this year could amount to $ 17 million.
In the four years ended June 1969 the Commonwealth
provided Queensland with assistance totalling $ 17 million for approved
drought relief measures. In 1966-67 and 1967-68 the Commonwealth
provided special financial assistance of a general revenue nature to
Queensland to help offset the adverse effects of drought on State revenue.
This additional assistance totalled approximately $ 5 million. 



1
FOR PRESS: P. M. NO. 82/ 1969
RE-APPOINTMENT OF SIR ALEXANDER DOWNER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Sir Alexander Downer, K. B. has been re-appointed
as High Commissioner for Australia in Britain for a further term until
24 October 1970. Sir Alexander was appointed as High Commissioner
on 25 October 1964 for a period of five years.
I am grateful to Sir Alexander for agreeing to this
extension of his appointment in a position in which he has served
Australia with great distinction.
CANBERRA
24 November 1969 



LINKING OF EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY
Broken Hill, N. S. W. 29 NOVEMBER 1969
Spech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. McCusker, Mr. Mayor, the Hon. the Premiers of New South Wales
and South Australia and Parliamentary Colleagues both Federal and State
and Ladies and Gentlemen:
Mr. Askin, Mr. Hall and I have each -just driven a dog
spike, suitably embellished with gold or silver plate, into the track at the
back of us. It is not for me to say how skilfully we did the job:' I think
we were assisted by the fact that the hole was probably bored out beforehand
for us to put the spikes into: But at least they went in, and that means
that officially the East-West Standard Gauge Railway is just about complete.
On the 12 January, the first through train will journey across
this country unimpeded by break of gauge, and travelling in 65 hours some
2, 500 miles across a bridge of steel which spans this continent and which
serves and will serve not orly as a bridge but as a tie that binds.
Each of the Premiers and myself have, I think, some
special right to be present and to meet you and to take part in this ceremony.
Mr. Askin has a right because Broken Hill is a part of New South Wales
and, theoretically at any rate, subject to the laws of New South Wales.
Mr. Hall, because Broken Hill can really be regarded almost as a suburb
of Adelaide, being only some nine hours away. And myself, I think, because
the Coalition Government some time ago took the first steps in the work
which came to fruition today and is providing something like half the
financial cost of it.
For the first time in more than a hundred years, this bridge,
this tie will be operating, and it will add a new dimension to the East-West
traffic; it will open a new chapter in our history. It is not possible today
to name all those who have played their part in the effort which came to
fruition today, but inevitably the names of the late Sir Harold Clapp, the
late Mr. Eddie Ward, the Minister for Transport in a previous Government,
and I think above all, my own Ministerial colleague, Mr. Wentworth,
come to mind. It was Mr. Ward who first started negotiating with the
States in these matters, and it was Mr. Wentworth who chaired the
Government's Parliamentary Committee on Standardisation I am not
sure that that Committee was ever appointed with the approval of the
then Government but it went ahead anyway under Mr. Wentworth' s
guidance. And it was the work of that Committee and the response by the
Commonwealth and State-Railways Commissioners who joined so
wholeheartedly in this co-operative effort which led to getting the same
gauges on the main Australian trunk routes. It is very fitting indeed, I
think, that Mr. Wentworth should be with us at this ceremony. / 2 
-2
What I have been speaking of is something that has been
done, and since it has been done it is virtually a part of the past, so we
should turn our eyes to the future. And in this field of transport in the
future, there are three more projects coming up, coming rapidly up.
The first is the construction of a new railway from Port
Augusta to Whyalla which will give Whyalla its first rail link with the rest
of Australia. The second is the construction of a standard gauge connection
to Adelaide from this East-West line which will take three years and cost
some $ 50 million. The third is a study of proposals for a new standard
gauge line to Alice Springs to eliminate the break of gauge at Marree and
to avoid the disruptions to traffic which natural disasters from time to
time have caused. These are continuing steps in the development of our nation,
and I would stress two things about them. One is that transport costs in
Australia have been, and are, a major factor in the whole of our business
and commercial activity and in the prices at which goods are finally sold.
These costs represent a greater part of national expenditure than do the
transport costs of most industrial and developed countries, and this must
present a continuing challenge to all Governments State and Federal
to all citizens, to all those engaged in the work of seeking to overcome
this transport cost imposed upon us. If we can overcome it together, we
will have taken one of the great steps forward towards reducing the costs,
the final cost of things which people buy.
And the second thing I want to stress is that in the field of
transport, whether it be by air or by sea, or by land by rail
developments such as we are seeing today will continue and help to make
us think as one nation. It is one thing to say that a people is indivisible,
that the nation is indivisible, but it is another to know in practical terms
that this in fact is so in the minds of all its citizens. And I think this work
will help to knit us together.
I congratulate all those who have taken part in the planning
and construction of this standard gauge right down to the fourth-last dog
spike that has been hammered into the track. The job has been well
planned, well done and will, for all the future of Australia, be a great
contribution to the nation.
I wish all those who use this trans-continental railway
safe, fast and comfortable travel, and I think that you all realise, you
here today, that you are in fact, as you are, taking part in a really
historic ceremony. 



CIVIC RECEPTION ON ThE OCCASION OF THE
LINKING OF THE EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE
Broken Hill, N. S. W. 29 NOVEMIBER 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Premiers, Distinguished Colleagues, both Federal and State and Gentlemen:
For some reason or other during the past three-quarters ox
an hour or so, I recalled two sayings which I think, perhaps, might be
known to you. One is something to do with an orphan called Oliver Twist
whom you may remember had a particular request to make after a heavy
meal. And the other I hope nobody, including me, will take this
personally the other was that description of Australia as a land where
there were fewer people to the square mile and more speeches to the
square meal than in any other civilised country! At any rate, this addition,
I promise you, is not going to be for long.
I suppose there is no city in Australia whose name is as
well known internationally as is the name of this city of Broken Hill. I
don't know whether it is the city itself which has become a household word
in the markets of the world where people in some esoteric fashion deal in
stocks and shares and futures and all these other things, or whether it is,
because of the giant Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. which started here.
But in any case it is a name known throughout the world.
I don't suppose, either, that any of us here have lived long
enough to know what this area was like before this city was built. I
understand, from what I have read, that it was a bleak featureless
landscape, except of course for " The Barrier" and " The Hill", populated
by almost nobody, an area to which one could come only by stage-coach
or in the course of boundary-riding. And there is a story told and I
think a true one of a visiting preacher coming to this area and running
across a young man digging a fence post hole, and stopping to talk to him.
The young man, not having any other human company for so long, bubbled
over with conversation and couldn't be stopped talking, because he was so
happy to see a fellow human being. Finally the preacher stopped him and
said: " Listen my son, have you been to Communion?" and he said: " Well,
I don't think I have, but I was at Menindee last week! Another instance,
I think, of the isolation of this area! / 2 
-2
But look at what it has turned into. And can't we take it,
perhaps, as a symbol of what Australia has done in wresting a living from
a harsh and arid land under bad conditions, without the help of the smiling
landscapes or the heavy rainfalls of Europe or countries where the land is
not so forbidding. We have come into this interior our fathers and our
grandfathers and have turned it into what it is, and what we have turned
it into is merely a challenge to what we must turn it into in the next
generation. And here again today in Broken Hill was a new step forward
in Australia's history. We have spanned the continent before the hard way by
land, the overlanders further north, driving their cattle across; we have
spanned it the easy way in recent years by air. We can now span it,
without being impeded, by rail one more step in the continuing progress
of this country. It was a great honour for me to drive ( in a way which I
wouldn't consider to be extremely expert) that spike into the railway today,
but I would like, in reply to what Mr. Fitzpatrick has said, to say that if
I am going to be charged any dues by the Union for this, then I want to have
a union ticket and I would be perfectly happy to pay the dues, or one-365th
of them, if I could get a unicn ticket:' You see, I ran into this once before.
I came from country much like this rainfall of eleven inches if we were
lucky and the country looked much the same. We were growing oranges
and we had a packing shed and I used to work eight or nine hours a day in
the packing shed and so did my wife and so did three other people. We
were approached at one time by the Storemen and Packers Union who said
we should all take out union tickets. I was delighted because I would have
made more money paying myself than I was able to make out of growing
and selling oranges. But unfortunately they wouldn't let me join. They
said: " No, you are the boss. You can't have a union ticket. I hope this
won't apply on this occasion, but if there is any suggestion of dues, at
least I'll get the ticket:
I said this wasn't going to be long, and it isn't. It has been
a pleasure to have been with you. It has been an honour to have been
associated with the greatness of accomplishment of all those who over the
years have planned and constructed this great work. Before I sit down, as
I said at the station, Wentworth is a name that must be associated with this
work. I echo the Town Clerk in again saying this. But it wasn't only
because of all the work over all the years that he put into it that I asked
him here today. It was because I was quite sure if I didn't, we would have
his wife parading up and down in front of us with a huge placard saying,
" Where's Wentworth?" as she did when the Melbourne / Sydney line was
opened! So for both those reasons, Bill, we are happy to have you with
us, and I congratulate all concerned on this work. 



3DEC 1969
FOR PRESS: P. M. NO. 84/ 1969
DEPUTATION ON FOUR WEEKS' ANNUAL LEAVE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, and the Minister
for Labour and National Service, Mr. Snedden, this afternoon
received a joint deputation on four weeks' annual leave for the
Public Service. The Chairman of the Public Service Board,
Sir Frederick Wheeler, was present, and the deputation comprised:-
Mr. H. J. Souter, Secretary, A. C. T. U.
Mr. D. L. Linehan, President, Council of
Commonwealth Public Service Organisations
Mr. P. R. Munro, Secretary, C. C. P. S. O.
Mr. P. D. Allsop, President, Australian Council
of Salaried and Professional Associations
Mr. W. Richardson, Executive Officer, A. C. S. P. A.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Prime Minister
said that after listening to the case presented by the deputation he
undertook to study it fully and to bring it before Cabinet for
consideration as quickly as possible.
CANBERRA 1 December 1969 



PRESENTATION OF AUSTRALIAN FILM INSTITUTE
AWARDS FOR 1969
National Library, Canberra, ACT 2 DECEMBER 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Professor, Distinguished Guests and Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is usual, of course, to say that it is a pleasure to talk to an
audience gathered together for whatever purpose it may be. On this
occasion it is more than true because I think that what you have done in the
past, and what we can, if I may say so, do together in the present and the
future, will bring a new dimension to Australian life. We can show the
rest of the world what Australia Is, how its people live, and impress on
them the fact that there are other things than avant-garde kangaroos or
Ned Kellys in this great country of ours.
You m~ ay be a little surprised to hear me say that because I
am sure that a number of you would remember some years ago, as a
Senator when I didn't have to watch my words so closely because they
were taken to mean what in fact they meant and weren't interpreted by
others and then criticised as a result of the interpretation I pointed out
in the course of a debate that I was attracted to the kind of television film
and other films in which booted men advanced towards each other at the
crossroads of a small town in the Western, used the immortal line from the
" Secret Life of Walter Mitty" " I wouldn't do that if I wez yew, Toledo".
I also found some attraction to the kind of private eye film where somebody
went out into the night with a couple of revolvers, was attacked, hit on the
head by beer bottles, knocked into the gutter, and five minutes later was
able to get up and lick his weight in wildcats. This attracts me because
it is the sort of milieu to which I am accustomed if you understand what
I mean! Well, at the time that caused a little comment and I think for
most of the population it caused a certain amusement because they agreed
by and large with it. To a section of the population engaged in writing,
particularly political correspondents from Canberra, it gave an opportunity
to hold up their hands in horror that such a Philistine had come amongst us.
But you must remember that at this stage and in that context, those remarks
were made against a background of speech after speech after speech dealing
solely and exclusively with culture in the films.
Now I'm no Goering. Every time I hear the word. " culture",
I don't want to reach for my revolver, but I do want and did want to have
some opportunity to feel other than like a cultured pearl, if I may say so,
and occasionally to swim into the sea and have these folk things before us.
. e/ 2 
2-
But I think on the whole I might in the intervening years have been
justified because you will agree with me, won't you, that critical taste
on the whole has tended to catch up with me.
I understand that Westerns are now high fashion and Western
fans include the critics of " Les Cahiers du Cinema" and " Sight and
Sound", so perhaps one was a little avant-garde oneself at that particular
time. But on becoming Prime Minister, it did seem to me that the
film industry here in Australia had reached that climax, that point
where a decision had to be made, which occurs in all the best Westerns.
And so one of my earliest acts was to push forward plans for the
Australian Council of the Arts as a whole and I pay tribute to my
pre decessor for having announced its inauguration and we nominated
the Council Members in June, 1968. They met a month later and their
Film and Television Committee had its first meeting in November of
1968. The Interim Report of that Committee was in my hands by
May 1969. It was adopted without any alteration, the moneys asked for
were provided without any reduction which is even more unusual and
in this year's Budget, provision was made for 11300, 000 $ 100, 000 for
setting up an Interim Council to plan for a National Film and Television
School The personnel for that Interim Council have been announced and
the first action they are going to undertake is to all go overseas to study
things, and then come back again and tell us what we ought to do. But
at least that has been launched, and I think the travellers will be launched
in about another three weeks.
Then there was $ 100, 000 for the setting up of an experimental
film fund to which you referred mainly for short subjects, short subjects
which could be exhibited either on the television screen or as film in
theatres. And then there was an exhibition fund another $ 100, 000 for
the promotion and distribution of such experimental films.
After the election, as I told you, the Council was named.
But there are going to be interesting decisions to be made. Should the
school be part of a university the National Film and Television School
should it be part of a university so the film is seen essentially as an
art form? I don't believe it should, but that will be a matter of
recommendation and discussion and decision. I would prefer to see it in
rather more practical terms. Perhaps it could be seen, and this is
coming closer to it, I think, as a film school linked with one of the
colleges of advanced education where technologists of all kinds and
we must include in this, I think, if it doesn't upset people directors,
producers, designers of scenery, script write14, all of whom have rn're
than a merely theoretical part to play a practical part to play in the ./ 3 
-3-
development of film and television in Australia.
Or should it as another alternative, and perhaps the best
of the lot, should it be a part of some entirely new not college of
advanced education, not university some entirely new centre where
not only the National Film and Television School sets up for its purposes,
but wher e the National Institute of Dramatic Art might perhaps set up
for its purposes instead of in the University of New South Wales, where
possibly the School of Opera or Ballet might also se t up for its purposes,
and where all these art forms which have so much in common could
perhaps cross-f ertilise aach other. Well these, and perhaps other
things of which I haven't spoken, are the recommendations for which we
are waiting and which, as soon as they are received, will be considered
and on which a decision will be made.
I am told by people closely associated with the industry that
the films of the 1970' s may have very little in common with the films of
the 1950' s or 1960' s in terms of form or content. As to the truth or
otherwise of that, I don't know, but the experimental film fund, I suggest,
is particularly important because through its tactics, through uts trials,
perhaps through its errors, the new writers, directors and editors of the
Australia of the 1970' s will be discovered. And we hope soon to advertise
for applications for assistance to the Australian Council of the Arts and
the Australian Film Institute.
I said in a policy speech in 1969 that if we were returned as
the Government, we would legislate for a film and television development
corporation ( recommended to us again by our advisers), and that this
legislation would be brought down in the first Session of 1970. An initial
capital grant of one million dollars will be provided, and as that is spent,
or as part of it is spent, it will be topped up each year to bring it back to
one million dollars, and the fund will be administered by an independent
board, whose members will be announced after the bill becomes law.
I want to emphasise to you that this fund is intended for
investment in films. It is not intended as a give-away programme.
It is intended for investment. We will be indicating our optimism by
such an investment, but we mustn't be expected, and I am sure it would be
wrong if we did underwrite all the cost of a film or films in this
programme. Producers will still be expected to have a substantial
equity in a film and to show faith in their artistic judgment, and I would
hope and expect that distributors those people whom I am sure many of
us think of a the bA man in the Western films, stalking along in a black
hat and black gauntlets the distributors should also be prepared to invest
in such an enterprise and share the losses, if there are losses, and
profits if there are profits. / 4 
-4
We believe, for we have optimism, that after a period of
time, properly-made investments in film industries will be bringing in
profits and that then there will be no need any longer for the public,
through the Government, to top up the fund each year. That is our
objective, and the measure of our success will be gauged by that.
I hope that the Government, having shown the red badge
of courage or in the case of a Liberal Government, the blue badge of
courage should in turn encourage all investors to back this industry.
We do expect profits in money terms. Above all, we expect
profits in human terms. Our industry, I think in Australia, is one of
the oldest in the world. I am told that " Soldiers of the Cross" was made
in 1899 in Australia in Murrumbeena and frankly that is all I know
about it and probably that is all most people in this room know about it,
but at least there was a film made at that time in Australia. I would like
to see it now. I am sure it has got all thcse jerky little motions they had
in the films we used to see in the past. But that initial silent movie era
was stopped in Australia by the introduction of the talking film, as so
many of the film stars of the time had their careers ruined by the
introduction of the talking film because it didn't seem quite in place for
somebody playing the part of the Queen of Rumania to have a Brooklyn
accent. So in Australia's case there was no great desire apparently in the
rest of the world to hear an Australian accent. And the film industry was
hurt further by the depression and suffered years of official neglect.
Well, the Government has given support to other arts since
the 1930' s ballet, drama, opera. Films in the 1960' s seem to us, and to
me, to be a logical extension. of what we have been doing with increased
momentum in the last couple of years.
The demand for film is very much greater on television than
it ever was when the picture theatres were at their peak. I am told that
18-year-olds today have seen over 500 feature films by watching television
which is more than we ever used to see as children or as 18-year-olds,
travelling each Saturday to see the " Perils of Pauline" in the silent movies.
So even to keep up a respectable proportion of Australian
interest, to be able to show, to lift up to the world a mirror to this
country of ours, we must produce more films and we must produce more
videotape material a a 
I assure you, Sir, and this audience, of my own personal
determination, of my own personal commitment to this, and of my own
personal burning desire that it should be successful for the sake of
Australia and for the sake of the people living in it or some of the
people living in it. Because this gives another opportunity for individuals
with particular talents in this field to be able to express those talents,
express their personalities, have a real reason, an interest in living,
and this is part of what a modern society must provide to all those who
are components of it.
We have done well in the field of painting, of course; that
is perhaps better known than any of our other arts overseas. If in the
next ten years, in the exciting seventies, we can in the film world
produce the equivalent of a Drysdale or a Dobell, then we shall have
amply justified the work that all you gentlemen have done and the support
that you in the audience have given.
We need to be able to see ourselves through the world of
film ourselves through other eyes if you like but the eyes behrzd the
camera. This we need to see in our own country, but even more, I
think, we need other countries to see just how we live and how we think
and how we dispute and what we do.
I doubt if many people living in Asia or in Europe would
have any real idea of what life in the United States is like, if it were
not for films and of course they haven't got any real idea of what life
in the United States is like because they see films, but at least they have
an impression which they get through films! I would hope that it would
be our chance to give an impression, and a true ippression, to people
of the world of what our couitry and our people are like in the city, in
the country, and in the problems which beset each one of them and in
the way in which they seek to overcome them.
I think that in this way we can make a contribution to the lives
of many people in this nation. Through the exciting seventies and at the
end of them, I hope there will be established here a film industry, not
yet as great as those in other countries, but so great that its ultimate
greatness cannot be denied and cannot be prevented. And if this does
come about, then this will be one of the most delightful things for me
personally because I will feel I have had some part in it and I wi 1
feel it is e thing worth having done. I will be able to hold that to myself
even though I haven't done the work that all you others have.
And therefore, Sir, I thank you for having asked me along
tonight, and it was a real pleasure to be able to come. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. L No. 85/ 1969
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL
FOR THE ARTS FOR 1969/ 1970
Statement by the _ Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I have received from the Chairman of the Australian Council
for the Arts the Council's recommendations concerning the major grants
to be made by the Commonwealth Government in support of the performing
arts in the current financial year.
As I announced in August, the Commonwealth Government
will be providing greatly increased support for the work of the Australian
Council in 1970. The Government has done this because of its conviction
that the arts have a vital role to play in the life of this country. Living in
a technological age imposes great strains on an individual. People now
live mainly in vast cities, subject to noise and speed and a multitude of
stresses and strains, not the least of which is the feeling that somewhere
in all this modern technological advancement the human individual has lost
something of his dignity and value.
The arts assert above all the value of the individual. The
great legacy of world art is no more than the sum of individual talent,
individual skills, individual imagination fired by personal vision. The
urge to find expression for feelings and ideas by creating something, by
seeking new words in poetry or prose, by shaping clay, by painting, or
dancing, -by singing or making music or sculpture this urge is fundamental
to man, and one of the great sources of enrichment of human life. Unless
people have some contact with the arts, either creating them or enjoying
them as spectators, their lives are greatly impoverished. In Australia,
where we enjoy a very high standard of material living, it is all the more
important for us to have access to the things in life which provide beauty
and stimulus and a rich personal experience.
In putting forward its proposals for the major grants for
1969/ 1970, the Australian Council has adhered to the same principles
which guided its policies in the past year. Because it-sees the Federal
Government as having a responsibility to establish and maintain the highest
possible standards of artistic endeavour, and to provide a possibility for
talented young Australians to pursue a professional career in their own
country if they wish to do so, it has recommended that the Government
continue to support and develop national level companies in opera, ballet
and drama. It is also concerned to see that standards of national training
in the arts are as high as possible and it is proposing to expand its interest
and responsibility in this area. It has also developed programmes to give
increased access to the arts for country people, to encourage in young
people a love and understanding of the arts, and to promote international
exchanges between Australia and countries with different cultural traditions.
/ 2 
-2
One of the hopes of my Government in making funds available
for the arts is that this will stimulate contributions from many other sources.
I am particularly gratified to see that there have already been substantial
increases in the present year, particularly from certain of the State
Governments who have added considerable sums to the generous provisions
which they are already making, often in the form of splendid buildings and
homes for the arts. Because of the -generosity of some of the State
Governments it has been possible to establish a new national theatre
orchestra and one new State drama company, and there are instances of
co-operative support in many ventures throughout the various States. As
the years go by we will hope to expand this valuable co-operation with
State and local governments throughout the Commonwealth.
1969 was the first year of activity for the Australian Council,
and the Government is proud of the progress already made. The Government,
through the Council, was able to stimulate and support artistic activity of
a very wide variety. As well as the major company activities which
provided ballet, opera, puppets and drama in all States of Australia, the
Special Projects Fund set up by the Council provided assistance to dozens
of smaller companies throughout the country, and supported several projects
of particular interest a retreat for playwrights at the University of New
England, a competition for young music ensembles, a script writing contest
for Australian writers, a visit to Australia by one of America's leading
modern dance teachers, an experimental film and electronic production
which will tour Australia in the coming year. New plays, operas and
ballets were commissioned. More young people than ever before were
allowed into theatres at concession rates. Australia was well represented
abroad by two chamber groups and one choir, all of which received
international acclaim for the standard of their work.
Next year, with the increased funds available, promises to
be very much more exciting. One of the world's most famous ballet
dancers Rudolf Nureyev, will be coming to Australia to dance with our
national ballet company. Sir Tyrone Guthrie, the world-famous producer,
will be spending some months here working with the Melbourne Theatre
Company, the Old Tote Company and possibly in Western Australia as well.
Dance groups from Asia, opera and drama companies from Britain and other
international groups will spend some time in Australia in the course of the
year. We ourselves will be sending abroad an excellent new chamber
orchestra recently formed in this country.
The Australian Council has commissioned a number of
reports, and has sought advice from its committees on new areas of
work which it is hoping to undertake programmes of support for training
professional theatre personnel, expanded assistance to music, an important
new programme of assistance and stimulus for Aboriginal arts. 
3-
The Special Projects Fund, which was such a success in
1969, will be considerably expanded for the coming year. It will provide
a wide variety of professional services to small companies throughout
Australia. It will bring in some of the best international teachers and
producers to work with Australian artists. It will support a play-reading
and advisory service for Australian playwrights and a workshop to allow
young writers to see their work performed. It will provide assistance for
the production of several new Australian plays and one new Australian
musical. It will help develop, in conjunction with the trade unions, a
programme of union interest and activity in the arts similar to those which
flourish in some other countries. It will support experimental work and
innovation in dance, drama, opera and music, and seek out new audiences
for the arts in various ways. It will help in certain special areas such as
New Guinea, and will generally seek to provide support wherever the
possibility exists of stimulating interest or raising standards in the arts
throughout Australia. In one area in particular a significant new step has been
taken. That is in the Government's commitment to provide support for
Australian film and television makers. The Government has accepted the
report of the film committee of the Australian Council which recommended
that a national film and television training school should be established,
that a fund should be set up to provide assistance for experiment in film
and television making, and that the Government should establish a National
Film and Television Development Corporation to provide stimulus to the
fiUm industry in this country. All of these proposals have been agreed to.
The Interim Council of the Film and Television Training School has been
announced and will shortly be beginning its work to determine a location
for this important new national institution. Arrangements are at present
being made for the administration of the experimental fund, and an
announcement is expected early in the New Year. The Government will
also be announcing its intentions before very long with regard to the
National Film and Television Development Corporation.
The Government is particularly pleased to be able to provide
support for Australian film makers. It is aware of the representations
which have been made over many decades for such assistance, and in the
1970' s, where film and television will play such a major role in the mass
communications of an electronic age, it is proper that Australian talents
and skills should be developed so that the voice of this country may be
heard and its image known abroad.
From time to time during the year other grants recommended
by the Australian Council will be announced. Meanwhile I have pleasure in
announcing the first series of major grants recommended by the Council.
CANBERRA 3 December 1969
Note: This statement is being released in Sydney and Canberra. In Sydney,
it will be issued at a press conference to be given by the Council's
Chairman, Dr. Coombs, at 4 p. m. 
GRANTS RECOMMENDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL
FOR THE ARTS FOR THE YEAR 1969/ 1970
1. TRAINING INSTITUTIONS
a) National Institute of Dramatic Art 52,000
b) Australian Ballet School 140,000
c) Professional Training Programmes for
Theatre Personnel 8,000
2. NATIONAL TOURING COMPANIES
a) The Australian Ballet 290,000
b) The Australian Opera 290,000
c) Elizabethan Trust Orchestra 380,000
d) Marionette Theatre 40,000
3. STATE DRAMA ACTIVITIES
a) Old Tote Theatre Company, N. S. W. 100,000
b) Melbourne Theatre Company 110,000o
c) South Australian Theatre Company 31,000
d) Queensland Theatre Company 27,000
e) Canberra Theatre Trust 15,000O
f) National Theatre at the Playhouse, Perth 30,000
g) Tasmania 27,000
4. REGIONAL THEAT11E ORGANISATIONS ASSISTED FROM
THE SPECIAL PRcfCT I'* N
a) New South Wales Professional Drama, Sydne
Ensemble Theatre
Independent Theatre) ( in total) 20,000
Community Theatre)
b) Victoria St. Martin's Theatre 8,500
Victorian Opera Company 4,000
Ballet Victoria 5,000
c) South Australia
Australian Dance Theatre 5,00
d) Queensland Queensland Ballet Company) ( in total) 17,000
Queensland Opera Company)
e) Western Australia
Western Australian Opera Company 10,000
West Australian Ballet Company 8,000
Hole-in-the-Wall Theatre 2,500
f) Australian Capital Territory
Canberra Repertory Society 3,500 
SPECIAL PROJECTS FUND
A Fund to support a wide variety of activities in the
performing arts such as the provision of professional
services, sponsoring of internatilonal visits, underwriting
special productions and productions of new
Australian plays, operas and ballets, encouraging the
interest of young people in the arts, supporting creative
workers in the performing arts, assisting trade union
arts programmes, programmes of experimental work,
activities designed to develop new or special audiences
and awards to encourage higher standards of criticism.
Details still to be announced. 216, 500
6. ABORIGINAL ARTS PROGRAMME
( Details still to be announced) 60,000
7. MUSIC ACTIVITIES
( Details still to be announced) 50, 000
8. FEDERAL CO-ORDINATING AND ENTREPRENEURIAL
ORGANISATIONS a) Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust for its
administration, production division and entrepreneurial
activities ( subject to agreement on grants to associated
companies) 270,000
b) Arts Council of Australia Federal Division for its
administration and country touring programmes ( plus
a reserve of $ 35, 000 for additional activities still to
be developed) 40,000
c) Musica Viva Society 8,000
9. STUDIES AND REPORTS
( Details still to be announced) 20,000
INTERNATIONAiL TOURS
a) Adelaide Festival of the Arts English Opera Group 18, 000
b) Musica Viva Society South East Asia Tour by Robert
Pikler Chamber Orchestra 10,000
Further details still to be announced.
11. FESTIVALS
a) Adelaide Festival of Arts 15,000
b) Festival of Perth 15,0( 0
c) Moomba Festival 8,600
Further details still to be announced.
12. FILM ACTIVITIES
The establishment of the Interim Council of the National Film
and Television School, the Experimental Fund and Exhibiting
Fund. Details still to be announced. 300, 000 



FOR PRESS:--P . No. 86/ 1969
PRESS APPOINTMENT FOR ROYAL VISIT
The Prime Minister, Mr Gorton, said today that press
arrangements for next year's Royal Visit would be supervised by his
Press Secretary, Mr Tony Eggleton.
As Press Co-ordinator for the visit, Mr Eggleton
would be responsible for the coverage by Australian and overseas
media, and would maintain close liaison with The Queen's Press
Secretary. Mr Gorton also announced that Mr Harry Rayner, the
Director of Public Relations for the Department of Defence, had been
appointed Commonwealth Press Liaison Officer. Mr Rayner would
begin duty as soon as possible, and would handle the detailed
arrangements for the large accredited press party expected to be
following the Royal Vi sitors throughout their stay in Australia. He
would be assisted by Mr Bruce King, of the Australian News and
Information Bureau, who would be Assistant Commonwealth Press
Liaison Officer. Mr Gorton said that until the start of the Royal Visit,
Mr Eggleton would combine his supervisory role as Press Co-ordinator
with his duties as Press Secretary to the Prime Minister.
CANBERRA, 7 December, 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 87/ 196
FOUR WEEKS'.{ EAVE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE
Follo~ wing is-the-text-, of-a -telegram despatclied this
morning to Mr. H. J. Soutar, Secretary of the A. C. T. U.
" At the conclusion of the discussion on 1 December
with the joint deputation of the Australian Council
of Trade Unions, the Council of Commonwealth
Public Service Organisations and the Australian
Council of Salaried and Professional Associations,
I said that I would present the claim which you had
submitted for four weeks' annual leave in the
Commonwealth Public Service to the Cabinet as
quickly as possible. My colleagues and I have
now discussed the claim. The Government has
concluded that having regard to existing relevant
circumstances it would be inappropriate to grant
an extra week's annual leave to the Commonwealth
Public Service at this time. I have sent a copy of
this telegram to the President of the Council of
Commonwealth Public Service Organisations and the
President of the Australian Council of Salaried and
Professional Associations. J. G. GORTON
PRIME MINISTER." i
CA NBERRA
11 December 1969 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
WILLIAM QUEALE MEMORIAL
LECTURE
Delivered b_ the Prime Minister, MrlJohn Gorton
At the Bonython Hall, Univers ity of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA
11 DECEMBER 1969
" EDUCATION FOR MANAGEMENT"
Mr President and Gentlemen
Twice in the last few months, men from this plonet earth
have walked the surface of the moon. We saw them on our television sets
and we heard their voices in our homes. Now that is part of the history of
our times. We are back in an everyday world of our own, coping with
everyday problems. But we know that what was previously held impossible,
has been shown to be possible. We have seen this gigantic achievement, and
it should help us all to strive for similar break-throughs in the more mundane
problems which face us.
This, you may say, is a far cry from Education for
Management which is the subject of my lecture tonight. This, you may
say, has little to do with the late William Queale whose memory we honour
tonight and whose memorial lecture it is my very great privilege to be
delivering. Yet it is not, in fact, far removed, and let me tell you why.
The targets for man's first landings on the moon were set
a decade ago. Studies were made, equipment was designed and manufactured,
personnel selected and trained, test flights in space were carried out and
the moon flight itself planned on a world-wide basis. At every point
management techniques were under ruthless test, and without those
management techniques, the moon flight would have failed.
Secondly, the moonshot was a pinnacle of achievement
symbolising a new age, and that new age challenges management to seize
new opportunities, to adopt new methods, to aspire to new horizons.
William Queale, I am sure, would have agreed with that
for he was a man with a vision. It was not my privilege to know him,
though his record and his works are familiar things in the Australian
story. We are in his debt for that which he did for Australia and we
assemble here tonight to acknowledge that. / 2 
-2
I chose to speak to you tonight on education for
management because of my personal interest in the subject and
because I believe, as Disraeli said of England, that " Upon the education
of the people of this country the fate of this country depends Education
of all kinds, but not least education in management.
Management is, I suppose, the science of
using with the maximum economy, manpower, physical resources and
intellectual skills in order to produce the maximum result. The goal
of the skilful manager is to produce, or at least to work to, a blue-print
or masterplan so that the goal, or goals, are set with absolute clarity,
that they are understood at every level of the hierarchy, that each man
knows the job he is to do, and does it without interfering with the work of
others, as expeditiously as careful planning can provide. And he must
be ready to abandon a blue-print, or a masterplan, when new and better
methods are proved, or other changes are evident. These are the tasks
of the manager and administrator.
I would like, first, to sketch the background to education
for management and tell you a little of it s history in Australia. Then,
if I have your patience, I will talk of management' s role in national
development. For the first half of this century our society continued
to develop logically from the revolutions of long ago social,
industrial, scientific and political revolutions which gave mankind
courses to steer and which divided him with " isms" and into comnfunities
distinguished by their wealth cr thdir pvierty, by their social standards or
their technologies, by their political freedoms or their subjection to
arbitrary rule. Two world wars drove mankind fast along these courses,
for better and for worse. The forced draught of war frantically
stimulated man's inventiveness in material matters. He flew, he
learned to communicate across great distances, he discovered
antibiotics, radar, the jet enc'fiTe computer, the guided missile,
nuclear power and he burst IA~ te space age. These were all extensions
of what had been happening.
Then in the last decade or so, he began to separate from
his past. It became clear that all around us things were beginning to
happen that were not an orderly extension of the past, a refinement and
a development of old systems, tested and brought to a level which
satisfied the generation into which we were born. We were facing something
new. / 3 
-3
Peter F. Drucker, Professor of Management at New
York University's Graduate School of Business has this to say
" The last half century has been an age of continuity....
the towering economic achievement of today, the affluent,
mass consumption economies of the advanced countries, their
productivity and their technical powers, are built foursquare
on Victorian and Edwardian foundations and out of building
blocks quarried then. They are, above all, a fulfilment of the
economic and technological promotion of the Victorian and
Edwardian eras and a testimony to their economic vision.
" Now we face an age of discontinuity in world economy
and technology..., it will be a period of change in technology
and in economic policy, in industrial structures and in economic
theory, in the knowledge needed to govern and to manage...
While we have been finishing the great nineteenth century economic
edifice, the foundations have shifted from under our feet.
Drucker goes on to make the point of the need for
" knowledge workers" as distinct from the emphasis on "~ manual workers
So we come face to face with education and management.
Look around us and what do we see? We see a world
very different from the one our fathers knew, from the one we knew as
children and that is not because it is jusi so much older. We are in a
new age of burgeoning technological and scientific change. We are in a
new age of discussion as to how best to use the new tools, the new
knowledge, the new technologies, with which we are now provided.
Tais is the task of the managers, and the hardest factor
to cope with in an advanced community like ours is the " knowledge"
explosion. The hour still only contains 60 minutes and the day only
24 hours but the amount of paper work which has to be dealt with rises
in an exponential curve. As measured by manpower, number of periodicals
or scientific papers, science is growing exponentially with a doubling
time of about fifteen years. Almost ninety per cent of all scientific
endeavour in the history of mankind has been undertaken during the past
fifty years. During the past fifteen years the same number of scientists
were produced as existed during the entire previous period of science.
Exactly the same is true in the social sciences and history. Where can
one begin to burrow through the mountain of paper to make an informed
judgment, except with benefit of computer? / 4 
It is important to understand these changes and
opportunities, for as we understand them, so we shall shape our skills
and condition our hearts and minds to extract the greatest benefits
from them. Thereforel we must look to education even more than we
have in the years gone by.
As our pioneer forbears searched for water to open up
an arid land and as our farmers planted the first grain so that they could
live, so must we, in much the same way, turn increasingly to education
to equip our nation for the long journey ahead. And education, by itself,
is not enough. It is how we apply education to the brave new world of the
seventies, the world which our children will inherit, that will determine
our future and our fate, in a society where knowledge grows and skills
abound. It is true, I think as Drucker postulates, that the most
rapidly growing area in international trade is probably no longer trade
in goods, but trade in technology, in patents and licences. This imt vitably
is creating a new economic and industrial environment for which we
must be educated and which we must know how to manage.
In Australia, as elsewhere, knowledge is growing in
importance in relation to experience. This is inevitable but the trend
is not absolute. There will always be some things that only experience
of life and the years can give. Computers cannot dispense wisdom. Y" Ot,
by and large, we have to accept that experience without knowledge is no
longer of the value that it was. By the same token, knowledge without
experience has a diminished value.
There are, I think, five elements we need to make up
the ideal for our education system.
The first, naturally, is an opportunity for everyone
of school age in Australia to have equal access to
opportunity for education, provided they are good
enough academically. This, by and large, we have.
The second is adequate resources in staff, buildings
and equipment to do the job. The problem is
identified; the final solution is not.
The third is a tertiary education opportunity for all
who have the ability to use it. This depends on
resources. 4 
-The-fourth is a proper adjustment of education
methods and systems to meet the demands of the
new age. This need is recognised, but not yet
satisfied.
-The fifth is more intensive research into fundamentals,
into priorities and methods. ' ibis, too, is recognised.
Much remains to be done.
Today forty per cent of the Australian population is
under twenty-one and therefore of school and university age. And the
young are staying at school longer. The percentage staying on beyond
the age of compulsory attendance is nearly double that of ten years ago.
University enrolments have risen in ten years from 47, 000 to 107, 000
in 1969 and are expected to reach 127, 000 by 1972.
1 quote these facts to show the growth in higher education
and the pressure that is on the system.
There has been, in recent years, an increasing direct
interest by the central government in education. The responsibility for
education outside the Commonwealth territories is primarily one for the
States but for financial reasons there is an interlocking of activity between
the Commonwealth and the State Governments. There is also constitutional
provision for the granting of financial assistance by the central
government to the States on terms and conditions approved by Parliament.
Under these arrangements the Commonwealth is able to
make significant cortributions to education in Australia.
I do not want to bore you tonight with too many figures,
but may I quote just a few to illustrate the point of increased Government
interest in education. The Commonwealth Government is spending on education
almost five times as much per head of population as it was ten years ago.
The amount has gone up from $ 44 a head to $ 22 a head. The total has
risen from around $ 40 million in a polqulation of nine million to $ 265
million this year in a population of 12: i million.
At the same time, the Australian States have more than
doubled their net expenditure on education, per head of population, in
the last ten years and they are now committing nearly one-third of their
total revenue and loan moneys to this end. / 6 
6-
All this has not been enough to solve the problem, but there
are many other calls being made by society on the resources of the community,
and we have, in education, at least been advancing.
In tackling the range of problems we face, and being
mindful of the five elements for an ideal system which I have mentioned,
the Commonwealth and State programmes have touched the whole area
from pre-school to postgraduate and adult education.
It is appropriate for me, I think, to confine myself
largely to the tertiary level for this is where the established education
system and management training come closest together.
A good geea education is, of course, basic to any
professional competence, but it is at the point where specialisation has
taken place that management training is most needed. We must ensure that
the expert is not " grooved" or his vision narrowed by the blinkers of his
specialisation. In talking of management training at the tertiary level,
it may be appropriate for me to mention here that the first university
to introduce a course in commercial studies was the University of
Adelaide which had an Advanced Commercial Certificate in 1902.
The University received a benefaction in that year of
1l, 000 from Mr Joseph Fisher, which was to provide an income for " the
promotion of the study of commerce in the University". The need was
justified on rather negative grounds as was made clear by the inaugural
Joseph Fisher lecturer who said
" The slow starvation of hundreds of young, briefless
barristers, and the forlorn outlook of scores of ' general
practitioners' relegated to the back block townships, must
eventually work a cure by giving pause to the enthusiasm which
creates these in such profusion. Their places would be more
than supplied if it were possible to offer a truly educational
course having a direct bearing on business life equal to that
lavished on the professions."
Well, we've come a long way, I suppose, because
frankly, I do not know of any starving barristers today and most of our
GP's " go bush" only by choice. Adelaide's first commercial certificate
was followed by diplomas and degrees and commercial studies available in
a variety of courses eventually became part of our tertiary education
system in all States. The concept of management training as part of / 7 
-7
commercial studies was introduced in a limited way at a much later date.
Now I come to the resources we have today for management
training, either as part of, or in addition to, commercial training in
the higher levels of our education systems.
The most relevant management education courses are for
Master's degrees in Busiess Administration at the Universities of
Adelaide, Melbourne, New South Wales and Monash. This year the total
enrolment at all of them was 406.
Then there are courses, full -time and part-time, for
diplomas in management, in business studies and business administration
at some of our advanced colleges of education and our leading technical
schools. Something like eighteen institutions are currently providing
these courses over the whole of the Commonwealth.
Supplementing these courses are others with which industry
itself is closely associated. For instance the Australian Administrative
Staff College at Mt Eliza in Victoria, the Summer School of Business
Administration at the University of Melbourne and the Institute of Administration,
run by the University of New South Wales at Little Bay.
Other universities have plans i this field of business
administration ranging from studies at Diploma level to a Master's
degree. Now all this is good up to a point. You will see that
the existing facilities are mostly for undergraduate studies. These are
essential and there will have to be more of them. But when we come to
a discussion of the nation's future needs at postgraduate level in management
we find ourselves in the middle of a continuing deb ate. Should each
Australian State and the Capital Territory bave its own university or its
own College of Advanced Education staffed and equipped for this purpose?
Or should resources be concentrated in one or two
institutions of excellence2 Should we accept the problems posed by
location and possible interstate jealousies for the sake of a concentration
of effort and staff and equipment.
I do not profess to know, but a decision has to be made and
made without too much delay and for myself, I incline towards the
avoidance of too much duplication. But this is a problem to the solution of
which managers themselves should devote their thoughts and decide their
attitudes. / 8 
-8
In some respects, Australia has been slower than some other industrial
countries in its development of management training. The first Master's
Degree in business administration was not available until 1962 and our
education resources are no,-t yet fully geared to the surge in national
development which is upon us, particularly in the mineral industries.
Until about eight years ago, an Australian business
executive who wanted management education at the highest level had to
go abroad and usually he went to America, to renowned institutions like
Harvard and Stanford. Many still do.
And yet, for years before that we had shown the world
we could grow the best wool, wheat and meat in the world, we could
build aeroplanes and ships and develop major industries. Some of our
scientists and medical men had been pre-eminent in their fields and
of world-wide reputation. Australians, in fact, were proving they
could succeed in any company.
But they had little opportunity for refining their admninistrative
skills. The specialist was in his slot. There was little incentive
for him to broaden the base of his management skill.
Now we are seeking to overcome that. Industry at
large is beginning to recognise it as the Institute of Management did
long ago. The demand from traduates and undergraduates for management
training is rising sharply. So too is the demand from industry.
I envisage the solution emerging as the result of joint
development by governments and industry. Most of you will be familiar
with the decision the Government made in May of this year to Institute
an inquiry into Australia's future needs in the field of post-graduate
education in management and how best these needs could be met.
This followed the study made by a panel from the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council which set the future needs of
industry as high as five hundred Masters of Business Administration a
year. Since our decision in May, representatives of the
Commonwealth have been abroad to visit a number of leading business
schools and, as a result, the Commonwealth has invited a group of
overseas experts to conduct the enquiry on the best method of management
training for Australia. Some acceptances of these invitations have
already been received and I would expect the Minister for Educat ion and
Science to be in a position to announce further details about the enquiry
very soon. / 9 
79
I believe, here, we are starting at the right point.
I turn now to management for national development. The
size of the task in Australia hardly needs restating before a distinguished
audience like this, for you are all, in your respective spheres, deeply
involved. It is primarily an exercise in responsible government and
" responsible government? as the late Sir Frederic Eggleston once
said is " the attempt, never completely successful, of free democracies
to secure in an integral process an effective forum, proper consideration
and decision and effective execution".
I see it as an exercise at three levels. First we have
the application of political principles to the formation of policy by
governments. Then there is the administrative arm of government,
which is non-political and continuous, and which provides the tools
governments need to do the j ob. It has vast skills and inherent
qualities of management. I refer to the Public Service.
And finally there is private enterprise which makes
the heart of a nation whole. This we might define as a huge, sprawling,
incredibly diverse association of individuals and comnirinities, bound
only byecononic 17,7 v: d cubject to economic sanctions.
Let us look for a moment at the political level in the
exercise of responsible government. No political philosophy can succeed
in a democracy ( though it may survive) unless it has a concept of
management which is based on the human values of the individual, a
respect for his liberties and an understanding of the forces which motivate
him. There must be incentives to work and prcper rewards for labour.
The opportunity to live without fear and in dignity must be his.
In our early civilisation, man's needs were few. They
were concerned with subsistence and survival. Management was a
primitive exercise in looking after oneself. Today those needs still are
there but they exist in a new environment which is made complicated and
demanding by man himself because of the development of his knowledge,
his skills, his inventions and his innovations.
A political philosophy has to encoutipass in this modern
age full regard t r the liberty of the individual and also recognise a
framework of society in which that liberty can exist. It must be committed
to the security of the social system in a world caught precariously between
the eternal values and the forces of destruction. 
10
It has to be flexible and it cannot be so if it does not
accept the virtues of compromise. Henry Clay, in writing of the Federal
system in America, said compromise was the cement that held the Union
together. " All legislation", he explains " is founded on the
principle of mutual concession.... let him who elevates himself above
humanity, above its weaknesses, its infirmities, its wants, its
necessities say, if he pleases, ' I will never compromise'; but let
no one who is not above the frailties of our common nature disdain
compromise" That, I am afraid, is commonsense, though compromise
must never involve abdication from principle. It seems to me that, in
meeting the challenge of the change around us, we have to be concerned,
at political level, not only with the art of compromise, but with a fuller
understanding of how to manage the " knowledge worker" of whom I have
already spoken. He needs and expects more than just " a living. He
must be challenged to achieve greatness in his own field, not so much by
people as by seeking to attain objectives objectives which others may
regard as unattainable. Governments have the task, in a management sense, of
defining the objectives of a society. In material terms those objectives
in Australia can be summarised quite briefly.
We want to see Australia free, independent, secure and
prosperous.
We want people and capital resources to develop this
continent.
We want to increase our self-sufficiency at home and
enlarge our markets abroad.
We want to play a responsible part in the community of
nations with a proper recognition of our regional
responsibilities.
" We want to provide the greatest variety of opportunity for
self-fulfilment and purposeful living to the individuals
who make up our nation. / 11 
11
Those objectives may be as old as our sovereignty, yet they
are constantly taking new forms. New objectives are also emerging which
are less tangible but of real importance, but I will come to them a little
later. I have spoken a good deal on the political level of management
in national development, but perhaps I may be forgiven because of my
direct involvement in it.
The second level I want to talk about now is the Public Service.
This is the link which joins succeeding governments and it has management
responsibili ties of a high order.
While the politician has to make the ultimate decisions and is
accountable to his peers and his constituents for what hie does or does not
do, top management in the Public Service still has weighty responsibilities.
This is where the translation of policy decisions into administrative action,
advisory functions and a whole range of support activities exist. Facts,
figures, analysis, assessment and advice must flow continuously to the
Cabinet, the Ministry and the Parliament.
I believe the Service performs these tasks well. Its probity
is unquestioned and its record second to none. The officers of the Service
are part of the new breed of " knowledge workers" as well as the architects
of management techniques in government. The Service has come a long
way in the second half of this century. University graduates are joining in
greater numbers and occupy many posts in the higher echelons.
It was not always so and in the first thirty years or so of
Federation, entry was by examination at the age of fourteen or thereabouts.
This led W. K. Hancock to write in 1930
" Democratic sentiment, applauds the sound argument that
every office boy should have a chance to become a manger
and perverts it into a practical rule that no-one shall become
a manager who has not been an office boy.
I quo te this to show that in the administration of government,
a vast transormation has already taken place and the process is still
going on. The higher educational qualifications in the Public Service and
the training in management practices which the Serivce provides internally
and externally are powerful reinforcements for the system of responsible
government. / 12 
-212-
In recent years the cross-pollination of industry and the Public
Service ar-officer-iel-baa. beon increasing. The fact that industry now
turns frequently to the-Public Ser'-Ice in its search for top executives,
top managers and specialists is a tribute to the system and the quality
of the officer it attracts and trains. Similarly the opportunities the
Public Service-itself provides do attract recruits from industry.
In thi s sophisticated, twentieth century world, I do not believe
the Public Service should be separated from industry by any significant
barriers or artificial divisions of skill providing the traditional rights of
the public servant are protected. After all, the differences between the
responsibilities each accepts and the service each provides are not
very great. The real barrier has been the non-transferability of
superannuation. To remove this barrier the Commonwealth Government
has accepted the concept of " portability of pensions" a clumsy phrase
perhaps but one which means that, subject to certain conditions, a
Commonwealth public servant does not lose his superannuation rights if he
transfers to different spheres of Commonwealth employment, to the
State public services, to the universities or to industry. It would seem
eminently sensible for this to become a general principle in all sectors
of employment. Though I know the industry has reservation as to this.
May I now take the third level of activity in managing for
national development. I refer to private enterprise. This is your
territory, gentlemen.
Now private enterprise has provided a great deal of the
thrust tbat has taken Australia to the point of development we are at
today, and it is indeed the base of our free enterprise society.
It was private enterprise which opened up our rural lands;
it was private enterprise which gave us our manufacturing industries.
It was private enterprise which first drew from the earth the mineral
wealth that today has given a new dimension to our growth, our export
opportunity and our national economy as a whole.
But it has not, and I probably need not remind you, done t,,.-se
things exclusively on its own. Governments had to create a climate
of opportunity and indeed to provide important incentives. This they
have done, and through this we have seen the development of a partnership,
ragged though it may appear at times, between the public and the
private sectors in order the better to attain our national objectives. / 13 
13
It was private enterprise, too, as I told you earlier in my
historical reference to education for management, that inspired commercial
education at the tertiary level. It was also informed private enterprise
which began to advocate higher post-graduate education for management.
But private enterprise in my opinion, is not pulling its weight in one
important field; research for industry has been too much dependent on
Government finances.
I say this frankly because I think it merits your consideration
and because it seems to me that research should have a very high priority
when we are working out which way we will go in the next decade.
This applies to management needs as well as management policies.
An analysis by Dr Peter Stubbs of the Institute of Appled
Economic Research at the University of Melbourne showed that while the
Australian research effort overall was small the percentage contribution
made by the Government sector to the total amount spent was far greater
than the percentage contributed by the Governments of other countries
in their own economies. The countries he selected for comparisons were
the United States of America, Britain, Belgium, France West Germany
and Holland. Of the estimated gross national expenditure on research and
development, the Government sector in Australia contributed around 73 per
cent and the next highest government contribution was in Britain where it
was 64 per cent.
Dr Stubbs makes it clear that in this field Australian industry,
that is the private sector, has played a very small role both in its
proportion to the Australian national effort and in absolute terms when
compared with other industrial countries.
I bring this to your notice because if we are to gvrasp the
opportunities the future holds, we have to be inventors and innovate
and it is top management which has to frame the policy towards innovation.
By inn ovation I mean the act of bringing invention to fruition, the
development part of " research and development" Invention we know as
the act of creating a new product or process and Australians have a good
record here, but development of an invention to tliFe point where it becomes
commercial does not occur in Australia to the degree that it should.
No-one can be an innovator without thorough research and a
study of all the possibilities and no-one can be a successful innovator
without management skills. / 14 
14
We need the most advanced and specialised managerial skills
we can attract. There have been regrettable cases in the past when
citizens have had abundant gifts to offer but they have been unable to fit
into already existing patterns of organisation. No matter how radical
we may think ourselves, most of us are deeply ingrained with conservatism
in organisational matters.
An example is that of the Greek town planner and architect
Constantinos Doxiadis. Dr Doxiadis was a leading architect in Greece
before the Second World War, and in that war he led the Greek underground
and was awarded the British OBE. After the war he was a Cabinet Minister
and directed Marshall Plan operations in Greece. Following a change of
government in 1951, he lost office and decided to migrate to Australia.
Once in Australia he found that technical difficulties about
qualifications prevented him from contributing as much as he would have
liked and for two years he grew tomatoes in Western Australia. He wrote
several books on town planning and in 1953 returned to Greece. He made
one more attempt at Australia in 1956 but was unable to find an appropriate
post for his talents.
Since then he has founded his own university in Athens, and has
begun massive town planning projects in Greece, in Philadelphia, Washington
and Louisville in the US, in Baghdad and Khartoum, in En gland, South
America and Asia. Only Australia has made no use of his genius. He
won the coveted Aspen Award and is a member of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences.
I would like to think that if Dr Doxiadis were to come as a migrant
now, with -our growing sophistication and our recognition of the need for
advanced managerial skills, he would not be rejected. But I cannot be sure.
I put it to you, therefore, that when we look at our management
standards and the contributions which come from the public and priva te
sectors, we should also look at our research needs and explore ways in which
government and industry can come closer together. Some progress has been
made in recent years and the Australian Government has made finance
available through special committees for both fundamental research and
applied research in industry. But I believe there is room for more direct
activity by industry and the field of development and application of new
inventions in techniques and processes. / i 
15
Given wide-ranging and effective research, I believe we then
have a solid ground floor from which the practitioners of the three levels
of national management can operate. These levels, as I have explained,
are represented by the politician both in government and opposition the
Public Service and private enterprise. How well they fit together is the
measure of our capacity tcget the job done. I believe they fit remarkably
well and we see this across the whole panorama of national activity today.
When I spoke earlier about our material objectives, I spoke of
a different, non-material range of objectives before us. These may be
stated simply as the objective of a more satisfying life for our citizens.
In concerning ourselves as a people. * i th what makes for a
more satisfying life, we have to admit that we are mostly only vaguely
interested in what is happening to our environment, and what is more
important what, indeed, we are doing to it. The sins of commission, I
think are perhaps as great as the sins of omission.
We all of us as citizens pollute the very air we breathe,
we savage our unique wildlife with little s1u me, we slay our fellows on
the roads with monstrous carelessness and we accept the congestion of
our cities as though urban sprawl was the fault of somebody else.
We blame everybody but ourselves for the grey areas in our daily lives.
You may ask: What has all this to do with education for
management? What has this to do with education for national development?
I think it has much to do with those things. For the success of government
efforts in this direction depends heavily on . an educated public opinion,
on the bre aking down of the barriers of " it doesn't matter" and " I don't
care". This is where private enterprise, which I have loosely descri ed
as a " free-acting association of individuals and communities" has to make
up the partnership and take up the challenge. It is a challenge to the
" knowledge workers" and the managers to help create the climate in which
an articulate public opinion can flourish and where people will come to say
simply " I do care" and where as a result a more satisfying life will
be the more easily attained.
It is a brave man, indeed, who is dogmatic about the kind of
people and the kind of nation we will be in the next century, but as we move
towards its beginning, I believe the desire for a better life and a sense of
involvement in the making of a nation are things close to the heart of most
Australians. These things we cannot achieve by some kind of imperial
rescript. They will come to us if we make a conscious effort to read some
of the signs around us, as I'm sure William Queale did in his day, and if
we keep the human values straight. An educated public opinion is our
starting point. i16 
16
So tonight, Mr President, we have looked historically at
our record in education-for-management and the need to do better if we
are to succeed in a world of change. We have looked at the base structure
of education development in Australia and the elements of government and
the people which form the management team for national development.
We have looked ar our national objectives in material and human terms.
And we have grounds for confidence, but none for complacency.
believe that if governments and people continue to question and to strive,
and are not bound by the concepts and practices of the past, we can stand
up to the weathering of the centuries.
You may ask " What of the future if we do all these things?"
I am no prophet but let me tell you what I see, from the shape of things
as they are 0 1 see Australia as a nation of perhaps twenty-five million
people by the end of the century. That is double our
population today.
I see Australia as a society retaining political freedoms and
using that freedom plus skilled management to provide
economic freedom and more opportunity for creative
self-expression.
* I see Australia as a nation of explorers probing the seas,
and the discoveries of the earth, and seeking new and better
ways of providing more and better material things.
0 1 see Australia developing in an environment we seek to
protect and not destroy.
a I see Australia as growing in tolerance, as increasing in the
realisation that there is a common and a noble task for
all sections of society to work for in harmony.
I conclude, Mr President, by saying just this. We are all practical
men. Of necessity we have to be. But we can have our dreams. And I
say " let us have those dreams".
Thomas Jefferson, a long time ago, said " We must dream of
an aristocracy of achievement arising out of a democracy of opportunity'".
You and your successors, I and . ni y successors, have the chance
in this niation to translate those dreams into reality.
I Mifn k you. 



EMBARGO NOTFOR-RLS./ EBEFORE9AM ( EST)
FOR PRESS: PM No. 88.1969
VIET NAM FURTHER TROOP WITHDRAWALS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Prsdn's announcement means that he believes
the Vietnamisation programme is proving successful, and that he can
make further troop withdrawals without running military risks.
K. It does not mean any abandonment of the objectives to
attain which the United States and we, ourselves, entered the war as,
indeed, the President has pointed out.
C. When the announced withdrawals have been completed,
the United States forces will have been reduced to a level about 50, 000
below that at which they stood when the Australian Government increased
its Yask Force to the present level.
It is the belief of the Australian Government, after
careful study of this matter in Cabinet on the basis of reports
jointly submitted by the Ministers for External Affairs and Defence that,
when the military situation in Vietnam permits the next substantial
withdrawal, then, in consultation with the Government of the Republic
of Vietnam, some. Australian units will be included in the numbers
scheduled for such withdrawal.
I have talked with the President of the Uni'ted States
C. about this and he expressed himself as happy to agiee with our view.
It is impossible, at this stage, to forecast when such
further withdrawals might take place.
CANBERRA, 16 December 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 89/ 1969
SHOP STEWARDS' INCITEMENT TO MUTINY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
However much some Australians may be opposed to the
conflict in Vietnam, I believe that every responsible and thoughtful citizen
will condemn with repugnance, as does the Government, the attitude of
the meeting of Union Shop Stewards in Melbourne yesterday.
To the average reader, this attitude is a stark incitement
to mutiny in the Armed Forces and defiance of the law in Australia.
It is not perhaps so surprising that Shop Stewards drawn
from some of the Unions involved should have adopted this irresponsible
and lawless attitude. But it is disturbing in the extreme that Mr. Crawford, the
President of the A. L. P. in Victoria, should have been associated with this
course. Dissent from and criticism of the Government's policy in Vietnam
is one matter incitement to mutiny is quite another.
Those urging this seek to defy the law, and endanger the lives
of Australian servicemen in order to achieve illegally what they have not
been able to achieve democratically.
Such action is typical of the extreme left and it is noteworthy
that the move comes from Victoria where the most extreme elements of
the A. L. P. are found. It is tantamount to a call to Australian troops to
surrender to Communist forces on the proposal of unions a number of
whom are Communist led.
The Shop Stewards' meeting in Melbourne, and the Victorian
Leader of the A. L. P. have urged a dangerous, undemocratic and disloyal
course. If the A. L. P. does, in fact, want a Communist victory in South
Vietnam, it should say so and the dividing line between the Government and
the Opposition would again be starkly drawn. If it does not, then the Leader
of the Opposition in Australia should at once condemn and disassociate
himself from the resolution passed in Melbourne.
For its part the Government does condemn it, and is ready
to take any steps necessary to see that the course advocated does not
succeed.
CANBERRA 16 December 1969 



TALK TO THE NATION
REDUCTION OF FORCES IN VIETNAM
STATEMENT ON RADIO AND TELEVISION BY THE PRIME
-MINST EK, 1KJJHTGORTDN 16 DECEMBER 1969
Tonight I want to talk to you quite briefly on possible
future developments in Vietnam.
In my Policy Speech before the last election, I had this
to say to the Australian people
" Should there be developments ( in Vietnam) which result in
plans for continuing reduction of United States Forces over
a period, we would expect to be phased in to that programme."
Since I spoke, developments have taken place, and you have today heard
the announcement by the President of the United States that a further
000 troops are to be withdrawn over the next few months.
What has happened is that the President has judged that
there has been more improvement in the military situation than he
previously anticipated, and that the programme of training and arming
Vietnamese troops to take over more and more combat duties has been,
and is being, successful. It has therefore been possible for United States Forces
to be reduced without endangering the objectives for which they, and we,
entered the Vietnam war.
The objectives remain. They are the objectives of
attaining a just peace and of enabling the people of South Vietnam to
live under a Government chosen freely by them, and chosen without the
threat of terrorism or armed aggression from abroad.
I am sure the President of the United States will never
abandon these object ives and neither will we.
But it appears the growing strength and confidence of
South Vietnamese Forces will enable them to play a greater and greater
part in attaining those objectives. If this proves to be true, it will lead
to that continuing reduction of United States Forces of which I spoke in
my Policy Speech. / 2 
-2
Therefore I have spoken directly with the President of the
United States, in accordance with arrangements made on my last visit,
and we were in complete accord in agreeing in principle that should the
future situation permit a further substantial withdrawal of troops, then
some Australian troops should be included in the numbers scheduled for
such reduction. Such agreement in principle is all that has been reached,
or all that can at present be reached.
Implementation of this arrangement can only occur in the light
of future military developments in Vietnam and after full consultation and
agreement with the South Vietnamese Governmen t and New Zealand.
I expect that there will be much baseless speculation on these
matters, and indeed there already has been. So I wish to make it clear
That there is no firm timetable for further withdrawal of
United States troops of which I know;
That there is no timetable fixed covering at what stage any
Australian reductions would be phased in to the next United
States withdrawal;
That there is no arrangement made as to how great any
Australian reductions, which may take place in the future, will be.
These are all matters for the future and dependent on future
developments and those future developments cannot now be
accurately forecast. But these things are sure
" We will not unilaterally withdraw any of our forces
" We will not abandon the objectives for which we entered the
Vietnam war
" We will participate in the next reduction of forces at some
stage, when it comes. But the extent and timing of that
participation remains to be settled in discussions between
all the Governments concerned; and
" We will not participate in any reductiorsof our own forces
which in any way endanger those of our forces which remain.
I am sure we will all be happy when the Vietnam war has reached
a successful conclusion. I believe we should be happy that the South
Vietnamese themselve s are able to take over more and more of the
burden of the day. We will remaini to attain the objectives which we started
out to reach. But we are glad we are able to make reductions without
endangering those objectives.
Goodnight. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 90/ 1969
CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO THE FORCES
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, has sent the
following message to the Australian forces:-
" To all Australian servicemen and women at home
and abroad, I send best wishes for Christmas and
the New Year.
so Speaking on behalf of the Government and your fellow
Australians, I want you to know that we appreciate
your contribution to our security and well-being.
In particular, our thoughts at this time are with
S those of you who are separated from your families,
and especially those serving in Vietnam. You are
doing a vital job for Australia, and for the stability
of that part of the world in which we live.
To you all, wherever you may be serving, I say a
very warm " thank you". I wish you as happy a
Christmas as circumstances will permit, and a
safe and successful New Year.
While we look hopefully to the seventies for a
peaceful solution to world problems, there is no
0 doubt that Australia will continue to depend on its
Armed Forces to guarantee security and progress
in the decade ahead. Sincerely,
JOHN GORTON."
CA NBERRA
23 December 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. NO. 91,' 1969
A NEW* YEAR MESSAGE TO THE NATION
From the Prime Mlinister, Mr. John Gorton
Today we begin a new decade as well as a year of
special significance to all Australians.
For we will, in this year, celebrate the bicentenary
of Captain Cook's discovery of a completely undeveloped land and
we will begin a decade of development unparalleled in Australia's
past history. I believe that this decade will see us grow in strength
and wealth as our industry expands and our population grows.
I believe that this decade will see a final and successful
attack on the poverty in our midst.
I believe that our increasing wealth will make possible
greater opportunities for all and will open the way to the individual
to develop his talents to the utmost and to find self expression and
satisfaction in his chosen sphere of work.
The prospects are glittering. We will need to increase
our capacity to defend what we build; we will need to help other
countries; above all we will need to work together to attain what
time and circumstances now make pos sible.
And if we do this but only if we do this 1970 will be
a year of achievement and the 1970' s a memorable decade.
I wish all Australians every happiness and success in
the New Year, and throughout the new decade.
CANBERRA 31 December 1969 



FOR PRESS: P. M. L No. 1/ 1970
VISIT BY THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE U. S. A.
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister today announced the programme for
the official visit to Canberra of the Vice-President of the United States
of America and Mrs. Spiro T. Agnew.
Mr. Agnew's visit to Australia will be at the concluding
stages of his Asian-Pacific tour.
CANBERRA 8 January 1970 PROGRAMME FOR CANBERRA
Tuesday 13 January
4.30 p. m. Ceremonial arrival at RAAF Fairbairn.
En route to his hotel, the Vice-President will lay
a wreath at the Australian War Memorial.
Evening Private Dinner with the Prime Minister and Mrs.
Gorton at the Lodge.
Wednesday 14 January
Morning The Vice-President visits Parliament House for
discussions with the Prime Minister and Cabinet
Ministers.
Presentation by Astronaut Thomas Stafford in King's
Hall of an Apollo 11 Flag and a Moon Rock.
Afternoon Cabinet Luncheon at Parliament House.
Evening The Vice-President and Mrs. Agnew will attend
dinner at Government House.
Thursday 15 January
Morning Discussions with the Leader of the Federal
Opposition, Mr. Gough Whitlam.
Ceremonial departure from RAAF Fairbairn 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 2/ 1970
PRIME MINISTER'S TELEGRAMS TO NEW GUINEA IN REPLY
TO COMPLAINTS OF DAMAGE CAUSED BY' MR. WHITLAMStatement
by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Following are texts of telegrams received yesterday by the Prime
Minister from the Planters' Association of New Guinea and Bali Plantations
Ltd.
Planters' Association of New Guinea:
" THIS ASSOCIATION IS SHOCKED THAT THE LEADER OF
THE OPPOSITION PARTY PUBLICLY SUPPORTS CONVICTED
LAW BREAKERS WHO ARE AGAINST THE BASIC TENETS
OF SELF GOVERNMENT THAT IS THE ORGANISATION
ELECTION AND WORKING OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
COUNCILS. FURTHER THAT IN VISITING ANOTHER
COUNTRY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION AND HIS
ASSOCIATES HAVE SHOWN GRAVE DISCOURTESY IN
CRITICISING THIS COUNTRY'S GOVERNMENT AND
LEADERS WITH LITTLE BASIC KNOWLEDGE OF THE
PEOPLE'S CULTURE, UPBRINGING AND BEIEFS.
MR. WHITLAM'S VISIT HAS CAUSED GRAVE DISQUIET
LACK OF CONFIDENCE IN THE FUTURE BY ALL
RESIDENTS INCLUDING THE MAJORITY OF PAPUANS
AND NEW GUINEANS AND IT IS THE CONSIDERED
OPINION OF THIS ASSOCIATION THAT EVERY EFFORT
BE MADE BY YOU TO VISIT THIS TERRITORY AS EARLY
AS POSSIBLE TO COUNTERACT THE DAMAGE WHICH
HAS BEEN DONE. WOULD APPRECIATE ACKNOWLEDGMENT."
Bali Plantations Ltd.:
" THIS COMPANY DEPLORES THE LABOR PARTY
PROMOTION ACTIVITIES OF LEADER OF THE
OPPOSITION IN THE GAZELLE PENINSULA AS A
FURTHER AGGRAVATION TO RECENT TROUBLES
HERE WHICH MUST RESULT IN A COMPLETE NEGATION
OF COSTLY OFFICIAL ACTION IN RESTORING LAW AND
ORDER. THIS HAS RESULTED IN AN INCREASED LACK
OF CONFIDENCE IN INVESTMENT IN THIS AREA BY
BOTH INDIGENOUS AND OVERSEAS INVESTORS. WE
RESPECTFULLY REQUEST THAT THE PRIME MINISTER
VISIT THIS DISTRICT IMMEDIATELY TO REFUTE THE
PROMISES MADE BY MR. WHITLAM WHO IS REGARDED
BY THE TOLAIS AS THE LEADING GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL / 2 
2-
TO VISIT RABAUL FOR MANY YEARS PARTICULARLY
WHILST HE APPEARS TO SYMPATHISE WITH THE
REBELLIOUS ATT7ITUJDE OF THE MINORITY REPEAT
MINORITY OF THE INDIGENOUS POPULATION."
Today the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, sent the following
reply to each of the above:
" YOUR TELEGRAM RECEIVED. I BELIEVE MR.
WHITLAM'S STATEMENTS ARE CALCULATED TO
WORSEN THE DIVISIONS AMONGST THE TOLAI
PEOPLE IN THE GAZELLE PENINSULA AND TO
ENCOURAGE EXTREMISTS.
THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THE LEGALLY
ELECTED MULTI-RACIAL COUNCIL, WHICH
INCLUDES 34 NATIVES AND 4 NON-NATIVES, IS
ACCEPTABLE TO THE MAJORITY OF THE TOLAL
PEOPLE AND IS IN THE BEST INTERESTS OF GOOD
GOVERNMENT IN THE GAZELLE PENINSULA. THE
GOVERNMENT WAS PREPARED TO TEST THIS
BELIEF BY A REFERENDUM HELD BY SECRET
BALLOT. THE MATAUNGAN ASSOCIATION REFUSED
TO AGREE TO SUCH A SECRET BALLOT REFERENDUM
BEING HELD AND SAID IT WOULD NOT, IN ANY CASE,
ABIDE BY THE RESULT OF SUCH A BALLOT. THE
MATAUNGAN ASSOCIATION HAVE WITHHELD TAXES,
REFUSED TO JOIN IN DISCUSSION OF THIS QUESTION,
AND HAVE RESORTED TO VIOLENCE.
MR. WHLTLAM'S SUPPORT OF THIS ATITITUDE AND
ACTION IS EMPHATICALLY REPUDIATED BY THE
GOVERNMENT AND WE WISH THIS TO BE KNOWN
TO ALL IN THE GAZELLE PENINSULA. THE
GOVERNMENT'S ATT'ITUDE HAS BEEN EXPRESSED
BY THE ADMINISTRATOR EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.
WE WILL NOT TOLERATE BREACHES OF THE LAW,
WILL INVOKE THE LAW AGAINST THE USE OF FORCE,
AND CALL UPON ALL GROUPS TO CO-OPERATE IN
RESTORING A PEACEFUL SITUATION.
I REGRET THAT I AM UNABLE AT PRESENT TO
ACCEPT YOUR SUGGESTION THAT I VISIT THE
AREA, BUT I HOPE THIS EXPRESSION OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S INTENTIONS WILL HELP TO
REPAIR THE DAMAGE CAUSED BY MR. WHITLAM." / 3 
-3
This afternoon, the following telegram was received from the
Gazelle Peninsula Council:
" GAZELLE PENINSULA COUNCIL EAST NEW BRITAIN
DEEPLY CONCERNED AND DISTRESSED BY ILL
CONSIDERED AND ILL INFORMED STATEMENTS
MADE BY WHITLAM LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION.
HIS SUPPORT OF THE MATAUNGAN ASSOCIATION
HIS ADMIRATION FOR ITS LEADERS AND ITS AIMS
CONSIDERED SERIOUSLY DETRIMENTAL TO THE
PEACE ORDER AND GOOD GOVERNMENT OF THE
GAZELLE PENINSULA AND TERRITORY. WHITLAM'S
CONFIDENT STATEMENT THAT HE WILL BE PRIME
MINISTER 1972 OR EARLIER AND WILL GRANT
IMMEDIATE HOME RULE ACCEPTED BY VERY
MANY TOLAIS AS FACT. IMPLICATION THAT
MATAUNGAN ASSOCIATION WILL ACHIEVE ALL
ITS OBJECTIVES WHICH INCLUDE DESTRUCTION
OF MULTI-RACIAL COUNCIL RETURN OF
ALIENATED LAND MUST BE REFUTED AT ALL
COSTS. FAILURE OF WHITLAM TO SUPPORT
DULY ELECTED MULTI-RACIAL COUNCIL
PARTICULARLY IN COUNCIL TAX ISSUE WILL
HAVE ADVERSE EFFECT THROUGHOUT TERRITORY.
MATAUNGAN MEMBERS HAD EVERY OPPORTUNITY
CONTEST JUNE ELECTIONS BUT D ECLINED TO DO
SO. WHITLAM'S STATEMENTS WILL DESTROY
EFFECTIVE GOVERNMENT THIS AREA UNLESS
REFUTED. FURTHER BLOODSHED AND VIOLENCE
LIKELY IF NO POSITIVE ACTION TAKEN. COUNCIL
CONSIDERS THAT AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT MUST
RESTORE THE CONFIDENCE OF ALL PEOPLE OF
THE TERRITORY AND IN PARTICULAR GAZELLE
AREA BY CLEAR RESTATEMENT OF YOUR
GOVERNMENT'S POLICY AND PLANS FOR OUR
FUTURE POLITICAL SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT." The Prime Minister has sent the following reply:
" YOUR TELEGRAM RECEIVED. I BELIEVE MR.
WHITLAM'S STATEMENTS ARE CALCULATED TO
WORSEN THE DIVISIONS AMONGST THE TOLAI
PEOPLE IN THE GAZELLE PEN4INSULA AND TO
ENCOURAGE EXTREMISTS. / 4 
-4
THE GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THE LEGALLY ELECTED
MULTI-RACIAL COUNCIL, WHICH INCLUDES 34 NATIVES
AND 4 NON-NATIVES, IS ACCEPTABLE TO THE
MAJORITY OF THE TOLAL PEOPLE AND IS IN THE
BEST INTERESTS OF GOOD GOVERNMENT IN THE
GAZELLE PENINSULA. THE GOVERNMENT WAS
PREPARED TO TEST THIS BELIEF BY A REFERENDUM
HELD BY SECRET BALLOT. THE MATAUNGAN
ASSOCIATION REFUSED TO AGREE TO SUCH A
SECRET BALLOT REFERENDUM BEING HELD AND
SAID IT WOULD NOT, IN ANY CASE, ABIDE BY THE
RESULT OF SUCH A BALLOT. THE MATAUNGAN
ASSOCIATION HAVE WITHHELD TAXES, REFUSED
TO JOIN IN DISCUSSION OF THIS QUESTION, AND
HAVE RESORTED TO VIOLENCE.
MR. WHITLAM'S SUPPORT OF THIS ATTITUDE AND
ACTION IS EMPHATICALLY REPUDIATED BY THE
GOVERNMENT AND WE WISH THIS TO BE KNOWN
TO ALL IN-THE GAZELLE PENINSULA.
THE GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE HAS BEEN
EXPRESSED BY THE ADMINISTRATOR'S EXECUTIVE
COUNCIL. WE WILL NOT TOLERATE BREACHES
OF THE LAW, WILL INVOKE THE LAW AGAINST
THE USE OF FORCE, AND CALL UPON ALL GROUPS
TO CO-OPERATE IN RESTORING A PEACEFUL
SITUATION. I HOPE THIS EXPRESSION OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S INTENTIONS WILL HELP TO REPAIR
THE DAMAGE CAUSED BY MR. WHITLAM."
CANBERRA 9 January 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 4/ 1970
DISTRIBUTION OF " ENDEAVOUR" CANNON
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, announced today
that one of the six cannon jettisoned by Captain Cook from the " Endeavour"
on the Great Barrier Reef in 1770 would be mounted and displayed in
the National Capital. Queensland and New South Wales, the States most
intimately associated with Captain Cook would each receive a cannon.
Mr. Gorton said that he had written to Dr. H. Radclyffe
Roberts, Director of the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences, the
organisation responsible for mounting the expedition and locating the
cannon, and had offered a cannon to them. Another was being presented
to the Governmeat and people of New Zealand as a goodwill gesture to
mark that country's bicentenary celebrations of Cook's circumnavigation
of New Zealand prior to discovering Australia. The sixth cannon would
be presented to Britain for display at the National Maritime Museum at
Greenwich. The Prime Minister said: " I would like to pay tribute to
the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences, in particular to Dr. Virgil
Kauffman and Brigadier-General Wolf for the magnificent research,
planning and effort which led to the discovery of these important relics..
It was a happy coincidence that they were recovered in time to permit
their restoration for Australia's bicentenary year.
The Prime Minister said that the cannon, which were
coral encrusted, had undergone considerable restoration in the Defence
Standards Laboratories of the Department of Supply under the care of
Dr. C. Pearson and his staff. Considerable study of the original
specifications had been made and it was proposed to construct wooden
mountings for the cannon which were identical with the original mountings.
CANBERRA 12 January 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 3/ 1970
MR. WHITLAM'S APOLOGIA
Statement by the Prime Mvinister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Whitlam is clearly trying to extricate himself from
the result of those indiscretions which have led native leaders in New
Guinea to tell him to pack up and go home and cease fermenting trouble.
The facts are that Mr. Whitlam made a flying visit to a
troubled area the Gazelle Peninsula. Once there he engaged in illconsidered
demagogy and increased the chances of trouble and violence
in that area. He deepened and worsened the divisions among the Tolai
people divisions which the Government has been seeking to heal. He
spoke to one section of the Tolai people and left the impression, in an
unsophisticated area, that he and the people of Australia supported not
only the aims but the methods including violence to which that section
has resorted. He refrained from calming the fears felt by some of the
Tolai that their land may be endangered by the multi-racial Council. Yet
he must know this fear to be baseless.
He must have known that the Administrator and Government
officials were subjected to violence when they went to the area to " listen"
and to discuss this problem. Yet he publicly admires the " fervour" of
those who used that violence.
Either through foolishness or by design he has made a
, difficult situation worse. He has refused to support what he calls
" technical legality" and has instead tacitly encouraged clearly illegal
action. If this results in greater violence and Australia's name is
thereby damaged he will to a very large degree be responsible if
responsible is a word which can properly be used in relation to his actions
in this matter. The Government will seek to remove the fears felt by a
section of the Tolais, to relieve the difficulties in the region, and to
repair the damage done by this visit. But this will now be more difficult.
CANBERRA 12 January 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 5/ 1970
MR. WHITLAM'S SUPPORT OF MATAUNGAN ASSOCIATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Whitlam has reached new heights of arrogance.
He went to speak to the Mataungan Association a
section of the Tolai people who had used violence, who were refusing
to pay taxes, who were refusing to abide by a legally elected council.
He told them according to newsmen whom he admits " faithfully
reported" him that he admired this Association, its expression,
and its spokesmen and was impressed by the patriotic fervour with
which they expressed their feelings.
If he does not feel that this supported and encouraged
that organisation he must be the only one who doesn't. Certainly the
responsible leading natives of New Guinea, who told him to go home
and stop fermenting trouble, don't agree with him. I fear he has
increased the risk of violence in the area.
If any apology is required it should come from Mr.
Whitlam to the Australian people for stating he had undertaken this
journey on their behalf, and suggesting he was their spokesman, when
the Australian people had so recently refused him the right either to
govern them or to speak for them.
CANBERRA 13 January 1970 


14 January 1970
Mr Vice-President and Colonel Stafford:
It is with a considerable amount of pride that on behalf of the Parliament and people of Australia I accept what you have brought back from one of man' s greatest adventures.
When the first successful landing on the moon took place, I described it as a dramatic fulfilment of man's urge "to go always a little further, to explore and know the formerly unknown, to strive, to seek, to find and not to yield". I think it was this desire of the human spirit which was exemplified by this co-operative effort, a co-operative effort for peace, a co-operative effort to find out more, to know more, so that we in this world might in the future be the better off.
It is very appropriate that you should have given us two photographs, one of Australia, the other a photograph of the North American continent, because I think you would agree it is true to say that part of the success of this historic mission was due to people from the North American continent and to people from Australia. And how appropriate it is that there should be here today so many men and women engaged in work at those tracking stations which were an essential and integral part of this great adventure.
We thank you -  I do on behalf of the Parliament and the Australian people -  for the moon rock and for the flag of this country which you took on this mission. On behalf of the Parliament and the Australian people, I thank too all those Australians and Americans who were engaged in being such an essential part of this magnificent enterprise.
We all thank you, Sir, and may these first trips be only the beginning of a continuing adventure for mankind and for both our countries in the future.



Issued from the Office
of the Press Secretary
to the Prime Minister.
FOR PRESS: TALKS WITH VICE-PRESIDENT
The Vice-President, Mr. Spiro T. Agnew, called
on the Prime Minister this morning. Subsequently, Mr. Agnew
met members of the Cabinet for a discussion and exchange of
views on matters of mutual interest to the Australian and U. S.
Governments. It has been helpful both to the Australian Ministers
and to the Vice-President to exchange views between the two
Governments in person on these matters.
The discussions emphasised the continuing
co-operation of Australia and the United States. This involves
co-operation both in defence and in peaceful development.
CANBERRA 14 January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 6/ 1970
DRILLING ON THE BARRIER REEF
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Pri me Minister, Mr. John Gorton, said that
he was very pleased indeed to receive the information from Ampol
Exploration that they were not proceeding with their intention of
drilling on the Barrier Reef pending a thorough examination of the
question of whether any damage might occur.
He stated his belief that the Barrier Reef was of
such importance to Australia and to world science that it was
essential that there should be not the slightest chance of any
damage occurring from such drilling ard congratulated Ampol
Exploration on their nationally responsible attitude.
CANBERRA 14 January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 8/ 1970
DRILLING ON THE BARRIER REEF
This evening the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, sent the
following reply to a telegram received from Ampol Exploration Ltd
" THANK YOU FOR YOUR TELEGRAM OF 13 JANUARY RE DRILLING FOR
OIL ON BARRIER REEF. I HOPE YOU WILL BE ABLE TO PERSUADE JAPEX
TO AGREE WITH YOUR DECISION AND CONGRATULATE YOU ON YOUR
INITIATIVE. IT IS MY HOPE THAT OTHER COMPANIES WHICH HOLD
PROSPECTING LEASES WILL FOLLOW YOUR LEAD PENDING A COMPLETE
INVESTIGATION AND REPORT. IN MY VIEW THE SLIGHTEST DANGER Is
TOO MUCH DANGER.
AS YOU KNOW THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT WAS BOUND
TO CONFIRM THE OIL LEASES ISSUED BY THE STATE ON AND NEAR
THE REEF AND IS VIRTUALLY UNABLE TO PREVENT DRILLING ON
THESE LEASES IF THE STATE AGREES TO DRILLING. HOWEVER I
AM PREPARED TO ASK C. S. ILR . 0. TO CHOOSE EXPERTS EITHER FROM
WITHIN THAT ORGANISATION, OR OUTSIDE IT, EITHER FROM
AUSTRALIA OR FROM OVERSEAS, TO INVESTIGATE AND REPORT
PUBLICLY ON THE MATTER. SUCH EXPERTS WOULD BE THE
COMMONWEALTH REPRESENTATIVES ON A JOINT COMMONWEALTH/
STATE INVESTIGATION SHOULD THE STATE GOVERNMENT AGREE TO
SUCH A JOINT BODY. I HAVE SO INFORMED THE QUEENSLAND
PREMIER. YOUR OFFER OF 5, 000 IS APPRECIATED BUT I BELIEVE YOU
WOULD AGREE THAT IT MIGHT BE BETTER IF AN INVESTIGATION WAS
IN NO WAY FINANCED BY AN ORGANISATION CONNECTED WITH OIL.
I DO NOT BELIEVE AN INVESTIGATION INTO THE POSSIBLE DANGERS
OF DRILLINGON THE BARRIER REEF SHOULD BE MIXED UP WITH AN
INVESTIGATION OF THE CROWN OF THORNS STARFISH. THIS PROBLEM
HAS BEEN INVESTIGATED BY SCIENTISTS FROM THE QUEENSLAND
UNIVERSITY AND THE QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY
INDUSIRI ES WHO INVESTIGATED THE PROBLEM AT GUAM IN CONJUNCTION
WITH SCIENTISTS FROM USA. A FURTHER MEETING WAS HELD IN
BRISBANE IN AUGUST LAST BETWEEN OFFICERS OF C. S. 1. R 0. AND THE
COMMONWEALTH DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRY AND
QUEENSLAND REPRESENTATIVES.
THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCE HAS ALSO FORMED A COMMITTEE
TO REPORT TO ITS COUNCIL ON THE PROBLEM. SO INVESTIGATION OF
THIS PROBLEM IN THE HOPE OF DISCOVERING EFFECTIVE CONTROL
ME4SURES IS PROCEEDING."
CANBERRA January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. L No 9/ 1970
BARRIER REEF
Sttmn yte rm iitr Mr John Gorton
I have been asked about a communication received from the Queensland
Government In June 1968 regarding the Barrier Reef.
In June 1968 we received a letter from the Queensland Government
informing us that they intended to set up a committee, to advise the Queensland
Government on the general question of the control and exploitation of all the
resources of the Great Barrier Reef which were described as " fishing, tourism,
scientific research, and probably mining". The Queensland Government proposed
to set up a committee of eleven members and suggested the Commonwealth might
nominate one member.
This general suggestion was entirely different from the present proposal
which is that drilling for oil on or near the Barrier Reef be halted until a joint enquiry
into possible dangers of drilling has been held, and has reported publicly to both
Governments. I have endorsed this latter proposal and indicated that if the Queensland
Government will agree to it the Commonwealth would be prepared to take part in such
an enquiry while drilling is suspended.
This is the question which now awaits the decision of the Queensland
Government. CANBERRA 16 January 1970 



EMBARGO: 6 p. m. Sunday 18 January 1970
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 7/ 1970
PROGRAMME FOR ROYAL VISIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Queen has been pleased to approve a detailed
programme for the Royal Visit to Australia later this year.
The Visit, Her Majesty's third to this country, will begin
in Sydney on Monday 30 March and end in Sydney on Sunday 3 May. The
Duke of Edinburgh and The Princess Anne will be accompanying The Queen
throughout the Visit, while The Prince of Wales will be here for the first
days. Celebrations marking the Cook Bicentenary will be
highlights of the tour, which will take the Royal Visitors-~ to New South
Wales, Tasmania, Victoria, Queensland and the A. C. T. In Sydney,
The Queen will attend the re-enactment of the landing of Captain Cook
and, at Her Majesty's request, the programme generally features those
aspects of the Australian way of life that have historic links with the days
of the first settlement, such as agriculture, mining and transportation.
As well, the importance of education and hospitals in the development of
the country will be recognised.
In agriculture, for example, the Royal Family will visit an
apple orchard in Tasmania to see crops being picked and prepared for
overseas markets, inspect a wool store in Victoria, and attend the National
Sheep Dog Trial Championships in Canberra.
In Queensland, the tour will include a visit to the Mt. isa
mines, while in Townsville Her Majesty will give Royal Assent to the
Bill granting autonomy to the University of North Queensland.
The Queen will lead the nation in the observance of Anzac
Day at a ceremony at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra, and will
give a talk to the nation over television and radio on Sunday 26 April.
Her Majesty will undertake a final official engagement
only an hour before departure for London. This will be the opening of
the new International Terminal at Sydney Airport. 
4 -2-
In planning the tour, organisers have kept in mind the
wishes of The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh to meet as many people
as possible from different sections of the community. Informality will
be the essence of the visit.
On some occasions, The Prince of Wales and The Princess
Anne will have their own programmes. These engagements have been
designed to enable Their Royal Highnesses to meet young people and to
find out for themselves something of the community and recreational and
other interests of Australians of their own age.
I am confident that I speak for all Australians when I say
we are delighted that The Queen and members of her family will be
visiting us and helping us to celebrate our 200th anniversary. They are
assured of a warm welcome.
CANBERRA 18 January 1970
Note: The programme of engagements for the A. C. T. is attached.
The Premiers of the States being visited are making
simultaneous release of their respective programmes.
A comprehensive programme of the visit to Australia is
being made available to news media in the capital cities
being visited. 



FOR PRESS_ P. M. No 11 / 1970
COMMONWEALTH/ STATE JOINT ENQUIRY ON REEF
The Prime Minister, Mr Gorton today replied to a telegram which
he received late on Friday from the Premier of Queensland, Mr Bjelke -Petersen, on
the subject of a Commonwealth/ State joint Enquiry into the danger of drilling
on the Barrier Reef. Following is the text of Mr Gorton's reply, which was sent by
telegram this morning: III HAVE YOUR TELEGRAM OF 16 JANUARY CONCERNING THE
SUGGESTED COMMONWEALTH/ STATE JOINT ENQUIRY INTO POSSIBLE DANGERS
TO THE REEF AS A RESULT OF DRILLING FOR OIL ON OR NEAR IT.
I SEE NO NEED FOR THIS PROPOSAL TO BE CONFUSED WITH
YOUR GOVERNMENT'S COMMUNICATION TO ME OF JUNE 1968.
THAT COMMUNICATION INFORMED ME OF YOUR GOVE RNMENT'S
INTENTION TO SET UP A COMMITTEE TO EXAMINE A NUMBER OF BROAD
MATTERS CONNECTED WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE REEF AREA
AND TO REPORT TO YOUR GOVERNMENT.
IT WAS SUGGESTED THAT THE COMMONWEALTH MIGHT
APPOINT ONE MEMBER TO THE ELEVEN MAN COMMITTEE ENVISAGED.
THAT SUGGESTION DOES NOT SEEM TO ME TO BE IN FACT
A JOINT COMMONWEALTH/ STATE ENQUIRY NOR IS IT SPECIFICALLY
CONCERNED WITH DRILLING FOR OIL ON THE REEF. I BELIEVE
THEREFORE THAT AS FAR AS WE ARE CONCERNED IT SHOULD BE LEFT
IN ABE YANCE AT PRESENT.
THE PROPOSAL BEFORE US NOW IS THAT DRILLING BE
SUSPENDED ON OR NEAR THE REEF PENDING A TRULY JOINT
COMMONWEALTH/ STATE ENQUIRY WHICH WILL REPORT TO BOTH OUR
GOVERNMENTS AND WHICH WILL MAKE PUBLIC ITS REPORTS.
THE COMMONWEALTH IS PREPARED TO ENDORSE THIS
SPECIFIC PROPOSAL AND I SHOULD BE GLAD IF YOU WILL LET ME KNOW
WHETHER THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT IS ALSO PREPARED TO DO
so. 
IF THE-QUEENSLAND GOVERNMEN1T IS PREPARED TO DO
SO I SUGGEST THAT* DISCUSSIONS MIGHT BEGIN ON THE SIZE OF THE
COMMITTEE, THE NUMBERS OF COMMITTEE MEN TO BE APPOINTED
BY EACH GOVERNMENT, THE INTERESTS TO BE REPRESENTED, THE
DATE OF COMMENCEMENT, AND SIMILAR MATTERS.
I WOULD BE GLAD OF YOUR EARLY ADVICE."
Following is the text of Mr Bjelke-Petersen's telegram, received
on Friday: " I HAVE YOUR TELEGRAM OF YESTERDAY CONCERNING
AMPOL EXPLORATIONS SUGGESTED OIL DRILLING ENQUIRY AND HAVE
NOTED THE TERMS 0I9 YOUR OFFER TO MR LEONARD. IN SO FAR AS
MY GOVERNMENT IS CONCERNED A BASICALLY SIMILAR BUT WIDER
PROPOSITION REGARDING DRILLING ON THE BARRIER REEF WAS
PREVIOUSLY PUT BEFORE YOU IN MY PREDECESSOR'S LETTER OF
7TH JUNE 1968 TO WHICH A DETAILED REPLY IS STILL AWAITED.
THE PROPOSALS THEN MADE AND THE SUPPORTING INFORMATION
GIVEN WERE AND STILL ARE PERTINENT TO THE QUESTION OF REEF
DRILLING AND THEREFORE I SEE NO REASON WHY THEY SHOULD NOT
APPROPRIATELY PROVIDE THE BASIS FOR ANY JOINT COMMONWEALTH,
STATE INVESTIGATION NOW. CONSEQUENTLY i( OU WILL APPRECIATE
THAT UNTIL SUCH TIME AS YOU FURNISH ME WITH YOUR GOVERNMENT'S
VIEWS ON OUR PROPOSAL OF 7TH JUNE 1968 OR ANY ALTERNATIVE YOU
MAY CARE TO ADVANCE I WOULD NATURALLY PREFER TO DEFER
A DECISION ON YOUR TELEGRAM OF YESTERDAY DATE."
CANBERRA 19 January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. V No 12/ 1970
CONVERSION TO METRIC SYSTEM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Following detailed consideration of the recommendations made by
the Senate Select Committee on the adoption of the Metric System of Weights
and Measures, the Government has decided that Australia should convert to
the Metric System as soon as possible.
The Commonwealth has notified the States of this decision and has
suggested that arrangements be made for a conference with them to discuss
co-operation in those areas where co-operation may be required.
The Government believes that the lasting benefits which will result
from this decision will greatly outweigh the not inconsiderable transitional
difficulties involved.
The Government's aim is to complete the changeover during a
period of ten years although conversion will be completed much sooner than
this in some sectors.
It is proposed to set up a Metric Conversion Board, on which a wide
range of interests will be represented, to plan, guide, and facilitate conversion.
The Board will be responsible to the Government through the Minister for
Education Science and will be expected to make appropriate recommendations
from time to time after full consultation with those concerned.
Although the . Government realises that some compensation may be paid in
such unusual and special cases as are accepted by the Government on the
recommendation of the Metric Conversion Board it is expected that, as in other
countries the costs of effecting the change will, in general, be borne by those
incurring them. By allowing time for natural obsolescence and depreciation
of plant and machinery the cost of conversion will be greatly reduced.
Experience in other countries such as Japan where conversion is complete
has shown that by forethought and good planning these costs can be greatly
reduced. The decision to convert is in line with decisions which have already
been taken in the United Kingdom, South Africa, New Zealand and South East
Asian countries and in announcing it the Government wishes to pay tribute to the
work of the Senate Select Committee under the leadership of the late Senator
Keith Laught.
CANBERRA 19 January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 13/ 1970
QUEENSLAND CYCLONE
The Prime Minister has sent the following telegram to the Premier
of Queensland, Mr Bjelke-Petersen:-
" ON BEHALF OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT I EXPRESS
SYMPATHY TO THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN AFFECTED BY THE SEVERE
CYCLONE IN THE PROSERPINE AREA AND THE ADJACENT ISLANDS OF THE
GREAT BARRIER REEF. TIHE COMMONWEALTH STANDS READY TO JOIN
WITH THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT ON A DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR
BASIS IN FINANCING THE RELIEF OF PERSONAL HARDSHIP AND DISTRESS
IN THE AFFECTED AREAS.
IN VIEW OF THE NATURE OF THE REPORTS WHICH HAVE BEEN
RECEIVED ABOUT THE EFFECTS OF THE CYCLONE I HAVE ASKED MY
COLLEAGUE THE MINISTER FOR THE NAVY TO ACT AS LIAISON BETWEEN
THE COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENTS AS TO RELIEF
MEASURES WHICH MAY BE REQUIRED.
CANBERRA 19 January 1970 



FOR PRESS PM. 14/ 1970
ROYAL VISIT
PRESENTATION OF VICTORIA CROSS AWARDS
Statement by the P; ime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Warrant Officer Class 2 R. S. Simpson, VC, DCM
and Warrant Officer Class 2 Keith Payne, VC, who were awarded
the Victoria Cross for acts of bravery whilst serving as members of
the Australian Army Training Team in Vietnam last year, will both
receive their awards at Investitures which Her Majesty The Queen
will hold during her visit to Australia.
Warrant Officer Simpson, who is still serving with
the Training Team in Vietnam, will receive his award at Government
House Sydney on i May. Warrant Officer Payne, now an Instructor
in Infantry at the Royal Military College, Duntroon will receive
his award in Brisbane aboard H. M. Y. " Britannia" on April.
Warrant Officers Simpson and Payne will be the first
Australian Victoria Cross winners to have been presented with their
awards personally by The Sovereign in Australia.
CANBERRA, 19 January 1970
( Note For details of the awards, see Press Statements PM. No. 70/ 1969
of 21 August and PM. No. 71/ 1969 of 8 September copies of which
are on the notice board. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 15/ 1970
MEETING TO DISCUSS BARRIER REEF ENQULIRY
The Prime Minister has received the following telegram from
the Premier of Queensland, Mr Bjelke-Petersen
" REFERENCE YOUR TELEGRAM YESTERDAY.
CABINET HAS AGREED THAT MY MINISTER FOR MINES,
MY ATITORNEY-GENERAL AND MYSELF MEET YOU AT
YOUR CONVENIENCE TO DISCUSS WITH YOU THE TERMS OF
REFERENCE OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH YOU PROPOSES'"
Following is the tex of the Prime Minister's reply
" GLAD YOU AGREE TO MY SUGGESTION. THAT
DRILLING ON OR NEAR THE REEF IS SUSPENDED PENDING
THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE SPECIFIC
MATITER OF POSSIBLE DANGER TO THE REEF. WILL BE GLAD
TO MEET WITH YOU TO DISCUSS ThE TERMS OF REF ERENCE
OF THE COMMITTEE. SUGGEST MEETING BE HELD IN
CANBERRA AT-3 PM ON THURSDAY 29 JANUARY."
CA NBERRA January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 16/ 1970
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Arrangements have now been completed with the State Premiers
to convene a meeting of the Premiers' Conference in Canberra on Thursday
26 February. The meeting may continue on Friday 27 February.
CANBERRA 21 January 1970 



FOjR PRESS P. M. No 17/ 1.970
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Invitations have been extended to representatives of national organisations
to meet with Ministers next month.
These consultations, whch are held at half-yearly intervals, are most
useful in keeping Ministers informed of the views of those directly involved in
commerce and industry.
On 4 February, Ministers will meet three groups of representative
organisations Primary Industry, Manufacturing Industry and Commerce.
Representatives of the Export Development Council and the Manufacturing
Industries Advisory Council will have separate discussions with Ministers on
February. Representatives of the Australian Council of Trade Unions have
also been invited to meet Ministers on that day.
Below is a list of national organisations invited to take part in these
talks, which will be held in Sydney.
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS INVITED TO BE REPRESENTED
AT ECO ' iHC CONSULTATIONS
4 February 1970
Primary Industry Group
The Australian Farmers' F ederat ion
Australian Wool Growers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers' Federation
Australian Mining Industry Council
Manufacturing Industry Group
The Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Commercial Group
The Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers
CANBERRA 21 January 1970 


The Government has purchased the well-known Ferguson Collection of Australiana for the National Library in Canberra.
This Collection also covers the Pacific Islands and Captain Cook's voyages, and includes an original manuscript journal kept by James Burney during 1772-1773 while on Cook's second  voyage.
This timely acquisition will join two other Cook journals now on exhibition in the Library one a copy of Cook's own journal of the same voyage and the other a manluScript journal in Cook's own hand of the first voyage ( 1768 to 1771).
The other important Pacific material included-in the collection is of special value in that it relates to various aspects of history often neglected by other collectors, and will enable the National Library to support the most advanced research about Australia and the Pacific from the earliest times.
The Ferguson Collection should stimulate Australians to take an increased pride and interest in their own history. As the collection is internationally known, it should also attract scholars from abroad.
The late Sir John Ferguson assembled his collection of 34, 000 items over the last 60 years and transferred a substantial part of it as a gift. In adc'ition to achieving distinction as a member of the Bench of New South Wales, he gained an international reputation as a bibkographer and had a record of distinguished community service,
CANBERRA,
21 January 1970



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 19/ 1970
EXHIBITION OF CONTEMPORARY-AU' ITAIAN ART
TFOVI91TSTME T A1A_
,$ tatemntbyth Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
A collection of contemporary Australian art, is aboutto go
on exhibition in South-East Asia.
Opening in Singapore on Friday, the exhibition will
subsequently be seen in Thailand, the Philippines, Malaysia and
Indonesia. It will return to Australia in mid-June.
The exhibition comprises 46 paintings, prints and
sculptures. It has been selected by the Commonwealth Art Advisory
Board from the National Collection and private collections.
This is the second opportunity for Australian art to be seen
by Australia's neighbours in Asia. The first exhibition, which toured
the area in 1962, showed something of the development of Australian
art. The present exhibition is by way of a postscript to the sixties and
a prelude to the seventies and represents the youngest generation of
Australian arti~ its to have won critical acclaim.
Mr James Mollison, the Exhibitions Officer of the Prime
Minister' s Department and formerly Director of the Ballarat Art
Gallery, will travel with the exhibition and will lecture on Australian
art in the countries visited.
CANBERRA, 22 January 1970
Ba~ srund ote
The names and works of the artists represented in the exhibition are
on the Press Gallery Notice Board. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 20/ 1970
COMMONWEALTH CYCLONE ASSISTANCE
There has been an exchange of telegrams between Queensland arnd
the Commonwealth today in relation to Federal Government assistance the
wake of Cyclone Ada.
The following telegram was received from the Queensland Premier,
Mr Bjelke-Petersen " FOLLOWING MY PERSONAL INSPECTION OF CYCLONE ADA
DEVASTATION AND OFFICIAL REPORTS rIT IS APPARENT THE EFFECTS OF
THIS CATASTROPHE ARE OF MAJOR PROPORTIONS AND THE RESULTANT
AMOUNT OF PERSONAL DISTRESS AND HARDSHIP OF A MUCH LARGER
SCALE THAN IN RECENT SIMILAR DISASTERS. I AM SURE THIS WILL BE
CONFIRMED BY YOUR NAVY MINISTER AND OTHER COMMONWEALTH
SOURCES. MY GOVERNMENT GREATLY APPRECIATES AND ACCEPTS
YOUR OFFER OF DOLLAR FOR DOLLAR ASSISTANCE CONVEYED YOU
TELEGRAM OF 19TH JANUARY AND I WOULD BE VERY GRATEFUL TF YOU
WOULD URGENTLY CONFIRM THAT THE SCOPE OF THIS ASSISTANCE WILL
INCLUDE IN ADDITION TO PERSONAL DISTRESS RELIEF, ESSENTIAL
REPAIRS TO HOUSES AND THE REPAIRING OR REPLACING OF ESSENTIAL
ITEMS OF FURNITURE AND EQUIPMENT TO THE EXTENT NECESSARY
TO PROVIDE REASONABLE LIVING CONDITIONS FOR THOSE WHO DUE
TO LACK OF ADEQUATE FINANCIAL RESOURCES WOULD OTHERWISE
SUFFER PERSONAL HARDSHIP. I WOULD ADD THAT THE DAMAGE
SUSTAINED BY GOVERNMENT AND LOCAL AUTHORITY BUILDINGS AND
INSTALLATIONS APPEARS TO BE COMPARABLE TO THAT OF THE .967
NORTH QUEENSLAND FLOODS AND THE 1958 BOWEN CYCLONE AND
CONSIDER AMPLE JUSTIFICATION EXISTS FOR YOUR GOVERNMENT TO
EXTEND SIMILAR FINANCIAL AID IN THIS REGARD ON THIS OCCASION.
I WOULD STRESS HOWEVER THAT URGENT CCNFIRMATION OF HOUSE
REPAIR ASSISTANCE WOULD BE APPRECIATED. RE MY SECOND
REQUEST IF ANY DETAILS OR INFORMATION ARE REQUIRED TO ASSIST
YOUR CONSIDERATION I SHALL BE HAPPY TO FURNISH THEM PROMPTLY." / 2 
This is the reply sent-by the Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, late this
afternoon " THANK YOU FOR YOUR REPORT WHICH CONFORMS WITIH
REPORT GIVEN TO ME BY MINISTER FOR NAVY.
I CONFIRM THAT COMMONWEALTH ASSISTANCE OFFERED IN
MY TELEGRAM OF 19 JANUARY FOR THE RELIEF OF DISTRESS INCLUDES
MAKING ESSENTIAL REPAIRS TO HOUSES AND REPAIRING OR REPLACING
ESSENTIAL ITEMS OF FURNITURE AND EQUIPMENT TO THE EXTENT
NECESSARY TO PROVIDE REASONABLE LIVING CONDITIONS FOR THOSE
WHO, DUE TO LACK OF ADEQUATE FINANCIAL RESOURCES, WOULD
OTHERWISE SUFFER HARDSHIP.
TO ASSIST CONSIDERATION OF YOUR REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE
IN THE RESTORATION OF PUBLIC ASSETS, PLEASE ADVISE AS SOON AS
P OSSIBLE ESTIMATED COST OF THE DAMAGE."
CANBERRA 22 January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 21/ 1970
AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
From the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
This year our National Day has a special significance.
Just two hundred years ago Captain Cook made his voyage of discovery
along our east coast. And eighteen years later the arrival of the
First Fleet set the date which we observe as our National Day.
On this day we can look back on our history and draw
hope and inspiration from dangers and difficulties overcome.
And we can reflect on tasks ahead of us and what we
should write on the blank pages of history yet to be.
In the seventies and with thought for what we would
wish our country to be at the turn of the century, we can, each
of us, reflect on present opportunities and the best method of
realiging them. Each of us, if we invest time, thought, goodwill
and effort, can share in the task of building a nation materially
rich, offering self-development to all, and contributing to the
welfare of the world community.
We have come far in the last two hundred years.
The spirit and endurance of those who ensured this
progress will, I am sure, persist, and will accelerate progress
in the future.
CANBERRA 24 January 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 22/,
PRACTICAL TRAINING FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIAN COMPOSERS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
On the advice of the Advisory Board, Commonwealth Assistance to
Australian Composers, four young composers have been select ed to gain advanced
practical experience in the techniques of orchestral and Instrumental writing.
The successful young composers, selected after the project had been
widely advertlsed, are Miss Elaine Doe of Brisbane, Mr. Kim Williams of Sydney and
Mr. V. Plush and Mr. M. Wesley-Smith of Adelaide. The Commonwealth has
provided a grant to cover their travel and accommodation.
The training programme for the young composers includes the
National Music Camp in Adelaide. They will also attend all rehearsals and
performances of the Sydney and Melbourne Prom Concert seasons, and participate in
the workshop programme being arranged by the University of Western Australia and
the Australian Broadcasting Commission in conjunction with the Festival of Perth.
These workshops are to be conducted by the noted Australian composer,
Mr. Don Banks, who is returning from England specially for this purpose,
This scheme should be of great benefit to the young composers. Not
only will they have an opportunity of hearing a number of contemporary works
rehearsed and performed by professional musicians but they will also be able to
have discussions with individual musicians, conductors and composers and receive
guidance on composing for films and television.
CA NBERRA
28 January 1970
BACKGROUND NOTE
The Advisory Board, Commonwealth Assistance to Australian
Composers, comprises Sir Bernard Heinze of Sydney ( Chairman)
Professor Frank Callaway, 0. B. E.
Department of Music,
University of Western Australia
Mr. John Hopkins,
Director of Music, A. B. C. Sydney 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 23/ 1970
MR TRUDEAUS VISIT
The Prime Minister warmly welcomed Mr Trudeau's
announcement that he would visit Australia before going to Japan for
Canada' s National Day at Expo 70 on May 27th.
Mr Gorton said that Mr Trudeau had known since they
first met at the Prime Ministers' Conference a year ago that Australia
would be more than delighted to welcome him at any time he could come
and talk to us. Mr Trudeau's visit was tangible evidence of Canada's
keen and growing interest in even closer ties with other Commonwealth
countries in the Pacific. The Government was looking forward to
discussions with the Prime Minister of Canada on many important
matters of mutual interest in the region.
Mr Trudeau is expected to arrive in the middle of May
and to spend about five days here.
CANBERRA 28 January 1970 



FOR PRESS_ P. M. No. 24/ 1970
AGREEMENT ON BARRIER REEF CIL DRILLING ENQUIRY
The Prime Minister said he was delighted with the outcome of
the conference with the Premier of Queensland.
Agreement had been reached that there should be an enquiry into
the possible damage which might be caused to the Barrier Reef through drilling
for oil. The enquiry was to be an open enquiry with s ufficient authority to
collect any evidence required. All interested parties could appear before the
Committee and state their views, and adduce evidence to support those views.
The Committee of enquiry was to be not less than three nor more
than five. It was to consist of a judge as Chairman and representatives of
marine biologists and petroleum engineers. The committee wras to be jointly
agreed by the Commonwealth and the State Governments and was to report to
both Governments. The terms of reference of the Committee were
1. Taking into account existing world technology in relation to
drilling, and safety precautions relating thereto, what
dangers are there of an oil or gas leak in exploratory
and production drilling in the area of the Great Barrier
Reef.
2. The probability of benefits accruing to the State of Queensland
and other parts of the Commonwealth from exploration or
drilling for petroleum in the vicinity of the Reef and the
extent of the benefits thereby rendered probable.
3. What are the existing safety precautions already prescribed
or otherwise laid down, and, if exploration or drilling
for petroleum on or near the Reef is permitted, what.
conditions should be imposed before such drilling coul d
take place.
4. What would be the likely effect of an oil or gas leak and
subsequent remedial measures on
the coral reefs themselves
the coastline
the ecological and biological aspects of
life of the area
Whether there are areas, and if so where, where an oil leak,
if it occurred, would cause no damage to the Reefs or
ecological and biological aspects of the Reefs. / 2 
6. The area of the Great Barrier Reef referred to in the above terms
of reference includes the entire area from low water mark on the
mainland of Queensland to the outer line of the Reefs and includes
also the area outside and adjacent to the outer line of Reefs.
The question of the possibility of drilling during the holding
of the enquiry was considered.
As regards drilling in Repulse Bay, the Queensland Government
stated that it did not feel it could repudiate its contractual obligations should
Ampol/ Japex insist on drilling. But both Governments expressed the hope
that Ampol/ Japex would inform the Queensland Government that they did not
propose to drill pending the outcome of the enquiry.
In regard to other areas of the Barrier ReefD both Governments
expressed the hope and the desire that drilling should not take place
pending the outcome of the enquiry and the Commovvealth stated that if the
wish of the Governments concerned should be ignored, the
conditions attached to drilling should be so stringent that no damage
could occur. It was further agreed if, as a result of any action taken because
of the report of the Committee, the question of compensation should arise,
both Governments would at once confer on this matter.
On the question of the depredations of the Crown of Thorns
Starfish both Governments agreed that a joint Committee should be
set up financed by a dollar for dollar grant from the State and Commcnw ealth
Governments. It was noted that much investigation into this problem had
already taken place but that no definitive proposals for action had so
far been able to be recommended by the bodies concerned in
investigation. CA NBERRA
29 January 1970 



FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON DOMICILIARY
NURSING
Melbourne, Victoria 2 FEBRUARY 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Madam President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Thank you very much for your welcome, Madam
President. My wife and I are glad indeed to be with you on this
occasion and to have the opportunity of extending, on behalf of
the Commonwealth Government, a welcome to all delegates, but
particularly, perhaps to those delegates who have come from overseas.
It is good that we have with us today delegates from
the World Health Organisation, from the North American continent,
from Europe, from Asia and from the Pacific. I take some small
personal satisfaction in having made the conference arrangements
a little easier, due largely to the persistence of Dame Ivy Wedgwood.
I wish at the beginning to pay tribute to the organisers
of this Conference, the Ff. rst International Domiciliary Nursing
Conference the Royal D ',. xrict Nursing Service of Melbourne.
Beginning in 1885 with a. si-aff of two nurses, they are now
recognised as the senior home nursing service in Australia, and
the conference owes much to their initiative and hard work.
But they are not the only organisation in Australia.
Twelve years ago, when the Commonwealth Government first
began to financially assist these organisations, there were some
19 organisations employing some 200 nurses. Now there are 78
organisations employing more than 700 nurses, engaged in
succouring the ill, in rehabilitation and in after-care throughout
Australia. You have chosen as the theme of this conference
" Domiciliary nursing in a Changing World". What is the nature of
this change referred to, as far as it concerns the matters you are
going to discuss? Over the last two decades there have been
great advances in the methods of treatment of the ill. and in the
technical ability to heal. But in this period there has also been
what is perhaps a more important change a determination on the
part of nations to see that this technical capacity to heal is applied
to the individual, to see that schemes are brought into being in
countries of the world whereby these new methods of medical and
hospital care are made available to all individuals in a community 
and that none is debarred from sharing in them as a result of his
financial sit uat ion. This is indeed a great change, and perhaps what
you had in mind. But it is not an easy matter to arrange. What do we
want as a result of applying our minds to this change in attitude
towards our citizens? We want a scheme which covers the great
bulk of the cost of minor and major illnesses to a patient, whether
that cost be incurred by medical attention, hospitalisation or by
other methods of care and rehabilitation. We want a scheme which
requires some contribution from the individual, high enough to
impress on his mind that these matters are extremely costly, and
yet low enough t o ensure that all can join in the protection offered.
We want a scheme that is efficient from the point of
view of the patient, to whom we direct our attention. And we want
one which costs the tax payer as little as possible, consistent with
the effective operation of the scheme, and consistent with it being
extended to all our citizens. So this is what we want. Not very
difficult to state, but quite difficult to attain.
So we need to cover medical diagnosis and treatment,
hospitalisation and the other cares of which I have spoken. This
involves great and growing costs to the community, as
experience has shown in our country and every other country
which has involved itself in matters of this kind. This is true
whether the method of a scheme adopted is a compulsory one or
a voluntary one. In either case, there are great and growing costs.
Major problems leading to this cost, ones that we must
seek to guard against, I think, are unchecked rises in medical fees by
doctors, rising hospital costs as costs rise generally through the
community, the over-use by patients of medical or hospital facilities,
and the over-treatment by some doctors of patients who will add to
the income of the doctors tdu t over-treat them. I emphasise SOME
doctors. These are problems common to all schemes, again
whether they be compulsory or whether they be voluntary, and
overcoming these is a major matter for all those who wish to see
the proper operation of the health scheme I postulated at the
beginning, working in our community.
But in any case, even if we do overcome them, costs
will still tend to rise. They will rise because of the cost per bed
in hospitals. Perhaps this gathering might devote some of its attention
to seeing whether the cost per bed in hospital is necessary at its present
level, whether perhaps some of the stainless steel, some of the bronze 
some of the general what sball I call it the general greatness
which is put into the building of hospitals is essential for the care of
the patient. There is a great field to be covered in hospital
construction, and in what is required for different classes of patients
in hospitals. In any case, this is just, in passing, one aspect which
this gathering may perhaps wish to take into consideration.
Perhaps more directly concerning this gathering is that
home nursing contributes to keeping down the cost of treating
patients in hospitals or even in nursing homes. Yet it does, of
course, far more than merely keep down the cost of treating patients.
It pays attention to the inner desires of someone I referred to hitherto
as a patient, but who is more than a patient, who is a living, sentient
human being. It pays attention to the scial and emotional desire of
such people to be treated in surroundings they know, in the company
of families they love, in their own homes. So it does far more than
merely keep down costs. It contributes very greatly to actual
healing, if actual healing is helped, as I believe it is, by the state
of mind of the person being treated, and this is the great significance
of this movement. There is another matter I would ask you to consider.
As the technical capacity to treat those who are ill has increased,
so there seems to have been an increase in the amount of training
and the number of certificates required by nurses. And I am sure
this is right and proper. But I wonder if all those nurses who make
home visits for domiciliary care need to be quite as highly technically
trained as some other nurses involved in hospitals perhaps need to be.
I am told by doctor friends ;-and I have some doctor friends
I am told by doctor friends that in many of these cases what patients
at home need more than anything is what they describe as TLC or
tender loving care, which involves the smoothing of a pillow, the
makcing of a bed, the bringing of a cold drink, the talk about little
matters of the day, the provision of a hot water bottle which in
themselves, the laymen would think, did not really require triple
certificates in order to be able to be devoted to the welfare of the
patient. But I just put this question to you and look to you for the
answers to it to come back in due course.
I am sure the answer to that and other questions of
significance will emerge from this Conference and will be of help
to me, and to the Parliament and to the nation, for on these matters
we will in the year ahead be hearing a very great deal indeed, and be
seeking to make advances in solving some of the problems involved.
It is of some help and some sustenance to those who try to devote our
attention to this to know that here in Melbourne, and in Australia today, 
4.
we have this conference concerned in the same affairs, preparing to
devote its discussion to those affairs, and we know that out of that
discussion there will be help for us in our attempts to be, as it were,
the midwife between the Australian nation and those who are sick in
the Australian nation, so that what the Australian nation wants to do
for those who are sick, we may help them do in the most effective and
efficient way possible.
I must finish by congratulating and thanking all of you
for having devoted your attention to the thought and care for
those who are less fortunate than you. That in itself will, I think,
be a reward for you to know you have done that, but a rather more
concrete and rather more significant reward will be if from this
Conference there emerges proposals which a government is able
to consider and perhaps adopt for the good of the people of this
nation. 



FOR PRESS PM. NO. 25/ 1970
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
In Sydney today, the Government met with representatives
of industry and commerce. Ministers conferred with representatives
of national organisations in three groups primary industry,
manufacturing industry and commerce,
These economic consultations, which are held at
half-yearly intervals, were once again valuable in providing Ministers
with an appreciation of the views of those directly involved in commerce
and industry. The consultations will continue tomorrow, when
Ministers will have separate discussions with representatives of the
Export Development Council, the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council and the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
CANBERRA, 4 February 1970
NOTE Attached is a list of those who participated in today's talks 
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED AT
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
4 February 1970
Primary Industry Group
A-stralian Farmers' Federation
Australian Wool Growers' and
Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers'
Federation
Australian Mining Industry
Council
Manufacturing Industry Group
The Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation
Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries
Commercial Group
Associated Chambers of Commerce
of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers President Mr L. R. Forrester
President Mr B. A. Wright
President Mr R. V. Sewell, OBE
President Mr K. M. McDougall
Immediate Past President
Sir George Fisher
Executive Member
Mr W. W. Pettingell
President Mr R. S. Prentice
Vice-President
Mr N. W. Lawrance
President Mr G. M. Hastie, OBE
President Mr N. A. Jackson
President Mr T. Luton, CSO, MBE 



AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT
N. S. W. DIVISION ANNUAL DINNER
Sydney, N. S. W. t
Presentation of John Storey award to Mr. W. W. Pettingell
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
FEBRUARY 1970
Mr. President, Mr. Pettingell, Ladies and Gentlemen:
One of the great pleasures for me tonight, and I am
sure one of the great pleasures for you, is that before I came
it was stipulated that I had not come in order to make a speech
or to leave a message with you, but merely to appear on an
occasion which seems to me to be one which deserves the
greatest support which the government of this country can give.
I come for two reasons. One is because this is a
gathering of the Australian Institute of Management, and as the
politician of caricature says " In this gathering I say without fear
of contradiction that the Australian Institute of Management is an
extraordinarily fine body of men. And if there may be some
amongst us who cavil a little at men being selected, then to those
I say that I fall back on the legal precept that the greater includes
the less. And I mean this because what is required in this or
other developing countries for we still are a developing country
is capital, wherever we can get it, to the greatest degree that we
can, subject to some small reservations as to the conditions on
which it comes; and labour, which on the figures recently released,
is getting more and more in demand and less and less available.
But there is something over and above that, for what use
is capital, what use is labour if it is not managed in such a way that
from it the greatest possible benefit is received for the country? You
can have a factory in which you have adequate machinery, in which you
have a workforce of competent people, but what can you get from it if
management is not capable of utilising what is provided?
It is true, I think, as our trade union leaders would say
and indeed I would say, that what is produced in a country is basically
produced from the skills and the devotion and the work of the man on the
factory floor, the man who runs the lathe, the foreman, and the people
in the work force. It also remains true that in any given factory you
could have exactly the same skills on the factory floor, exactly the 
2.
same number of people, but you could have a production which was
small if the management was bad, or a production which was great
if the management was good. And this is the great contribution
that can be made to the growth of this country and to the well being
of all who are in it. And because the Institute of Management does
this, it is one of the pleasures to me of coming tonight.
There is another, Sir, arising out of something
which you said in the course of your speech. I thinkc, if I may
paraphrase, you said that in the world today everybody knows what
everybody else has and wants it. If I may speak personally for a
moment, I am not unfamiliar with that approach! But this is not
necessarily a bad thing, provided those who want it are prepared
to earn it, are prepared to see how it has been achieved and to put
In the effort and the brain power and the devotion which is required
to get it. In this case what you have said is good, but of course if
somebody, some other country sees what has been attained here and
wants it, and doesn't want to put in that kind of effort, but merely
expropriate it or take it away, then this does no good at all.
And because this Institute of Management seeks to
disseminate amongst the people of this country the techniques by
which these things can be attained, that is another reason why I
think it is of such significance to this country of Australia.
But the second reason why I am so glad to be here is
that it is a gathering to honour Mr. Pettingell, whom I see not for
the first time today. You will have heard, if you didn't know
before, he is indeed a man for all seasons. Indeed, hearing of
how he sailed a partly finished boat to Hobart, one can only tremble
for Ted Heath if that boat had been finished before he started.
But seriously, Sir, no words of mine can add to the
record which was read to the assembled gathering as to what you
have done and what you are continuing to do. A man who has
always sought the most direct route to whatever it is he sought to
attain, and who I am glad to say is still doing it. He has been one
of the pioneers of business management in this country, one of the
people who has recognised that it is necessary if you have a factory
force, if you have people working for you, to mobiise their talents,
to utilise their skill to the greatest possible extent, and to realise
the full potential of those for whom he is responsible in his sphere,
to the benefit of his company, to the benefit of the people so utilised
and to the benefit of the Australian nation.
I am glad to say that there is a growing realisation of the
importance of management and of the importance of research. You
will know that there are experts coming to Australia on February 24-
3.
( some of you will have dealt with them before) to advise on the
setting up of a School of Business Management in this country, a
post-graduate school, a real attempt to bring the techniques to the
younger people who more and more will be taking over management
in the expanding economy of our nation.
And it affords me pleasure, not only that this is
happening but that I will be able to get a bit of my own back by
going to industry and saying, " Now you can provide the money
that is required for the setting up of this school for the benefit
of everybody. I still remember somebody promising me $ 10 million
if we did it and I intend to collect that IOU. Of course that will
only cover a part of the cost:
But because of what you have done, Mr. Pettingell,
a nd what those others in this room have done and are doing,
because of the overriding significance of management for the
full realisation of what we can do, because you are here tonight
being honoured and because of those who are here to honour you,
I have had the greatest delight in being able to be in some small
way associated with this function.
May I finish on this note? A short time ago, I went to
Adelaide to deliver an address called " The William Queale
Memorial Lecture" on management and training for management,
and used these words, or something like these words: We have seen
just recently the most extraordinary occurrence in man's history.
We have seen people walking on the moon. The planning for this was
started a decade or more ago. The people who took part in that
journey deserve all the tribute we can pay them. But they could not
have got there, they could not have walked on the moon, they could
not have come back, had it not been for management techniques,
for management planning, for the overseeing of every detail which
led to that great and successful adventure. If that is so in a
dramatic way, then if the same devotion and the same techniques,
are applied to providing in this country the greater opportunities
that are possible, this may be even greater than the success of the
management techniques which led to the journey to the moon. This
is very largely in your habds and in the hands of people like
Mr. Pettingell, and it is for this reason I have been honoured to be
with you tonight. 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 26/ 1970
RUMOURS ABOUIT PROPOSED INDUSTRIAL 1
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
It is necessary to dispose of some of the wild stories and
mistaken rumours which are circulating concerning the proposed
Industrial Development Corporation.
An official, detailed statement will be made at the
appropriate time by the Government, and prior to that any
observations on the details of the proposal can be nothing but
speculation. However, there are certain matters which should be
made clear. These are
It is not intended that the Corporation should have the
status of a bank or that any loans it negotiated would
be guaranteed by the Commonwealth.
It Is not intended that the Corporation should work under
the jurisdiction or subject to the direction or influence of
any Commonwealth Department. It would be an institution
established by the Government by statute and be entirely
free of any influence other than that set out in the statute
creating it. It is intended that its directorate should
include iion-Government persons of top business
experience. It would in no way diminish capital in-flow from overseas.
Its objective would be, on the exercise of a business
judgement, and when an Australian enterprise desired it,
to substitute fixed interest borrowing abroad for some
of the overseas money at present supplied in return for a
surrender of Australian equity. Any internal borrowing
would be kept to an absolute minimum and would be subject
to the agreement of the Reserve Bank.
It would in no way conflict with the functions of the States
or in any way affect their freedom in industry matters. 
2.
Its function is to tap those sources of overseas funds
from which overseas companies at present borrow for
investment in Australia. If it does this, and thereby helps
to assure that a greater proportion of Australian
development remains in Australian hands, its objectives
should commend themselves to all who do not think
attempts to maximise Australian ownership are
positively bad.
CANBERRA 11 FEBRUARY 1970 



FOR PRESS PM No. 27/ 1970
MR WILFRED BURCHETT lI9
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, today 4
received the following telegram from Mr Frank Galbally
" RESPECTFULLY REQUEST YOU ALLOW
WILFRED BURCHETT TEMPORARY ENTRY TO
AUSTRALIA TO ATTEND RECENTLY DECEASED
BROTHER'S MEMORIAL SERVICE SUNDAY. FULL
PARTICULARS TELEPHONED TO YOUR SECRETARY'S
OFFICE." Mr Gorton replied as follows
" I ACKNOWLEDGE YOUR TELEGRAM OF
TODAY'S DATE CONCERNING WILFRED BURCHETT.
AS YOU KNOW CABINET HAS DECIDED THAT THE
GOVERNMENT WILL DO NOTHING EITHER TO GRANT
MR BURCHET" AN AUSTRALIAN PASSPORT OR TO
FACILITATE HIS TRAVEL IN ANY OTHER WAY."
CANBERRA, 12 February 1970 



QPE" ING OF THE NEW MIDDLE SCHOOL AT
CHRISTIAN BROTHERS COLLEGE,
WAVERLEY, N. S. W, FEBRUARY 1970
Speech by the. Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Chairman, Your Grace, Parliamentary Colleagues both Federal and
State, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
May I thank you for the warmth of your welcome and thank you
in particular, Brother Simmons, for what you had to say and tell you that I regard
this occasion to be an honour for me and one which gives me great satisfaction.
I regard it as an honour because I have been asked to be associated
today with those who planned and worked and strove and finally completed their
task. And I find it of immense satisfaction, because as I look at this new block
and cast my mind into the future, I believe there will come from it and from the
resources which it includes, hundreds and hundreds of young men into the
Australian community, better educated than they would otherwise have been. I
believe they will be inculcated with the desire to put their talents and their
privileges at the service of their country, and contributing to this nation not to
any segment of it but to this nation more than they would have been able to
contribute had this building not beetr conjtrucfed.
This, of course, is a special day for Waverley. It is a concrete
illustration of the advances now being made in educational thinking, in educational
techniques, and in the application of technology to make teaching more easy, more
interesting, more satisfying and more comprehensive. It is, too, a shining example
of the use of funds, both private and public, to the best possible advantage from the
poin . t of view of getting value for every dollar spent.
This Middle School block, Sir, is a notable addition to a notable
school, a school with a long history and fine tradition. And I would like to
congratulate Brother Simmons and his staff and the members of the College Advisory
Council on what they have achieved and what we see before us today as a result of
that achievement. I think, too, that this is a justification if justification were needed
of the policies of governments, both State and Commonwealth but I speak for the
Commonwealth of the policies adopted towards providing encouragement and some
assistance to Independent schools; a policy based, I believe, on principles of
justice, of economic commonsense, and of an appreciation of how best to serve
the true interests of education generally throughout our nation. a. / 2 
Allow me for a moment to set before you what in fact that policy
towards education is, because there seems to be some mistaken belief growing
in the community, some mistaken idea that governments are only providing
help to independent schools, that such schools are the pampered darlings of the
Commonwealth Government and this is not true.
It is true that Commonwealth spending on education in Australia
has risen to $ 22 a head of population from some $ 4 ten years ago, but the vast
majority of this sum and the vast majority of this increase is provided for
sectors of public education, and that should be borne constantly in mind. Science
blocks have been provided throughout Australia to all secondary schools, which
means that 75 per cent of all monetary provision for this has gone to public, not
to independent, schools. Libraries a programme now getting well under way, but still
to be brought to full fruition are being provided to all secondary schools
throughout Australia, which means some 75 per cent of the finances provided goes
to State and not to independent schools. Expenditure on secondary technical
education, so essential for the future of our nation, is almost entirely confined
to'government schools. Teacher training colleges are provided with unmatched
funds by the Commonwealth, on condition that ten per cent of the places reserved
in them for trainees are reserved for those who will teach in independent schools.
In colleges of advanced education, in assistance to universities,
the public sector is the sector which receives all expenditure.
So no-one can say that the needs of publi c education are being
in any way ignored, and that is the first point which I wish to make.
Yet there are those who oppose any assistance being given to
independent schools, who oppose the provision of science blocks to such schools,
of libraries to such schools and, more particularly, oppose the recent provision
of assistance towards the running costs of such schools.
I believe that those who so oppose this policy are completely
wrong. I can understand though I would entirely reject an argument advanced
in some quarters that there should be no private independent schools allowed.
That at least is a simple argument, and, I think, simply refuted. But I cannot
understand the argument which would say to some Australian citizens " Although
you have paid your full share of taxation for a public school system which you do
not use, thereby relieving the strain on it; although you have paid additional
charges and are paying them to provide a school of a type which you prefer
although you are doing all this, yet you should nevertheless be prohibited from
receiving any assistance at all from the taxation revenue to which you have
contributed. This seems to me to be entirely unjust, and that is why I said
earlier that our policy is based on principles of justice the policy of giving
some assistance. vo e. / 3 
And the economic argument which supports the provision of
assistance to independent schools is irrefutable. How much more would be
required from the taxpayers of Australia if there were to be no private schools
tomorrow, and those who attended them were to be moved to a state system
tomorrow? What great sums would be required, not to improve the existing
state schools, but merely to keep them at their present standards? I think
the economic argument and the commonsense are quite unassailable.
But moving to the interests of education, you, Brother Simmons,
said that what was required of our educational institutions was that they should
have independence, that they should seek for excellence and that they should
be able to experiment and to have variety. What better way can these ideals
be achieved than by having a state school system on the one hand, and independent
school systems on the other, so that there is no risk of uniformity being applied
by a central education department. There is an opportunity for innovations
suich as we have seen here today, and innovations not only from independent
schools they can come both from state and independent but innovations which
once they are made and once they have been proved to be successful, are not
confined to the sector which made those innovations, but are available for the
whole broad field of education throughout Australia.
So both from the point of view of justice, of economic commonsense,
and of serving the. interests of education, I believe the policies of
assistance which have been adopted are right, and I assure you that those policies
will continue and will not be changed,
There are those who think that by expressing disagreement and
opposition to these policies, which they have a perfect right to do, they are
serving the interests of the state sector of education. It may well be indeed
I believe it is that if they were to achieve the objectives they seek, they
would not be defending government schools at all, but merely preventing the
improvement of government schools, which will be able the more quickly to
be improved if the independent schools are provided some assistance over and
above the burdens borne by those who support them, to enable more of the
taxpayers! dollars to be left to improve the state school system itself.
We as a government are not interested in just one sector of
education. We are, as you know, awaiting the report of an enquiry by all state
governments into the needs of education, both in state schools and in
independent schools throughout Australia. We believe that the method of such
an inquiry by each state government is the best way to carry it out. We know
that there are further improvements required to primary and secondary
education generally. And we will, as time and opportunity permit, seek to play
our part with State Governments in this field. But because we are interested in
the whole field of education state as well as independent we will not turn
our backs on our interest in the independent sector. a o. a / 4 
May I, Sir, before I declare the Middle School open, merely
say this That as long as there are throughout Australia people who are prepared
to give of their income, to give of their time, to give of their effort in order to
try to create better opportunities for education, then I think that we can face
the future with a high heart. Because there will come from all our schools in
greater numbers those better able to grapple with the new problems which will
face us, those provided with the technical skills to harness the inventions now
being made for the service of mankird, and those with a belief in rightness, in
service and in dedication which must be the true end and requirement of education
in whatever school that education may take place.
And now, Sir, I have great satisfaction in moving to the tablet
and declaring open this new Middle School of Waverley College. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 28/ 1970
TALKS WITH TASMANIAN PREMIER
The Premier of Tasmania, Mr. Bethune, today
discussed with the Prime Minister proposals for port
development on King Island, and the best method of maintaining
adequate shipping services to King Island.
It was agreed that further study should be made by
the two Governments into the Premier's proposals.
The Premier also presented facts on the difficulties
facing the State as a result of frost damage in the Huon Valley,
and the Prime Minister agreed to pass the facts presented to
the Treasury for analysis.
The talks between Mr. Gorton and Mr. Bethune
were held in the Prime Minister's Office in Canberra this
morning. 2 MAR 1970
CANBERRA 16 February 1970. 



FOR PRESS PM No. 29/ 1970
APPOINTMENTS TO COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, today announced
appointments to fill two vacancies on the Australian Council
for the Arts. Mr. H. R. Bonython, of Adelaide, well known for
his interest in the visual arts and in music, will replace
Mr. G. Dutton, who has resigned from the Council for
personal reasons. Mr. T. C. Bray, of Brisbane, formerly Editor-in-
Chief of the Brisbane " Courier Mail", succeeds Dr. K. Langer,
who died last year.
CANBERRA 16 February 1970
Biographical Notes:-
Mr. Bonython:
Mr. Bray: He is a Foundation Member of the Society of
Collectors of Fine Arts, and Director of the
Bonython Art Galleries in Adelaide and Sydney.
He has been an outstanding sponsor: of many
Australian artists. His other interests include
modern music, particularly jazz.
He has had a long career in journalism, and has
just retired as joint Managing Director of
Queensland Newspapers Pty. Ltd. and Editorin-
Chief of the Brisbane " Courier Mail" and
" Sunday Mail". He is keenly interested in the
arts, especially the theatre. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 30/ 1970
SIGNING OF NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Cabinet this morning gave full consideration to
the question of whether Australia should sign the Nuclear Non'-
Proliferation Treaty. We have decided that it would be in Australia's
interests to sign but with reservations. Signature will enable
us to join with other like-minded signatories,, such as West
Germany and Japan to achieve those interpretations, assurances,
and qualifications which we regard as important.
We have always supported the proposal for a
Treaty designed to limit the further spread of nuclear weapons
among the nations of the world.
But we have wished to be satisfied that such a
Treaty was effective, and did not damage Australia's interests.
We do not believe that as yet sufficient nations
have signed or ratified the Treaty to render it fully effective.
But the recent signatures with reservations of Japan and
West Germany have undoubtedly made it possible for the Treaty
to be much more effective than it was.
Further, although the questions of inspection and
the safeguard provisions of the Treaty have not yet been resolved
to our satisfaction progress has been made towards a solution.
It is clear, too, that the Treaty will not inhibit
but will assist the application of atomic energy for peaceful
purposes in Australia. In these circumstances the Government believes
that the time has come to sign the Treaty and hopes that this
action will encourage other couDig to do the same. 
* Ourd ecision . san-expxressio-no f -oure ar nest Jiope
that a fully satisfactory Treaty can be achieved. It is also an
expression of our desire to help and above all not to hinder
such an achievement. However we wish to make it plain that our
decision to sign is not to be taken in any way as a decision to
ratify the Treaty, and of course, the Treaty is not binding
on us until it is ratified. As was the case with Japan and West Germany
our signature will be accompanied by a statement of our
reservations and we do not propose to ratify the Treaty until
the matters of concern to us have been clarified to our
satisfaction. 18 FEBRUARY 1970 



70/ 31
FOR PRESS: 31/ 1970
PROROGATION OF PARLIAMENT
At the request of the Prime Minister, His
Excellency the Governor-General has signed a
Proclamation proroguing Parliament until Tuesday, 3
March, 1970, and summoning the Parliament to assemble
at 3.00 p. m. on that day.
CANBERRA 23 February 1970
BACKGROUND NOTE
When Parliament met on 25 November 1969, the
Governor-General stated in his Speech that the
Government intended to seek the prorogation of the
Parliament and to call it together as soon as possible
in the new year. 



70/ 12.
FOR PRESS: PM. No. 32/ 1970
ANU PERFORMING ARTS CENTRE
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Duval's gift to the Australian National
University is a generous and heartening gesture. The Performing
Arts Centre will provide a valuable opportunity for students to broaden
the cultural base of their studies.
In recent years the Commonwealth Government has
greatly increased its support of all branches of the arts, It is pleasing
to find private citizens prepared to make substantial contributions
in this field. I hope that this practice will grow and that, as is the
case in many overseas countries, wealthy citizens will assist
education and the arts in this way.
CANBERRA, February 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 33/ 1970
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE FEBRUARY 1970
COMMONWEALTH'S OFFER NEW FINANCIAL AGREEMENT
The Commonwealth today offered the States new bases for
improving State revenues in a new financial agreement.
The Commonwealth agreed in principle that there should be an
increase in the basic amount of money on which increases in State revenue
grants are calculated and offered to discuss this with the States. The
Commonwealth however, rejected the proposal that the rate of growth should
be tied to the rate of growth of income tax collections.
The Commonwealth also agreed in principle that there should
be a change in the betterment factor so that the State revenue grants should
grow more quickly year by year. This too will be discussed with the States.
The Commonwealth suggested that it should, progressively
over the term of the next agreement, assume full responsibility for a
proportion of State debt suggesting for purposes of illustration a figure
of one billion dollars.
The Commonwealth also suggested that in order to prevent
State debt growing as fast as it otherwise would do the Commonwealth
should provide a portion of the loan programme as, in effect, revenue
grants rather than loans.
The Commonwealth indicated it could not agree to vacating
part of the personal or company income tax field and said that in its
opinion income tax rates in these fields should be uniform and that personal
income tax rates should be decreased from their present levels. However
it undertook to join with the States in examining any proposals made by the
States for an alternative field of growth tax.
CA NBERRA
26 February 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 34/ 1970
PORT AUGUSTA-WHYALLA RAILWAY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
I am pleased to have signed today an Agreement with the
Premier of South Australia, Mr R. S. Hall, for the building of a
railway between Port Augusta and Whyalla.
( Mr Gorton had announced in his Election Policy Speech that
this railway would be built,
Under the Agreement signed today the railway will be a
standard gauge link to be financed, constructed and operated by the
Commonwealth. The cost of construction and rolling stock is estimated
to be about $ 8 million.
The Agreement provides for the definition of the route, the
provision of fencing, and arrangements for road crossings. The
construction timetable will depend on the results of tenders to be called
in the near future, but it is hoped that the work will be completed by
the end of 1971. The Agreement will take effect after authorising legislation
has been passed by both the Commonwealth and State Parliaments. The
Commonwealth will introduce its legislation in the forthcoming Parliamentary
Session.
CANBERRA 26 February 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 35/ 1970
CENTRAL QUEENSLAND POWER HOUSE
The Prime Minister and the Premier of Queensland today
issued the following statement:-
" Last September the Prime Minister announced the Commonwealth
Government's willingness to help finance a proposed power house
in Central Queensland.
It was believed that the establishment of this power house would
attract very significant industrial development to the Gladstone
area.
At the time of the announcement the Commonwealth said that
it was prepared to lend up to $ 80 million for that part of the
power station which would meet the initial needs of that
industrial development.
Final arrangements for this loan have now been made
between the two Governments and officers will meet next
week to draw up an agreement for the provision of the finance.
Legislation will be introduced as soon as possible thereafter".
CANBERRA 26 February 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 36/ 1970
SIGNING OF AGREEMENTS FOR THE DARTMOUTH DAM
The Prime Minister and the Premiers of New South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia today signed the two agreements relating to
the construction of Dartmouth Dam.
One agreement amends the River Murray Waters Agreement
to authorise construction of the Dartmouth Dam on the Mitta Mitta River,
a tributary of the River Murray, while the other agreement relates to
the financial arrangements. The opportunity has also been taken to
modernise the original River Murray Waters Agreement parts of which
have been in force since 1915.
The Prime Minister said the way was now clear to introduce
legislation into the four Parliaments to ratify the amendments agreed to.
With Dartmouth, South Australia will get an increased
allocation of almost one quarter of a million acre feet per annum.
A further a~ mendment provides that, in times of drought, all
water available to the River Murray Commission will be shared equally.
Up to now, the sharing has been in the proportions 5: 5: 3 ( 3 being South
Australia). The Dartmouth Dam itself will consist of a central earth core
flanked by rock as an outer shell, forming an embankment of maximum
height of 590 feet, with a crest length of 2, 300 feet and a total volume of
fill of about 20 million cubic yards.
A storage of approximately 3 million acre feet will be
impounded behind this Dam.
The State Rivers and Water Supply Commission of Victoria
will be the Constructing Authority for the Dam and it is expected to retain
the Snowy Mountains Authority as consultants to undertake designs and
prepare contract documents. e / 2 
2.
In 1963, a bridging-agreement was reached between the River
Murray Commission and the State-of New-South Wales whereby the Commission
became entitled to use some of the water from the Menindee Lakes Storage.
This agreement was to operate for seven years and one of the new amendments
will provide for the use of this water from the Menindee Scheme in
perpetuity. Amongst other things, this will ensure adequate emergency
supplies of water for South Australia within a reasonable distance of that
State. Another amendment provides for the provision of a system of
storage at Lake Victoria with inlet and outlet works that are of a size
that will, in the opinion of the Contracting Governments, ensure the
effect iveness of tihe system of storage in the regulation of the River
Murray ( including operations after the Dartmouth Reservoir has become
effective for the purpose of the Agreement).
The financial arrangements for the construction of the Dam
provide for the Commonwealth, in addition to paying its own share, to lend
to each of the States at the long-term Commonwealth bond rate prevailing
at the time when the loan was made one half of their share of the costs.
Such loans would be subject to the usual interest payments, but repayment
of capital would be deferred for ten years and would take place over the
subsequent fifteen years.
CA NBERRA
26 February 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 37/ 1970
SPECIAL NON-RECtJRR ING-REVENUE GRANT
At the meeting of the Premiers' Conference this evening,
the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, announced that the Commonwealth
would make a special non-recurring revenue grant of $ 12 million to
the States. This amount will be allocated in the same proportions as
the distribution of the 1969-70 financial assistance grants.
The estimated distribution of the $ 12
the following table million is shown in
$ MILLION
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Total 1.9 1.3 1. 3
0.
12. 0
CANBERRA 26 February 1970 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO 44/ 1970.
The Prime Minister, the Right Honourable J. G. Gorton, M. P.
issued the following statement today on the death of the
late Mr. Jim Fraser, M. P. for the A. C. T.
Jim Fraser will be missed both as a man
and as a dedicated representative of the citizens of
Canberra. Although we were politically opposed I
have always known him as a thoroughly good, decent,
and able man. He had no touch of malice or meanmindedness
anywhere about him.
I am sure that all Members of Parliament
will be genuinely saddened at losing him and I extend,
to his wife, son, and brother our very real condolences.
I hope that it may comfort them to reflect
that throughout his life he did his duty as he saw it
courageously and to the utmost of his capacity.
CANBERRA 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
AIJSTRAHIAN FILM DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION BILL 1970
Second Reading
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates,' 5 March 1970.]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
[ 8.00]-1 move:
That the Bil be now read a second time.
This Bill will fulfil the Government's undertaking
to assist the Australian film industry.
It provides for the establishment of an
Australian Film Development Corporation
which will administer a fund with
an initial capital of Sim, The Corporation
will make loans to film
and television producers. It will be able to
guarantee repayment of loans, including
bank overdrafts, made to producers of Australian
films. It will be able to join with
producers of Australian films under
arrangements which will entitle it to receive
a share of the proceeds without being
liable for any debts which may be incurred.
It may also, subject to ministerial approval,
participate in the formation of a company
for the distribution of Australian films. The
Corporation will seek to encourage the production
and distribution of Australian films
of high quality. I should perhaps say, Mr
Speaker, that when I refer to films of high
quality I do not confine my meaning to
films of technical excellence or those with
an artistic content which could win a
12972/ 70 festival award, but be commercially unsuccessful.
The Corporation will seek to encourage
the production of films which are
box office successes and which have those
excellences of production, camera work and
technical presentation which justify the
description ' high quality'.
The fund is intended for investment in
films: It is not intended as a giveaway project.
It indicates our optimism that such
investment will be successful in all ways but
it is not intended as a vehicle for underwriting
the full cost of a film or films. Producers
of films will still be expected to
have a substantial equity in a film and to
show faith in their artistic and commercial
judgment, and I hope that distributors will
also be prepared to invest, at their judgment,
in such enterprises. We believe that
after a period of time properly made investments
will be returning profits to the Corporation
and there will then be no need for
the Government to replenish the fund each
year. That is our objective and the measure
of the scheme's success will be judged
partly on this.
So we expect profits in money terms but
at least as importantly we expect profit in 
human values. A flourishing film industry
in Australia will employ talented Australian
writers, artists, directors, actors, musicians
and technicians. Many of them have all too
often had to leave this country to pursue
their chosen careers. Their talents have
added distinction to the productions of
other countries. But I know many of them
wish to return again home. We hope that
they will be able to do so as a result of
the action here suggested. Further, film and
television distributed throughout the world
is perhaps the most effective means by
which the image of a country can be projected
abroad-the most effective means by
which the ideas and way of life of a nation
can become known throughout the world.
We hope this Bill will help Australia in this
way. It is now apparent that Australian interest
and support is beginning to be available
for local productions and it is my Government's
hope that money provided by the
Corporation will act as a catalyst to
encourage private capital to invest in Australian
productions. In other countries considerable
investment in film production is
forthcoming from banking and other
financial institutions. Let us hope and urge
that this support, along with that suppor-t
from distributors and exhibitors which I
have mentioned, will be forthcoming here.
The corporation will consist of a chairman
and four other members-each appointed for periods not exceeding 5 years
but eligible for reappointment. Members
will be appointed from amongst persons of
standing and varied experience but without
pecuniary interests in the business' of making,
distributing or exhibiting films, or in a
corporation carrying on such a business.
The Corporation will be required to report
annually to the Minister with appropriate
financial statements. The Minister will be
required to lay the report and financial
statements, together with the report of the
Auditor-General, before each House of the
Parliament. It gives me great personal pleasure to
introduce this Bill. It expresses the Government's
belief that we should devote ourselves
not only to building great new
factories and smelters, not only to wresting
produce and minerals from the earth of
Australia, not only to material standards,
but also to involvement in and encouragement
and development of the Arts. The
human values we will thereby nurture, the
satisfaction we will offer to individual
development, the improvement of the
quality of life are essential for any nation
if it is to merit the description ' great'.
I believe this Bill will help us to attain
these aims and I commend it to the House.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Hayden)
adjourned.
Printed for the Government of the Commonwealth by W. G. MURRAy at the
Grovernment Printing Office, Canberra 



3 APR 1970
FOR PRESS P. M. No 38/ 1970
C. S. I. R. 0. SCIENTISTS STUDY OIL SLICK
Two C. S. I. R. 0. scientists both members of the Division
of Fisheries and Oceanography are being sent to Queensland to study the
effect of the oil that has escaped from the OCEANIC GRANDEUR.
The Government felt that in view of the forthcoming Royal
Commission into oil drilling on the Great Barrier Reef, it would be
valuable to gain as much knowledge as possible from the tanker incident.
CA NBERRA
March 1970 



AUSTRALIAN MINING INDUSTRY COUNCIL
THIRD ANNUAL DINNER
Canberra, ACT 9 MARCH 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr. President, Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Guests and
Ladies and Gentlemen Thank you, Sir, for your introduction and for the generous
way in which you and the people in this room have honoured the toast to
your guests. I appreciate what you have said. I am sure my fellow guests
appreciate it too, and if through the press of affairs, Sir, it is impossible
for me to make this an annual event, at least I can assure you that both
myself and my colleagues will make quite sure that it is at least a triennial
event for a long time to come.
Sir, although your Council has not been in-existence for a
long term of years, as years go in our national history, I believe it has
already made its mark on Australia, on Government, both State and
Federal, and on the way in which the mining industry is conducted in
Australia. As I stand here before you and see the representatives of
so many companies, my mind's eye leaves this room, as I think perhaps
yours can do, and instead of being here in a hotel in the National Capital,
it moves away to the areas where you and your companies are operating.
It swings thousands of miles North, for example, to Weipa, where, in the
last war the Air Force landed on a lot of little brown pebbles, and they
wondered what on earth it was; and they were landing on bauxite where
there is now an aerodrome on probably one of the largest bauxite deposits
in the world. It comes south to Gladstone, where that bauxite is turned
into alumina for the great benefit of overseas companies: To Kambalda,
Sir, this hot, dry area which has given Kalgoorlie, the city of legend,
a new lease of life. Because after all, it is far more profitable to mine
nickel than gold today, unless of course, you can find some alluvial
deposit where you pick up the nuggets! / 2 
Or to Gove again a great bauxite deposit, or to those
dreaming areas in the North-West of North Australia where for so long all
the experts, all the geologists told us there was no iron ore; it was a
waste of time to look, there just wasn't anything there. This was not
entirely the West Australian Department of Mines' geologists, although they
had a good deal to do with it but there to this area today, where Mt Tom
Price ( with not much Australian equity) but where Mt Tom Price and close
to it, Mt Whaleback have some thousands of million tons of iron ore
reserves. And where a stone's throw away in terms of our national
dimensions, there is the yet unexploited Rhodes Ridge with 3, 000 million
tons of iron ore reserves three times as much as the two great mines
I have mentioned. And where, hiding over the horizon, and known to many
people, so I am giving nothing away, is Mcamey's Monster, yet to be
proved, but again at least as large as Rhodes Ridge.
Leaving aside altogether the deposits at Robe River, leaving
aside the deposits which Broken Hill has taken up recently, we can go from
here to all these frontier areas where the companies which you gentlemen
represent are taking from the soil of Australia riches which were previously
undreamt of an which are the sinews of our growth at present and in the
future. I have mentioned but a few of the new areas being developed,
the new frontiers, and what frontiers they are. Because as you go around
and look at them, here are the pioneers living in air-conditioned houses
provided by the mining company, with electricity, electric refrigerators,
with shopping centres, swimming pools, and thanks to the benevolence of
the Postmaster-General soon to be with television. What a wonderful
way of pioneering that is, particularly for somebody with a memory as I
have of Aladdin lamps which had to be trimmed every night and a kerosene
refrigerator and later an electric generating plant of one's own which
only went when one went out and kicked it. Indeed, these modern facilities
are provided by your companies to see that people will go and vork in these
areas. Of course in some States not all but in some States, much
more than this is done. I was told by a representative of one significant
company that they didn't particularly mind building the railroads and
building the ports and the harbours and building the schools, but they thought
it was a little tough when they were asked to build the gaol:. But they
went ahead and did it anyway! ./ 3 
It is a little hard to believe that all this advance, that all this
minerals explosion really began only some ten years or so ago. Until
1960, there had been a 20-year-old ban on the export of iron ore from
Australia. Indeed, our mineral exports in 1959/ 60 were valued at
$ 168 million. Today they are worth $ 759 million, and before the end of
this decade well before the end of this decade they will be bringing
us in 000 million. What an immense acceleration in what a short
period of time. And to emphasise this, in 1960, our exports of iron ore
were a few hundred dollars. This year they are to be worth $ 142 million.
Coal exports, ten years ago, were worth $ 121 million. Today they will
bring us in $ 142 million.
This is an immense expansion in such a short space of time
by the companies and the enterprises that you gentlemen in this room
represent. And what now? What is going to happen in the future?
It seems to me inevitable that although Japan is our major
trading partner now in the export of iron ore, Europe will supplant it as
soon as sufficiently large ships are able to be brought in to cut down the
cost of freight to Europue. After all, we have got hematite of 64% or
65% 0 iron ore content and they are scratching around at 30% 0 or sonething
of that kind. They have to mine it. All we have to do is to get to the
top of a hill and take the hill away:
And I believe, myself, that before long, the United States
of America must be a strong customer for iron ore of the quality we have.
If US Steel does not come out here and build its own steel plant to use the
ore we have, then our ore will go to the United States in order to make
steel there. It will be cheaper for US Steel to do that than to continue on
the course they are now following in the United States itself.
The openings in front of us, the windows on the future look
on to a vista that is virtually unlimited. Let me, Sir, continue a little
with the importance which I see to Australia of these new enterprises.
At the end of last month, my colleague, the Minister for
National Development, issued a set of new projections for the mining
industry. I have mentioned the $ 2000 million of his projections. / 4 
Stack that up against the projections made by the Vernon Committee which
estimated that mineral exports would be valued at about $ 330 million a year
by 1975. That Committee based that figure on known resources and on
expert predictions. There were a few people around who thought this
estimate a little conservative and said it might be a $ 100 million or so more
than that who could tell? And someone had the temerity to mention that
it might be $ 700 or $ 800 million and this was at once dismissed as a
complete flight of fancy, complete nonsense. But it wasn't a flight of fancy.
It was an underestimation by experts of what we had and of what we could do
with what we had and perhaps this underlines again what I have said that
the future is virtually without limit. We don't yet know all we have got, We
don't yet know what it can bring in for us.
There is always difficulty in planning of this kind. I am told
that the two best-planned cities in Australia are Broken Hill and Kalgoorlie
and the reason that they are the two best-planned cities in Australia is that
the roads were designed so that those using them could turn a camel team.
I have got to bring this to the attention of my colleague, the Minister for
the Interior, in Canberra: But whatever the reasons for it may be, this
indicates that sometimes planning has unexpected results and often
planning underestimates what can be achieved.
Now, Sir, I have been speaking only of the mining industry
so far, But what I have been saying tonight means that the change in our
pattern of trade is obvious as a result of ou~ r mineral developments. Last
year, mineral exports exceeded in value our greasy wool exports from
Australia for the first time, and there we get another pointer to the
dimension in our national affairs played by the mineral explosion.
In five years' time, the value of our mineral exports from
Australia should be greater than the total value of our rural exports today.
And since we have grown from an infant nation to our present state, very
largely if not entirely on the value of our rural exports, what a great
punctuation mark in our national history is here heralded. And that is the
export the overseas earnings side of the question. And I have already
said that the future is unlimited.
But we are talking of mining and what mining can bring into
this country, and largely one has been thinking of raw materials. Not
entirely, of course, because there is to be at Kwinana the new refinery
for nickel, there is now for which I take some personal pleasure to be
in Queensland a smelter which might well be the greatest in the world if
you put a four-pot line instead of a three-pot line, as I hope you will. 
But very largely it is the raw materials, the ore and the pellets that are
being exported. But more and more, if we are to make the best use of what
has been discovered, of what has been and is being worked, more and more
I think we should seek to process the materials that are torn from the land
in Australia. I would like to see Australia with a second steel industry. I
am told there is more than one at present, but I don't believe it. I think
there is one which owns some subsidiaries. I would quite like to see a
second steel industry. I want to see aluminium smelters in this country.
I want to see more and more processing of the materials we produce.
And let me illustrate that by giving you some figures. I
have been talking of bauxite. Let's look at what is involved here. One
million tons of bauxite from Weipa or from Gove earns $ 5 million for
export. If it is converted to alumina, the equivalent of its earnings is
some $ 30 million. If that alumina is converted to aluminum, ingot
aluminum, it would be worth $ 120 million, and if, finally, that ingot
aluminum is fabricated into aluminium products then it would be worth
$ 600 million. There really is a premium, gentlemen, on getting $ 600
million or $ 200 million rather than not only a premium in what can
be earned overseas by it, but a premium in the factories that are
Srovided, the smelters that are provided, the jobs that are provided, the
ecentralisation that is provided, if we can more and more get into this
field. I know many companies are already acting along these lines.
The more companies that do this the better it will be for them, and for our
nation. And I believe that the gentlemen in this room would wish to see
that happen and will strive to see it happens.
And if it is to happen, then there is another aspect to which
I think we should all turn our minds. Some of you may have heard or read
that I have a view that the more Australian ownership there is in these
fields the better it is for Australia. Of course we need, and nobody
denies we need, overseas capital in very.* large quantities, both for the
development of the mining section and, more particularly, perhaps, for
the development of the processing section of which I have spoken. And we
cannot but benefit from such an exercise; even if it is 100 per cent
ownership, we cannot but benefit from it. We benefit because we are
virtually 50/ 50 partners since we take some 45 per cent of profits in company
tax. There are some companies who can minimise their profits, of course,
which has some effect on this, but once they really get going and the
opportunity for hiding things is gone, then we take 45 per cent, andso
we are 45 per cent partners in this manner. / 6 
We benefit because of the townships that are built, and
because of the people who are employed, and because of the taxation given
us by those who are employed. We benefit because of the manpower which
comes in and which otherwise we might not get. We benefit because of
access to overseas markets which very big overseas companies have got
sewn up and which we might not be able to enter if we didn't have this
capital here. In all these ways we benefit.
But having said that, and having said that we must not in any
way interfere with this flow, it would be wrong, I think, to say there is
no price that has to be paid for the benefits I have outlined.
There is a price. There is a price to be paid in that the
overseas earnings which companies make are going eventually to be
diminished by the dividends that have to be paid overseas for the fixed
interest loans that have to be paid off. There is a price, perhaps, to be
paid, if there is too great a concentration of overseas ownership, on the
refusal of access to particular markets because of arrangements made
by international cartels. So there is a number of prices to be paid.
Now, Sir, none of these prices is sufficient for us to prevent
the inflow of overseas capital and the benefits which we get from it, but
surely the lower we can keep this price without preventing such inflow,
the better it is for us and for pur country.
And it is for these reasons that my Government has made
it abundantly clear that we look with favour on partnership arrangements,
that we look with favour on overseas companies offering opportunity to
Australian investors to take up equity in those companies. And having
made this known, I am happy to say that significant overseas companies
are taking notice of it and are, more than before, providing these
opportunities. I have no evidence to indicate that having made this known
has in any way inhibited the inflow of capital from abroad. I have plenty
of evidence to indicate that overseas companies are offering more
ownership to Australians if they are prepared to take it up.
And it was for these reasons that we instituted the idea of
convertible notes so that citizens in Australia who have money to invest
but who must have an income to live on from that money, would have the
opportunity to invest it, to receive income from it, and at a later stage,
when a company became profitable, have the opportunity to convert that
into equity. And it was for these reasons that we instituted guidelines for
/ 7 
borrowing in Australia by overseas companies, guidelines which would give'
to overseas companies an incentive to provide equity to Australians because
the greater the equity, the greater the opportunity to borrow in Australia, and
the less interest had to be paid by those who were borrowing.
And now we propose a further step, and that is the setting UP ofC
a corporation to enable Australian companies to compete in overseas fixed
interest borrowing with the gia it companies which now can borrow overseas.
There is no n.-eed to expound upon this to those of you who are in this room'--
because you know it like a book. I have on my right a gentleman whose
company is borrowing large, very large sums of money overseas at quite
high rates of interest to develop Australia, at any rate to smelt in Australia.
The other day, Hamersley had a new float and borrowed large sums of mon--ey
overseas at high rates of interest to further develop Mt Tom Price. Utah
is doing the same. Let us not go any further. We all know that for purposes of
development, companies with complete or partial overseas ownership will
borrow as much inside Australia as they can and the rest outside Australia
or. their business judgment of what will best help to develop their compa.. i-es,
and their business judgment of how they can service the loans they borrow.
And this is made easier to do because on the international markets Alcoa,
General Motors, companies of that calibre can go and establish with no
difficulty their credit worthiness for large loans. What we are seeking to
do by this new step, the latest in the ones we have already taken, is to
establish a corporation in Australia which, by its size, will be able to
be seen by those who have money to lend abroad, to be at least as creditworthy
as General Motors or Alcoa, or other companies of that kind. This
is so that it can, in that way, for Australian comparies who on a business
judgment believe they need it, borrow money at high rates of interest which
they think they can service and thereby be put on the same footing as the
other large companies of which I have spoken. We believe in that way we
will help preserve that Australian equity and reduce the price and we
believe that to reduce the price and to protect as much Australian equity as
possible is a good objective for a government to have.
These steps, I think, will compleme-nt for the benefit of our
nation what you geitlemeri are initiating a-id which is I am sure for the
benefit of our nation.
Sir, both government and industry are, to a great extent
perhaps n-ot to as great an extent as the Council would like but to a
great extent co-operating in the furtherance of the aims of your Cwn:-cil. / S 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 39/ 1970
-QUEENSLAND -INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE
The Premier of Queensland, Mr Bjelke -Petersen, has
sent a telegram to the Prime Minister appealing to Mr Gorton to " exert
his urgent endeavours" to resolve an industrial dispute involving the
AMPOL and AMOCO Refineries.
The Prime Minister has replied as follows:-
III REFER TO YOUR TELEGRAM DATED 11 MARCH
ABOUT THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE AT THE AMPOL AND AMOCO
REFINERIES IN BRISBANE. I AM INFORMED THE DISPUTE
IS IN THE HANDS OF THE COMMONWEALTH CONCILIATION
AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION WHICH IS MAKING STRENUOUS
EFFORTS TO RESOLVE IT AND HENCE PUT AN END TO THE
DISRUPTION CAUSED IN YOUR STATE BY IT. THE
COMMISSION HAS ORDERED A RESUMPTION OF WORK AND
HAS INDICATED THAT IT WILL DEAL WITH THE MERITS OF
THE DISPUTE AT AN EARLY DATE. I AM INFORMED A
MEETING OF STRIKERS IS TAKING PLACE THIS AFTERNOON.
I AM HOPEFUL THAT AS A RESULT OF THE EFFORTS OF THE
COMMISSION THEY WILL DECIDE TO RETURN TO WORK AND
HAVE THEIR CLAIMS RESOLVED BY THE COMMISSION. i
CANBERRA, 12 March 1970 
4 



FOR PRESS: 3P17
PMK NO. 40/ 1970
PRIME MINISTER'S EXPOMESSAGES
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, has despatched
two messages in relation to the opening of EXPO 70 in Osaka, Japan,
today ( Sunday 15 March).
The cables were as follows-
To the Prime Mnseof Japan:
" tM y G overnment and the people of Australia
send their congratulations and warm good wishes to
Japan for the opening of EXPO 70 in Osaka.
We wish you every success with the first world
exposition in the Asian region. Australia is proud to be
among the 78 nations contributing to this -markable
international presentation of man's achievements and
aspirations for the future.
We are confident the Exposition will be a notable
event, and that it will live long in the memories of all
who are fortunate enough to see it."
To the Australian EXPO Sta~ ff~
" M y w armest good wishes go to all associated
with the Australian exhibit at EXPO 70. Thank you for
working so hard and so enthusiastically to give us a
pavilion of which we can be proud.
you have a responsible task in the weeks ahead.
I know you will represent us well, and that throughout
the period of EXPO our pavilion will be a credit to
Australia. Good luck, and every succ~ ess at Osaka."
CANBERRA, March 1970 



FQR PRESS* 33 A9 P. M. No 41/ 1970
PERCY GRAINGER FESTIVAL
Statement by the Primie Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth has approved financial assistance for the
Percy Grainger Festival which is at present taking place in London.
An approach for assistance was received from Sir William McKie,
an Australian now retired in England, who is one of the Vice-Presidents
of the Festival, and Mr. Bryan Fairfax, also an Australian living in
London, who has organised the Festival.
On the recommendation of the Advisory Board, Commonwealth
Assistance to Australian Composers ( Sir Bernard Heinze, Chairman)
the Commonwealth Government has approved a sum of 500. This
represents more than half the amount which the organisers were
seeking to ensure the financial success of the Festival.
CA NBERRA
19 March 1970
BACKGROUND NOTE:-
Percy Aldridge Grainger, pianist and composer, was born in
Melbourne in 1882. A composer of international standing, he won
special success as an arranger of folk song themes. In 1935, he
founded a Museum of Comparative Musicology in Melbourne, which
features many of the innovations he introduced. He died in 1961. 



MIS
PRESS, RADIO AND TV CONFE~ RENCE GIVEN BY
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, AT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, A. C. T. March 1970
PRIME MINISTER Well, gentlemen of the Press, I understand you
have a predilection for press conferences and now for the next thirty
minutes I am in your hands while we have one.
Q. David Solomon from the " Australian". In Sydney
today the Federal Treasurer described the way the economy was shaping
as sufficiently menacing to be taken very seriously. Last Thursday,
you said that in raising interest rates the Government had already taken
the action necessary to control the economy. Do you still believe that
no further Government action will be necessary?
PM: I don't think you are quite accurate in saying what
I said last Thursday. I think this was in answer to a Question in the
House, if I remember correctly. You will remember that in the
Governor-General's Speech, I said that the economy had been, over the
past, kept well under control " reasonably under cont rol" I think were
the words, but that it needed constant and close attention, and that this
raising of interest rates was one of the methods indicating that it was
getting close attention. The speech made by the Treasurer today
pointed out, as you will know if you read it, a number of the indices
which indicate a possibility of too much pressure. It also had in it,
as you will have read, that there were countervailing factors, that
there was grcing to be much less liquidity in the next three months of
this year and that he described the position as, I think the word was
" ambiguous" not completely clear which way it would go. This, I
think, is where the position is at the moment.
Q. John Commins, ABC. In short, is the Government
conteamplating s supplementary Budget?
PM: No.
Alan Barnes, Melbourne Age. Prime Minister,
Mr. Bury in his speech referred to the effect of public sector spending
as being one of those major pressures. Do you intend to take this into
account when framing your Budget and your spending for the rest of
the year? / 2 
PM: Mr Barnes, we always take into account the question
of public spending, of public requirement, of expenditures on education,
on grants to the States, all these matters are taken into consideration
along with the prognostication of the likely private demand and the
Budget is framed accordingly. I am sure you wouldn't expect me to give
any indications of how it would be framed at this stage, except that we
believe it will be framed in a way that will see that inflation does not
occur.
Q. Frank Chamberlain, AFP and Macquarie. Mr
Prime Minister, could you elaborate on what Mr Bury has said about
the economy? Would you use the kind of words he uses as " menacing"
and, further, would you associate this with the rural march in
Melbourne earlier this week?
PM: No, I wouldn't associate it with the rural march in
Melbourne because Mr Bury indicated, right at the beginning of his
speech, that the economy had been progressing well and there had been
growth and prosperity in all sectionij, except for the rural section.
He made that clear in the speech when he gave it. And I don't think
I can elaborate very much on what he said. He pointed to the indices
which are now appearing. Ther'e is a very tight labour market. Thero
is housing construction running at record rates. There is a number
of indices which I would not describe, myself, as menacing, but as
potentially menacing, but they have to be set up against the effects of
the domestic surplus for which we budgeted this year and for the
declining liquidity which is going to take place for the next three months
of this year at least so I am informed by the Reserve Bank and the
Treasury.
Q. You knew that the speech was to be made, did you?
PM: Oh, yes. I read it.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, on the rural march in Melbourne.
Mr. Malcolm Fraser was reported as saying that he advocated compulsory
acquisition of the wool clip as the only satisfactory method of running
the wool industry. Is this Government policy, or is it your view on it?
PM: Well, according to NU Malcolmn Fraser, it is not
even an accurate report. / 3 
Q. Peter Samuel, Bulletin. Mr. Gorton on wool,
could you give us an indication of your attitude towards the proposal
for a subsidy for wool.
PM: Yes, Mr S muel. I don't believe that a subsidy
for wool can be any long-term solution for the problems the wool industry
faces. There is a lot of things which could be done to help wool, such
things as core testing and sample selling and the wool villages of which
you have heard, and trying to cut down the number of times the wool
is handled. All of these things can save a certain amount per bale.
I doubt whether they would save more, in aggregate, than perhaps
6 cents a pound, maybe a little bit more. I am not setting anything
definite. But that is not going to be sufficient to be a real solution to it.
I think we need, and I believe Gunn's Committee set up is exam ining
into these aspects we need to know just what is, the grade of wool
which is bringing us the greatest amount afe overseas exchange, just
what is most in demand, and in the long run a subsidy, I believe, mould
not meet the needs of the wool industry, it is a palliative rather than
a solution. Q. Rob Chalmers, Chani-, el C. Prime Minister, mh ile
on the rural question, last month, the Leader of the Country Party said
in a public statement that the position of primary industry was so serious
in economic terms that the Country Party had resolved to apply a new
measure of determination and boldness in followiing measures of
support in the coming Session of Parliament,..~
PM: This was a statement by whom?
Q. By the Country Party Leader, Sir?
PM: Oh, yes.
Q. Have you yet seen in Cabinet any of these new
measures of support in this Session?
PM: Do you think I could just continue with the question
that you asked, because it might, hanging in the air, leave a slightly
inappropriate situation. 1 think you will remember that the Leader of
the Country Party made it clear that this was not an indication that the
Liberal Party was in any way hanging back, and th-at Liberal Party
Members representing rural seats were also disturbed, and we / 4 
were all disturbed about it, and I think that is where the situation rests.
There has been, I think, a significant attack on the wheat problem. A3
you know, quotas were introduced, and quotas are going to be considerably
less next year than they are this year. They are going to be
per cent less and this has been recommended by the wheat people, and
this is very responsible. And I am sure we will -progress to a situation
A 0 which one wishes to arrive at. The Dairy &amp; i ae Scheme is still
running into difficulties with the States, but in the last two days, I have
reason to believe that those difficulties might begin to be resolved
quite quickly, but I can't say because it is not entirely within my decision.
The rural industry which you have mentioned is, in my view, in a
very horrible situation. I have known what it is vhen I was on the land
in the early days to sit waiting for the telephone to ring and not ' Know
whether it would be somebody saying, " You owe me for the fertiliser!
you bought to put on the orchard. Why don't you pay it?" " You owe
me for the spray, why don't you pay it?" Or perhiaps it was the bank
manager saying, " You have gone over your limit"', and you were
struggling to put enough into your land to 7produce the next crop, hoping
the next crop would pay offf. I know what this is, and this is a great
social problem for the -woolgrower today not all woolgrowers, but
far too many of them, and the solution to it is not easy to see; but
certainly matters of handling, and quite probably matters of selling
methods of selling could be the solutions. At the moment we are
waiting for some indication from a quite significant Committee vh ich
has been set up by Sir William Gunn, and we are all discussing it in
Cabinet quite " seriously" is not a strong enough word but
attempting to decide what we can see as the best solution for this.
Q. Laurie Oakes, Melbourne Sun : Prime Mnister
on Vietnam. You said in December that the Australian Government
wanted some Australian troops phased into the next major US withdrawal.
Are you in a position to say, Sir, how far plannin~ g for withdrawal has
progress in the last four months2 Can you tell us how many troops
are likely to come home and when, and can you also give us some idea
of the relevance of Mr Fraser's trip to Vietnam next week with regard
to withdrawal?
PM: Well, this trip would be a part of the discussions
that have been going on. I don't believe that I could go any further than
than other than to say that our position has -not changed, indeed it wasn't
only last December it was in the Governor-General's speech, and I
think in a Question in the House since then, that the position has been
made clear that if it is regarded the situation enables a significant / s 
further withdrawal of Anrcit roops, then we will expect some
Australian troops to be phased into that withdrawal. Now, the discussions
have been going on about this. Mr Fraser's trio will have sonething to
do with it, but I don't believe I should go any further than that at the
moment.
Q. Hugh Armfield, Melbourne A-. ge Was the New
Zealand Defence M-nister, Mr Thompson correct when he said here
recently that the South Vietnamese were ready and willing to take over
from Australian and New ZEealand Forces in Phuoc Tuy?
PM: I haven't seen anything to substantiate that. If the
suggestion is that the South Vietnamese are ready and eager and willing
to take over all the activities in Phuoc Tuy Provi-nce, I have seen nothing
to substantiate that.
Q. Cameron Foro'es, Newsday Prime Minister, does the
Australian Government view with any disquiet such actions by the Saigon
Government as arose in the case of the gaoling of the representative
Chou and the disquiet this evidently caused in sorne sections of the
Vietnamese population?
PM: I wouldn't want to interfere or to express opinions on
the actions of another government which, after a'il, I would remind you, is
an elected government, and one vi ich has been elected under probably the
most difficult conditions that any government has had to face during an
election. Let us not forget that this government is in a coun try which is
in the throes of war, and before we place too much emphasis on the
sort of thing you have mentioned, let us remember that England in the
last war when it was in the throes of war -Aound it necessary Mr Churchill
found it necessary to put into gaol somebody who either was or had been
a Member of the Parliament.
Q. Max Grant, Melbourne Herald and 3DB Mr Prime
MInister, there has been some speculation about the provision of the
Nimmo Committee Report which suggests that doctors may be excluded
if they don't co-operate with the common fee scheme. Would you like
to say how you feel about that at this stage?"
PM: The suggestion in the N-Immo Committee Report was
for a participating doctor scheme and all it recommended was that it
would wish doctors to hang up in their consultiing-rooms placards, as it
were, saying " This is what I charge This is the ccmmon fee. / 6 
and that only those doctors who did that should be participating in the
scheme and that patients who went to doctors who did not do that mould
not have their bills paid. We have decided not to accept this recommendation,
and I think that is all I can say on that at the moment.
Q. Would you reconsider that one day, Mr Gorton, if the
scheme were running into difficulties?
PM: I have strong hopes that the scheme will not run into
trouble, but clearly all things can change,. and at the monment we have not
adopted that.
Q. Alan Barnes. I understand Dr Forbes reported to
Cabinet yesterday on this matter. Can you tell us how you are going to
make the health scheme work when doctors in three States repudiated
the AMA leaders on whose advice you based the scllaeme?
PM: I You tell me how you understand that Dr Forbes reported
to Cabinet on this matter? He made no statements about it.
A. I read it in the papers, Sir:
PM: You asked me whether I thoughit the scheme mo uld wourk
if what you described as " doctors were against it". I think it should be
made clear that there are divisions in the medical profession. To the
best of my knowledge, I don't know of specialists who are opposed to
the scheme which we propose. There have been suggestions that general
practitioners are opposed to it. I don't believe that general practitioners
would refuse to treat patients. I don't believe that general practitio * ners
would refuse to take such action as wo uld enable their patients to be
reimbursed by the Government and the Fu-nds for tae treatment the
general practitioners give them, I think that the greneral practitioners.
will find that their fears are unfounded and I hope and believe that the
scheme will work. You know what the problem is here. There is only
one real area of disagreement. We want to introduce a scheme which
will protect the patient against the higher charges that a specialist
now makes. At the moment he is not protected. 1i order to do that it
will be necessary to give, from the insurance funds and from the
Government, more reimbursement to a patieint who goes. to a specialist
than is given to a patient who goes to a general practitioner. This protects
the patient. This ensures that there is no economic bar to a patient who
needs to get specialist attention and this is whiat wie want to get, but the
general practitioners are fearful that this will 1 end to all sorts of people
who don't really need specialist treatment. This is their fear. It is
just a fear. We don't think it will happen, but if it did happen, we mould / 7 
be just as interested in Beeking to stop it from a Government point of
view as they are, because our objective is to see thiat those who need
it get it, not those who don't need it. That should be able to be worked
out.
Q. What is the Government's timetable, Sir? on
legislation on introduction of the scheme?
P M; We should be introducing this scheme very soon
after the next sitting of Par-liament, that is, whe. 2 wie meet after April 7,
Q. Arising from Cabinet, are there any compromises,
any watering-down of the Government's proposals71
PM; No, we haven't got any, but it is a scheme which we
have indicated, If it is shown that there are anomnalies in the scheme after
it is introduced or when it is in operation, then oZ course we would be
prepared to look at them and seek to overcome them, but not to the extent
of abrogating our main objective which is to protect the patient against
specialist charges.
Q. Laurie Cakes : On the same subject, Prime Mlnistpr,
have you yet chosen the membership of the National Health Insurance
Commission?
PM:' No, not yet, Mr Cakes.
W~ dlace Brown, Courier Mail Prime Minister,
when do you hope to work out the aspects of the , Iimmo recommendations
that require State co-operation. In particular, what do you think of the
particular Nimmo recommendation that says the Commonwealth should
pay the full $ 2 a day benefit in respect of public ward patients in
Queensland, instead of the 60 cents it pays at the moment for uninsured
patients?
PM: Well, I think that these matters, being the subject
of discussion between Dr Forbes the Minister for Health and our Govern
ment and the State Governments, and being in the course of discussion
between them, are not ones that I should express opinions on at this
time. But I hope that they will be worked out. inaeed, it is
necessary that they should be worked out. e / 8 
Q. Max Hawkins, Brisbane Telegraph Mr Fraser
is making a trip not only to Saigon, but to Washington to talk about the
Fill1 plane and its problems. How soon after he returns do you expect
the Government will be able to announce a firm decision whether we get
it, cancel it or want to take another plane?
PM; 1 would expect that soon after he returned we would
be in a position where we could start looking to see whether there were'
alternate planes that were available. I wouldn't like to give you a specific
answer to your question of how soon after his return would it be
possible to make a really final decision because there have been so many
changes in rogard to the F IlIl coming unexpectedly. everything seemed
to be all right and then it turns out that it is not all right, that it might
be chancing my arm a bit to say, " Well, in a week or a fortnight" or
something of that kind, but you can be quite sure that we mould be seek~ ng
to do it as soon as we possibly could on our judgment of the facts as
presented. Q. Peter Samuel of the Bulletin again During the election
campaign you said, I think, that you were very strongly against the Russians
getting a naval base in the Indian Ocean area. There have been reports
that Singapore is offering its naval base facilities to the Russians. I
wouder if you could tell us what the attitude of your Government is to that?
PM: Well, I don't believe that we could by force majeure
stop it but we would not like to see it, and would express our opinions
that we would not wish to see it. I don't thinkc you could go any furt..-
than that.
Q. Have you done that alreadyr
PM: Oh, I think if you read the statement of the Minister
for Defence, and the Minister for External Affairs, you will see a pretty
clear indication that we don't wish to see a military presence of that
kind by the Russians in this area.
Q. Have you made any move to speak to Singapore about
it? The Singapore Government?
PM: I haven't spoken to Singapore about it. I doubt
whether it has reached a situation where it would be necessary to do that.
/ 9 
Q. Alan Reid Sir, reverting to wool. Whether Mr Fraser
was reported accurately or inaccurately, have you or your Government formed.
any opinion on the desirability or otherwise of a Wiool Acquisition Scheme,
and if so, what are these views?
PM: Well, I think I told you Mr Reid, that there was a
Committee looking into the question, a whole number of questions in
relation to wool. I wouldn't say that we had form-ed a view for an
acquisition shceme. An acquistion scheme, a variation of the present
method of selling, a temporary subsidy, a whole variety of possible
courses is open, and I can't go any further than that at this stage.
Q. Sir, on the question about Singapore, did you, as
some commentators did, read implications in the statement of the
Minister for External Affairs regarding his desire to see Britain return
or remain in the area? W~ as there any implication in this that in the
long term we would need them to be there before we stayed in the
long term?
PM: No, I didn't read that into it at all. I just read into
it a plain statement that it would be a lot better anad a lot more militarily
acceptable to us if they stayed than it would be if they left. This is in
fact what we have been saying from the start, but they seemed to have
made their minds up, unless of course there is a change of government
in Britain.
Q. Have you any official news you can give us, Sir,
about the situation in Cambodia and South-East Asia's unrest in general?
PM: I don't think I can give you anything more than I have
read in the newspapers. I have had a report today from External Affairs
on it, but the situation seems to be that the Government there is now
describing itself as a Gi rnbodian Government, instead of the Royal
Cambodian Government just what that means you can read into it
what you wish and they are indicating they wqish the Vietcong and the
North Vietnamese to leave their country. They horpe to be able to
do this by negotiation, by discussion. Well, whether they will be able
to do it by negotiation or discussion or not, time w~ ill show. But of
cou rse one of the difficulties in these situations L-that the North
Vietnamese always refuse to admit that they are there in the first place
and therefore don't feel they can discuss getting out. 
Q_ Bob Baudino, Sydney D-: ly Telegraph Sir, could I
take you back to Mr Bury's speech. You have mnentioned that you did read
the speech. Could I ask you did you read it before or after the event?
PM: I read it before the event.
Q. Fred Brenchley, Newsday j-t the declaration of the
poll, last November in your electorate of Higgins, you said that in view
of the Government's losses in the election, its policies had to be reviewed.
I would like to ask you if this review has now been completed, and do we see
the results of it in the Governor -General's Speech to Parliament or is there
more to come? In other words, should we have more policy initiatives like
the Industry Development Corporation?
PM: I believe that you have a Government which will never
run out of policy initiatives or new forward-looking, steps forward-looking
eyes and advancing steps. You have certainly seen some of the actions
which we foreshadowed at the time.
Q. Tom McNeil, Australian Associated Press In your
Policy Speech you said the Government's aim was to reduce the burden
of income tax on the lower and middle inconne ear-ners. In the light of
the economy situation at the moment, is this aim still capable of achievement?
Is it still your Government' s aim to do this, starting from this
next Budget?
PM: In my Policy Speech, I said that we would aim during
the life of this Parliament to reduce the burden of income tax on lower and
middle income earners so that at the end of three years they would be
paying a given sum I think $ 200 million or words to that effect less than
they would normally be paying. This is still our aim, and this is an
aim we will attain. I don't propose to go any further than that.
Q. Warren Duncan, ABC: Getting back to Cambodia.
Prince Sihanouk is reported to be trying to form his own private army
to try and get himself back.-to power. What wou. ld our attitude be towards
the Prince in this move?
PM Our attitude toward the Prince in that move?
Q. Yes, in his forming a private army?
PM: I should think that we would quite properly leave it
to the Cambodians to decide. / 11 
Q. Have we any Australians there at all, apart from
diplomats?
PM: Absolutely none that k-now of.
Q. Mr Prime Minister, followin-g up the question on the
income tax distribution, I know it is not the policy of the Government to
reveal what is coming up in the Budget, but bearing in mind that it was the
subject of your Policy Speech, could you tell us at least if you have in
mind to do something about it in this coming Budget?
PM: What we have in mind to do, Mr Willesee is to carry
out the intention which was expressed in the Pciicy Szch.
Q. In this Budget?
PM: W-hat we have in mind to do is to carry out the intention
expressed in the Policy Speech.
Q. Gould I ask you specifically if you intend to do anythiing
about it in this Budget?
PM: I heard you ask that but I am sure you didn't expect an
answer.
Q. The Governor-General's speech, though, did contain
a suggestion that you would start action in the current Budget, in the next
Budget. Will that be changed?
PM: I don't know which part of the Governor-General's Speech
you are specifically talking about, Mr Solominon, but I am not going to answer
questions as to what is going to be in the next Budget.
Mr. Eggleton: I think we have time for-just one more question.
Q. A related subject, Sir, Some of the economists tell
us that the present t roubles in the economy date baick to your rather
generous Budget last time, and they forecast further problems in your
election promises and the promises you made to the State Premiers. In
view of the economic situation, or perhaps if it gets worse, would you
be prepared to delay some of your promises to ease the economic situation? / 12 
12.
PM: I think it is a very interesting question because I
remember at the time some of the economists writing quite strongly about
the terrifically inflationary Budget when it was brought in " economic
vandalism" I think was a headline I remember. Then about a month
or so ago I remember the same economists writing how wrong they had
been and how I think the quotation was " Gortoa' s got the laugh on us."
I believe and I have reasons not of my own but from the economists
who have the responsibility in the Reserve Bank of Australia and in the
Treasury that in spite of the indices which are now appearing for the
rest of this financial year the fears that the economists showed at first,
and damped down at second, will not be realised. Now the second part
of your question was Would we, should inflation appear more likely,
seek to do something about it in the coming Budget, and the only answer
I can give you is tLat. the Government would in the future, as it has in
the past, have as one of its main objectives the balanced growth of the
economy and the avoidance of significant inflation.
Q. Do you think, Mr Prime Minister that the Treasurer
is crying wolf rather too strongly?
PM: I think what the Treasurer is doing is drawing atteriion
to potentialities and to possibilities, and I thinkc he is right to point that
out.
Mr. Eggleton MTr. h angkgl eyoonu: gentlemen and thank you Prime Minister. 



FOR PRESS: R 70 " J9
V. N . Isued from the Office
of the Press Secretary
PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT EXPO
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, will visit Japan
in May for Australia's National Day at Expo.
Mr. Gorton said today that he would be absent from Australia
for only a few days. But he was anxious to be present in Osaka on
the 8th of May for the special day of activities featuring Australia.
Our contribution to Expo had already won much favourable
comment, and he felt he should represent the Government on this
special occasion. Mr. Gorton said he would probably also spend a day in
Tokyo, but the details of the visit were still being worked out.
CANBERRA, March 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 42 / 973
DR. CAIRNS' CALL FOR DEMONCSTRATIONS
Comment by the Prime Minister, M. John Gorton
Dr. Cairns is a leading member of the Labor Party and a
member of the Executive of the Parliamentary Labor Party in Canberra.
The Victorian President of that Party recently chaired a
meeting which called on Australian Troops, fighting the Communists
in Vietnam, to mutiny.
Now Dr. Cairns, in alliance with the Communist Party, calls
for the streets of Melbourne to be taken over, for all traffic to be halted
and all business stopped, as a protest against Australian troops fighting
Communists in Vietnam.
He threatens that if the Police seek to maintain order, and to
protect the rights of citizens going about their lawful occasions, he and
his followers will become violent.
The significance of this is not that the call for anarchy was
made, for the call is likely to have negligible effect.
The significance is that it comes from a man who is a Shadow
Minister in Labor's Shadow Cabinet.
The question to be asked is whether this policy of anarchy,
of the use of force to gain ends which could not be gained through the
ballot box, is the Labor Party's policy. We know it is the policy of a
significant sector of the Labor Party but is it the policy of the Party
as a whole? Mr. Whitlam owes it to Australians to clear this matter up.
I hope that Australians will treat this excursion into storm
trooper tactics with disdain and disgust.
CANBERRA 26 March 1970 



FOR PRESS: losued from the Off ice
othe Press_ Secrty
PRIME MINISTER ANSWERS DR. J. CAIRNS
The Prime Minister, Mr. J. G. Gor-ton, to-day commented
on statements by Dr. J. Cairns in the Australian press.
The Prime Minister said
" Having called for the streets of Melbourne to be taken
over, for the traffic to be brought to a stand-still and i-or Commerce and
industry to be disrupted, Dr. Cairns has now tried to divert attention
from his irresponsible actions by making a personal attack on me.
" If this gives him any satisfaction, it causes me no
distress. " But it doesn't alter the fact that he has called for massive
disruption, has indicated that violence will occur if that disruption is
prevented and has heralded bringing into the Australian pattern of
life the kinds of methods used by storm-trooperG.
" Either he or the Labor Party ought to disavow this call
for anarchy, and if neither does disavow it, theni the peoole of Australia
know the methods the Labor Party is prepared to adopt."
CANBERRA March 197J 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 45/ 1970
INCREASE [ N LIMITS OF LIABILITY FOR AIRCRAFT
Statement by the E: rime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth Government proposes to amend its,
legislation relating to compensation payable to injured passengers or the
dependants of passengers killed in domestic aircraft acciden'ts. The
proposed amendments are designed to improve the position of air
travellers, or their dependants, in this respect.
The Civil Aviation ( Carriers' Liability) Act, prescribes the
liability of airline operators in the event of aircraft accidents. In the case
of domestic operations, an airline is liable for damages arising from an
accident taking place on board its aircraft whether or not it was responsible
for the accident, and the Act specifies $ 15, 000 as the maximum amount
of damages payable in respect of any one passenger.
The Government believes that this limit on damages sh ould
now be raised to $ 30, 000, and that provision should also be made for early
interim payments to the surviving spouse and children of a deceased
passenger pending assessment of the damages payable. The limits of
liability in respect of damaged or destroyed baggage will also be increased.
At present, the Act applies only to passengers carried by the
airlines, and the Government intends to extend its provisions to cover
passengers on all charter flights, commuter services and joyrides etc.
so far as Commonwealth powers permit.
As the Commonwealth legislation relates primarily to
interstate operations, the various State Governments have enacted laws
applying the same rules to intrastate air services. I have written to the
State Premiers seeking their views on the Commonwealth's proposals and
asking for their co-operation in having comparable amendments made
to their legislation in due course.
The Government will introduce the necessary amending
legislation into Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
The Government would like to see changes in' the Carriers'
liability arrangements applicable to international services operatedto and
from Australia, but these are subject to an international convention which
has been ratified by Australia. Worldwide consideration is currently being
given to increasing the limit of liability in respect of international passengers,
but the Government has concluded that, as it will be some time before any
finality could be reached in this matter, it should deal with the legislation
affecting Australia's internal air services separately and as soon as
possible. CANBERRA I April 1.970 



FOR PRESS:-3 APR 197O M. No 46/ 1970
STATE FUNERAL FOR THE LATE MR. JIM FRASER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Johni Gorton
The Government has decided that, as a special case, the
late Mr. Jim Fraser should be given a State Funeral.
Mr. Fraser has held for 19 years electorate which
is in many ways unique.
He was the only elected member of Parliamenit to vh om
people of the A. C. T. could turn for assistance and advice in local
problems of all kinds.
CANBERRA 1 April 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 47/ 1970
COMMONWEALTH CYCLONEASSISTANCE FOR
QUEENSLAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister has announced the provision of
Commonwealth assistance to the State of Queensland towards the cost
of government assets damaged as a result of cyclone " Ada".
Mr. Gorton said that it is the primary responsibility of
State Governments to meet the cost of restoring government property
damaged by natural disasters such as cyclones. However, where it is
considered that such expenditure by a State would impose an undue
burden on its financial resources, the Commonwealth is prepared to
assist in meeting the cost.
Mr. Gorton said that the amount involved in the present
instance would not normally call for the provision of Commonwealth assistance.
However, he was mindful that the Queensland Government was already
involved in expenditure on natural disaster relief as a result of the
widespread drought in the State in addition the Queensland Government
would be sharing with the Commonwealth the cost of relief for personal
hardship and distress resulting from the cyclone.
In the circumstances, the Prime Minister said, he was pleased
to announce that the Commonwealth was prepared to provide assistalce
on the basis of one half of the cost to the State Government of the
restoration of government assets damaged by cyclone " Ada".
CAN BERRA
7 April '-970 



E M B A R G 0: Not for publication, broadcastigor telecasting
before 9 p . Tuesdy 7 April 197
FOR PRESS: P. M. No 48/ 1970
CROWN OF THORNS STARFISH
Ministerial Statement by the Frime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Honourable Members will be aware that the Commonwealth
and Queensland have agreed to establish a joint Committee to investigate
the problem of the Crown of Thorns starfish.
The Committee will be supported on a $ 1 for $ 1 basis by
each government. It will report to each government.
On behalf of the Premier of Queensland and myself I am
pleased to be able to announce to the House that the Committee will comprise
the following experts:-
COMMONWEALTH NOMINEES
Professor R. J. Walsh, Professor of Human Genetics at the
University of New South Wales ( Chairman).
Professor W. G. H. Maxwell, Associate Professor of Geology
at the University of Sydney.
Mr. D. J. Tranter M. Sc. Senior Research Scientist, Divis ion
of Fisheries and Oceanography, C. S. 1. R. 0.
QUEENSLANDNOMINEES Dr. j. M. Harvey, Director-General of Primary Industries.
Professor J. M. Thompson, Professor of Zoology at the
Queensland University. Mr. C. L. Harris of the Department of Primary Industries.
I have asked that the joint Committee meet as soon as is
practicable in view of the urgency of the situation.
CA NBERRA
7 April 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 49/ 1970
CORAL SEA GUEST
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Rear-Admiral David F. Welch, Commander United States
Naval Support Force Antarctica, will come to Australia for the Coral
Sea Celebrations this year.
Admiral Welch, accompanied by Mrs. Welch, will arrive
in Australia on Wednesday, 6 May for a fourteen-day visit. He will go
to all States and Canberra, his itinerary being as follows:-
Wednesday, 6 May
Thursday, 7 May
Friday, 8 May
Saturday, 9 May
Sunday, 10 May
Monday, 11 May
Tuesday, 12 May
Wednesday, 13 May
Thursday, 14 May
Friday, 18 May
Saturday, 16 May
Sunday, 17 May
Monday, 18 May
Tuesday, 19 May Melbourne Melbourne Melbourne/ Hobart
Hobart/ Adelaide
Adelaide/ Perth
Perth Perth/ Canberra
Canberra Canberra/ Brisban e
Brisbane/ Sydney
Sydney Sydney Sydney Sydney/ Overseas
CANBERRA 8 April 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 50/ 1970
MR. HOLYOAKE'S VISIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister of New Zealand will pay an official
visit to Australia from 4 to 11 June. The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton,
said today that he was delighted that Mr. Holyoake had been able to
accept the invitation, extended to him in March 1968 during Mr. Gorton's
visit to New Zealand. Mr. Gorton said that, although Mr. Holyoake had visited
Australia on a number of occasions for meetings of regional groups, this
would be Mr. Holyoake's first official visit to Australia. Mr. Holyoake
hoped to have the opportunity of seeing something of Australia's industrial
development and of meeting Australians from different walks of life.
Mr. Gorton said that he was looking forward to discussions
with Mr. Holyoake on many matters of mutual interest and that the visit
would further strengthen the already close ties between Australia and
New Zealand.
CANBERRA 8 April '. 970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 51/ 1970
SUSPENSION OF PARLIAMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. Joh:: Gorton
The House of Representatives tonight witne3sed the most
shocking behaviour in the history o Parliamentary government in
Australia. The Opposition, under the direction of Mx. Whitlam, resorted
to planned disruption verging on riot, refused to obey the rulings of the
Chair, refused to leave the service of the House when named, shouted,
rose in a body to defy the Spea. ker, and prevented the business of
Parliament from proceeding.
They have served notice that they believe in mob violence,
not in the role of the Parliament elected by the people, and in so doing,
have struck at the very existence of Parliamentary rule, and have
sought to prevent the Government from governing and the Parliament
from functioning, by the use of force.
I am sure that the Speaker of the House of Representatives
cannot permit this behaviour to continue and will take all measures
necessary to see that it does not.
CANBERRA
9 April 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No t51970
NATIONAL LIBRARY COUNCIL APPOINTMENIT OF CHAIRMAN
AND MEMBERS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister announced today that tiie Governor-
General had re-appointed the Chairman of the National Library Council
and six other Council members for varying terms of office from
23rd March 1970. He explained that the Parliament, as provided
by the National Library Act of 1960, had already elected two Parliamentary
members to the Council in the persons of Sir Alister McMullin,
President of the Senate, and Mr. G. M. Bryant from the House of
Representatives. The re-appointments announced today are:
Sir Grenfell Price, C. M. G. ( Chairman)) Reappointed
Sir Leonard Huxley, K. B. E. for one year
The Honourable Sir Peter Crisp Reappointed
Sir Harold Wyndham, C. B. E. for two years
Dr. Ursula Hoff, 0. B. E.
Mr. K. B. Myer, D. S. C. Reappointed for three years
Mr. W. R. Cumming, C. V. O.
The Prime Minister emphasised that these re-appointrre nts
reflected the Government's appreciation of the tireless and devoted
energies of members of the Council.
CANBERRA April 1970 



WEST AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURE~ S
1970 ANNUAL DINNER
PERTH, W. A. 0 APRIL 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Sir David Brand, Distinguished Guests and Gentlemen:
Thank you very much, Sir, for that introduction, and thank you
for the opportunity that you have afforded me to speak tonight to this
very representative gathering of Western Australians.
I don't think there is any point in my detailing to you that which
you all know so well and that is the great and exciting changeO. that are
taking place in this part of Australia. Let us take that virtually for granted
because indeed I suspect you know more about it than I do, though I think
I know a great deal about it, particularly about the iron ore developments
in this State. Yet, we know this, and your menu tonight in capsuled form
shows that one thousand new factories have been opened here in the last
five years and that alone is an indication of what is happening here and all
throughout the Commonwealth of Australia.
And so what situation do we reach? What economic poosition do
we reach as a result of this surge of development in secondary industry,
in minerals not unfortunately in primary production, though the increase
is there but not the return but what do we find now economically as a
result of this? At this stage we see in Australia that we have reached an employment
situation which we have not known since 1965, the situation where we
have absolutely full employment, in my view, and indeed a situation where,
on the statistics, there are more jobs available than there are people to fill
them, a tight labour situation indeed as I do not have to explain to anybody
in this audience. In the field of home construction ( I am going througi' all those
indicators which show the sort of state that an economy finds itself in)
one of the tightest labour situations since 1965, one of the most obvious
booms in housing construction and other construction that Australia has ever
known. Motor registrations rising year by year to an extent not previously
even expected by the motor industry itself. Consumer spending rising
quite high, hire purchase debts increasing, wages rising by some 9 per cent
or so this year.... all of them indicators that in normal times, and in the
past, one would have expected to lead to be indications that there was a need,
if inflation is to be avoided, for demand to be reduced. ./ 2 
And yet we find, looking at the obverse side of the coin that the
cost of living index this year is rising at the rate of about 3 per cent which
is not unbearable as long as the rise does not continue to accelerate; which
is surprisingly low compared with all the other indicators that I have given.
We find that capital inflow having dropped off in the early part ode the year
is increasing again because of conditions overseas. We find our reservesi
not falling but beginning to rise, and we find our overseas trade balances
showing most healthy balances in our favour. And, norm-ally, in the past the
original indicators that I would have shown would have led people to expect
that overseas trade balances would fall instead of rise, and overseas reserves
would fall, and so there is an economic difference here from anything we have
seen before in our national life.
And because of these differences, and because we are going to have
this year what we aimed for, and that is an internal surplus of at least
$ 500 million, and because there have been some measures talcen to reduce
the demand for money by increasing the price that has to be paid for money,
because of these things, I believe it unlikely that the indicators which one
would have thought would lead to inflation, will in fact lead to such inflation
at least during the balance of this financial year.
At that time, when a new Budget is being looked at, then the
situation must be looked at anew; but it does appear that in spite off that
prosperity, in spite of the housing boom, in spite of the tight employment
situation, that so far we are being enabled to avoid an irilation which must
eventually be avoided. And this is due, to some extent, to the changing
pattern of production inside Australia itself.
We have in the past lived on primary produce, on the sheep's
back during all our formative years as a nation, but last year, I am told,
on the figures, rural produ ction was 51 per cent of earnings, minerals
23 per cent and manufactures 18 per cent of our earnings. And last year,
the mineral exports of Australia, for the first time, brought us in more
than the greasy wool crop of Australia, and within the next few years,
Western Australian iron ore production alone will bring in as much as
our entire wool crop. Western Australian iron ore production alone;
leaving other minerals in other States out, is estimated to bring in as much
as that crop on which in the past we have entirely depended.
This is, I think, a dramatic illustration of the change of Australia's
economic orientation, From this growth so far, from this change in pattern,
enormous opportunities are going to open up throughout Australia, given
a Government which is prepared to be unpopular as we would be prepared
to be unpopular if necessary, by ensuring there is no inflation,. given that
kind of stability, then there will be enormous opportunities. / 3 
I want to examine just some of the things which are involved in
the accelerating growth in the future, which I believe that we can expect.
I want to examine it against the background of overseas investment in
Australian industry, in Australian mining, and of Australian participation
in Australian industry and Australian mining.
Let me at the start set out the Government's positior: n regarding
overseas investment. We believe, indeed we know and I am sure you know,
that it is impossible to generate within Australia the amount of capital that
is going to be required if we are to proceed to develop at the rate which
history demands we should. If we are going to increase our industrial
capacity, if we are go-ing to increase the rate of our extractive mining
industries, if we are going to increase the processing of the minerals,
then we cannot within this country generate the capital which is required.
So we welcome and encourage and want overseas capital in enterprises
in Australia. Let us make that quite clear from the start and from the
beginning. Having said that, I still think that we should bear these things
in mind. Our motor vehicle industry in Australia today, important to our
economy as you would agree, is 90 per cent owned and controlled by
overseas capital. Our chemical industry in Australia today is 75 per cent
owned and controlled by overseas capital. Our electrical and
electronic industry which will play an even more important part in all
branches of industry in the future, is over 50 per cent owned and controlled
by overseas capital, and the alumina and aluminium industry based on
deposits of bauxite which perhaps may be the greatest in the world is
almost 100 per cent owned by overseas capital. Let us bear this in mind,
not in the sense that this is bad in itself, not that this does not bring us
benefits because it does in many ways. You and I are 50 per cent partners
in all these enterprises L icause of the company ta-:.*. hat you and I collect.
Not in any sense saying ., hat this is bad, but recog,:.: sing it and putting it
in our minds as a fact of life.
We hear on all sides people saying most of Australian industry
is owned by Australians and controlled and operated by Australians, x per
cent of factories is so owned. And so it is, but that is not the point. The
point is what is the size of those factories, in what fields of enterprise are
they engaged. And again, for background and to keep in our minds, the factories
with under 50 employees are ' 46 per cent, only 26 per cent owned by
overseas capital. Over 50 employees 34 per cent by overseas capital.
Over 100 employees 37 per cent. Over 500 employees 43 per cent.
So the larger enterprises, the larger the factory, the more likely it is that
there will be this control or this ownership from overseas. And perhaps
in more definite terms and perhaps again to put in our minds what in fact
is the case before we draw inferences from it but just what in1 fact is the
case let me trespass on your patience a little by giving some examples
of actual foreign-owned or majority foreign-owned companies in Australia,
some examples only which I have culled from a much longer list and which
I have sought to distribute over various fields of industry. ./ 4 
We find in this list such household words as GMH, Ford, Chrysler,
ICI, Union Carbide, Heinz, Kelloggs, Frigidaire, Hamersley, CRA, Alcoa,
STC, Philips, Vicars, Caterpillar, Massey Harris, Colgate, Portland Cement
and others which I won't go on with because I merely sought to indicate some
pointers on this list. Now, all that has been good.
All right, as some people do, to attack GMH, for example and
say they have a 100 per cent owned company in Australia and they built up
with the profits they made in Australia, but you must look at the obverse
side of the coin, too, and realise all the smaller factories which have
come into being as a result of GMH-, and which are providing GM/ H with the
spare parts or which are providing them with services of various kinds,
and you must take into account the export drive which GMI-has made I
don't say it is better than Ford or Chrysler but I am using it as an example
which they have made to contribute to the Australian economy.
These are not one-sided things I am trying to put. I am not
trying to say this shouldn't have happened or isn't good f'or us. I just want,
as a preliminary to what I propose to say later, to show that these things
are in fact happening. And they may happen to a greater extent in the
future in this era of opportunity that is opening up.
In the last five years, which we can take as an indication of the
next five years, we had $ 18, 000 million invested in industrial enterprises
of all kinds in Australia. That is $ 18, 000 million from all sources, internal
and external. And of that $ 18, 000 million, one-sixth or 000 million
came from abroad. Ten years ago, investment from abroad was $ 388 million.
One year ago, it had risen to $ 967 million. And in ning, particularly, thereis
this pattern being reproduced. Five years ago, overseas investment was
$ 34 million, It has risen on the last figures 1 say, to $ 244 million, which
has been accompanied by a rise in overseas ownership and control of
minerals. Indeed, the control of production, the Australian co: n. trol of
production in minerals has dropped from 63 per cent in 1963 to 47 per cent
in 1967. And this process probably will continue, given the facts I set out
at the start, that if we are to progress as fast as we must, then we can't
generate inside our own community enough savings and enough f-inds to
allow this to happen.
Now I said that this was not bad. I said that on balance this was
good, and I believe it to be so, but surely there must be a requirement to
see, in this situation, that as much of the new development as is possible,
without turning away overseas capital, without impeding its inf-low, that
as much as is possible remains under Australian ownership. The
Government has taken that view, and we have taken various courses to
try and see that it would happen. 0 0 0 
We have first indicated our views, our desires to overseas
companies and to overseas governments-that there should be an opportunity,
as far as possible, for Australian participation, for Australian ownership,
for Australian management and for Australian control not said that we
would force this, not said this would be a legislative matter, not said that
we would bring in regulations, but said this is what the Goveryrinent would
like to see, and it has had a r ' esult from responsible overseas companies
of stature. The result has been that there has been more offering to
Australians of equity in new developments in this country. If we can't take
them up, that's too bad, but the offerings have been made.
We have brought in a system of guideliie s which manyT of you
gentlemen will know about on the borrowing in Australia of fixed interest
by overseas companies, wherin we have laid down that let us use this as
an example, 20 per cent ot total new funds to be put into industrial
development, 20 per cent only can be borrowed in Australia by an overseas
company; but given an incentive to overseas companies by saying " if
there is more than a certain proportion of Australian owinershib in your
company, then you dan borrow more than that 20 per cent on Australian
markets on fixed interest, and this is a real incentive because the
interest rates here have been so much lower than they have beep. abroad.
And we have indicated that we should restore the benefit of allowiing
convertible notes to be issued by companies, so that those Australians
who have money to invest and who must get a return on that mo-ney in
order to live, will be enabled now to invest it in a company krnowing
that they will get interest on it and knowing also that they will have an
opportunity at the end of a fixed period of years to translate that fixed
interest investment into equity in the company in which they invest. All
of these things were done for the purpooe of giving more opportunity, more
incentive, more chance of the greatest possible Australian ownership
and control of Australian industry.
Now, we propose to take another step, and we propose to take
it for the same reasons. We propose to establish an Industry Development
Corporation of which many of you might have heard. I cannot go into
details of this yet because the detailed bill has not been introduced to
Parliament, but I can discuss some of the questions which this proposal
has raised and I can give the reasons behind this decision and what we
hope this decision will lead to. a 9. / 6 
We believe that there are important areas of Australian industrial
activity in which the potential financial requirements in the developing years
ahead are not completely served now and, as we think, may not be able to be
completely served by existing financial institutions. For exam-ple, in the
mineral field alone, which must in the nature of things take a prominent place
in all questions of Australian ownership, experience shows that in the extraction
and the subsequent processing, particularly t he subsequent processing of basic
material resources, there is overwhelming foreign ownership because of
the enormously high capital required in this field.
And leaving that field, coming into secondary industry generally,
we think that new scientific developments, new technological developments,
new knowledge as the frontiers of knowledge are pushed back, are going to
lead to capital needs which industry has not in this country hitherto known.
We think that in many fields of n-anufacture, Australian enterprise must be
much more massive than is the case in much of Australian industry, if there
are to be economies of scale to enable that industry to compete on a world
market and to compete in Australia with overseas industry wit'a a minimum of
tariff protection. In other words, the industry must grow to be comparable with
a massive world industry if it is ultimately to be able to compete and the
capital requirements of this are going to be most significant.
And we believe that it is desirable in these fields which I have
mentioned to aim at such co mpanies, whether they be new processing plants,
whether they be industrial companies which are going to be developed, to
aim at their development, while still retaining as much Australian ownership
as it is possible for us to have. Now, at present the statistical facts show
that this is not happening, and it is not happening for one of two reasons.
Either there is not a will on the part of industry and owners of
industry to retain ownership in Australian hands, and I discount that because
I believe the will is there, either there is not a will or there is an inadequate
opportunity to obtain the capital required and at the same time retain
Australian ownership. Well, at any rate, statistically, either one of these
factors is operating because more and more of our industry is passing into
foreign control. And we haven't had in the past enough policy on this, and a policy
saying that the primary purpose we must have is to enable not the prevention
of the inflow of overseas capital, but the retention of the maximum Australian
ownership. This has not been a policy and it seems to me that Australia
has lagged behind in the past. / 7 
Sir, it is towards filling this very significant gap in our policy
that the Industry Development Corporation is intended to be established.
I think it clear that the phenomenal pace of industrial development in
Australia over the last ten or twenty years has been facilitated by that
huge inflow of capital which has brought with it technical skills and access
to overseas markets of which I have spoken. And let rile reiterate we
recognise this as a government, and we approve it and we want it to
continue. But there is absolutely nothing connected with the iLdustrial
corporation we propose to establish which will in any way inhibit or
firghten off or prevent the inflow of this capital in this way. Vat it will
do, we hope, is as an Industry Development Corporation, be able to
give assistance to Australian industry, a particular Australian industry
when, and only when that assistance is sought, when and ordly when that
assistance is sought to help such an industry to obtain the capital it
needs from overseas without having to take in an overseas partner in order
to get overseas capital. In this way, we will not stop the inflo. of overseas
capital because the object of the IDC is to borrow overseas itself. We will
hope to make available to an industry in Australia which wants -o develop,
the capital to enable it to develop, if it asks for it, if it is a good business
risk; and retain its full ownership in Australian hands.
I think, Sir, that too many Australian industrial enterprises
which are growing and have grown, have run into limitations in the past
on the ability to raise capital. They have had, in order to obtain capital
to borrow, to break in a partner who can borrow abroad, and resolve
the dilemma of being unable to raise the capita) themselves in Australia
or overseas; to resolve that dilemma, they have taken in as partners a
company which can raise that capital, but which is foreign.
I think that hardly a week passes, Sir, when we don't read of
an important and growing enterprise which for one reason or another has
been taken over by an industrial concern from abroad. Now, again let
me make it clear that takeovers and mergers are not necessarily bad.
They can be good in many cases they are good. They are part of a
normal business scene, maybe part of the process of an industry developing,
growing up, becoming more efficient; or it may be that a joint venture
between Australians and foreign firms may be a desirable step in Australian
industry development and the opening up of overseas markets to an
industry. All these things are true. But it is also true that it is frequently
an unfortunate feature in the pattern of such arrangements that when the
Australian partner can't get his share of the capital requirements, whether
equity or loan, he will at best become the minor partner in the new
enterprise that results. We wish, not to stop the new enterprise, but to
enable the Australian partner to be not a minor but an equal partner in it,
by helping him to borrow abroad through the IDC. / 8 
Sir, that there are great resources of capital overseas willing
for investment in Australia, surely nobody has to prove. It is therefore
either equity or fixed term lendings, and the facts of the capital inflow
into Australia themselves prove that this is so; just as the fact that the
high interest rates required for such capital do not prevent it from
being borrowed by such firms, for examiple, as Hamersley because, on
a business judgement, it is possible to pay that for the capital a-nd still
make a profit. I am sure nobody doubts that these firms that are
borrowing it will do this. The capital is there, but is riot available to
small firms. It is available to Hamersley. It might be available to
BHP, to GRA, to Utah, to Comalco, to some world-wide company of
great stature and great standing, but it is not available to a relatively
small company. An industrial corporation established in Australia can have
the stature and the standing of a great international company and can when
approached by an Australian firm a relatively small firm, act for it.
It will act for it under the control of a board of directors, predominantly
drawn frxom private industry, in due course, to retain all the benefits
which that capital has brought irn the ownership of that industry itself.
This must surely be a proper objective. This. must surely be another
step in retaining as much as we can of our ownership and of our control.
This must be a help to the developmeint of Australian firms, and it must
surely be obvious that it cannot in any way interfere with that continuing
flow of overseas capital to overseas-owned firms % h ich we still want to
continue along with this. This is the last step that the Governmrent has
taken, along with indicating its desires, with its borrowing guidelines,
with its convertible notes, this is aiother step along that path.
And I hope, gentlemen, that it will commend itself to the thinking
of most people. It has been attacked by people who do not understand it,
who have been misled by initial press reports about it. But bear these
major points in mind it can only act when it is asked to act; it cannot
interfere with a company; it will be by law prevented from getting an equity
share in a company which will control that company; it will by law be
required to divest itself of any equity it gets in helping an Australian company,
as soon as it is clear that that equity can be disposed of on the Australian
market to Australian buyers; it will only act when asked; it will mobilise
funds which Australian industries of small or medium stature cannot
mobilise for themselves. And it will do it in a way that the Resources
Development Bank and other institutions cannot do, because the
Australian Resources Development Ban.%, important as it has been, has, in
fact, as an institution owned by the trading banks, been mobillsing / 9 
9.
Australian capital to great effect and to great benefit. Some $ 250 million
or more has been mobilised inside Australia from Australian Lsources, almost
nothing has been borrowed from abroad. And, indeed, it is not altogether
surprising because the Australian Resources Development Bar.-, is a bank
and is subject to banking requirements, and what bankcs pay for deposits
is not comparable with what many industries pay for capital, and indeed
not comparable with what Eurodollar market requires to be paid for its
capital. Further, by the very nature of banking, certain risk enterprises
do not commend themselves very much. But whatever the reasons may be,
the pragmatic fact is that there has not been the borrowing by this great
and effective institution, there has not been the borrowing abroad that we
seek to get now. And this, I think, will get capital to the great goo Of
Australian industry, to the ultimate saving of some interest which would
have to be paid overseas, the ultimate saving of dividends that :-ight
otherwise have to be paid overseas, and yet without in any wiay interfering
with the flow of capital we need as well. We are merely seeking to see
that if it is unnecessary to pay a high price for capital from abroad for
development, then we don't have to pay that price and that is the objective
of the IDG. If it works and if the development expands and accelerates in
the future, as I am sure you all believe it will, then in ten yean,* time,
I think we will be able to look at it, and say this has served Australia as
well as that other institution which was attacked in the same way at its
beginning and I refer to EPIC as well as that other institution, EPIC,
has served Australia, and Australian industries and Australia:--manufactures.
I thought I would take this opportunity of speaking to you and
proposing the toast of secondary industry, to set out, necessarily in a
brief form, the approach which the Government has in these Matters not
a chauvinistic approach but a business-like approach, which we have
taken, and the thinking underlying the next step we propose to take.
I hope, gentlemen, in the years to come at gatherings such as
this, when people rise to talk, it will be no longer necessary to speak,
because events will have proved the success of what we are now setting
out to do for industry, and, as we believe, for Australia. 



FOR PRESS:'
EMBARGO: t ot for abling or broadcasting before 1 a. m.
Monday, 13/ 4/ 70 P. M. No 53/ 1970
VISIT BY CANADIAN PRIME MINISTER
The Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Pierre Trudeau, wil
arrive in Brisbane on 15 May for a five-day visit to Australia.
After a rest period, which will be Spent privately, Mr. Trudeau
will perform official functions in Sydney on the morning of 18 May. Details
of these will be announced later. He will then fly to Canberra for a
formal welcome by the Commonwealth Government.
During the remainder of that day, Mr. Trudeau will be a
guest speaker at a National Press Club Luncheon, visit the Australian
National University and the Canadian High Commissioni, and call on
the Governor-General.
On 19 May, after laying a wreath at the Australian War
Memorial, Mr. Trudeau will go to Parliament House for private talks
with Mr. Gorton and the Cabinet. In the afternoon he will be guest of
honour at a Parliamentary Luncheon, and hear Question Time in the
House of Representatives and the Senate. Later, he will visit the
National Library and Regatta Point on Lake Burley Griffin, where a
flagpole presented by the Canadian Government stands close to the
Cook Memorial Fountain.
-In the evening, Mr. Trudeau will be guest of honour at a
Parliamentary Reception.
Mr. Trudeau will leave for Malaysia early on 20 May.
CA NBERRA
12 April 1970
BACKGROUND NOTE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton visited Canada as
Mr. Trudeau's guest in April, 1969. 



" IMEET THE PRESS##
TELEVISION ITWERVIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, OH
CHANNEL 7, MELBOURNE 12 APRIL 1970
Panel Reg Leonard
Vince Matthews
Trevor Sykes
Chairman Frederick Howard
Chairman: The choice of an opening topic for our discussion with the
Prime Minister was dictated by the echoes that are going round the
country from the disorder in Parliament earlier in the week.
Prime Minister, we would value your comments on that, and I vould
like also to have your opinion on whether there is behind this type of
disorder some frustration and strain indicating that the Parliamentary
system is not functioning these days as it should.
PM: You would like a comment first on the actual disorders?
Well, the comment I would give is that disorders of this kind in
Parliament which have not been seen in any Australian Parliament
before and I think probably in no English speaking Parliament in the
world, are not an attack on a government; they are an attack on
the institution of Parliament itself. If this sort of thing were to
continue, then the institution of Parliament would become unworkable,
and if it did, then the best method of government with the opportunity
for freedom and the opportunity for the provision of order mould
become unworkable and the whole process of democratic government
would be attacked at its roots.
Q. Isn't one of the major problems, Prime Minister, the urgency
with which the Government is trying to push through a pile of
legislation and not giving the opportunity to the Opposition to debate
this legislation?
PM: No, I don't think it is. I don't think in the Session of
Parliament so far there has been any indication of an attempt to push
through a great pile of legislation. There is a great deal there.
It has been brought in. It has been left at the Second Reading
stage and it must eventually be brought forward and debated, but I
think that the functioning of Parliament must depend not only on the
Standing Orders which Parliamentarians make, but on the way in / 2 
which they are applied, Now, there is a requirement for a government
to give to an opposition an opportunity to debate, an-opportunity to move
amendments, an opportunity to bring forward matters of public
importance. This is a requirement. But there is also a requirement
on the Opposition not to abuse the Standing Orders in order to prevent
legislation coming forward, in order to waste time. And I believe
that the Opposition in this case has in fact been seeking to abuse the
rights they have in order to waste time. Can I give an example of that?
One of the things that an Opposition should be able to do is to bring
forward matters of public urgency which they think ought to be
ventilated something is wrong somewhere and they want to make that
public. And when that happens, always in the past there have been
three or four speakers aside, by agreement, and then you have gone
on to the ordinary Parliamentary business. And this is important, but
it shourld only happen at spaced intervals. You can't have it every day.
If it was done every day, then the time of Parliament would be taken
up every day for the purposes of the Opposition, and this is what the
Opposition have been trying to do. They have almost every day been
bringing forward urgency motions expecting or hoping to have three
or four speakers aside. And if that were permitted, then the business
of Parliament would be taken out of the Government's hands. This is,
I think, an attempt to abuse the right, and it forces the Government
to gag.
Q. Apart from what they claim to be the over-enthusiastic use
of the gag, the Opposition also claims that the Leader of the House
broke undertakings. What is your comment on that? Is it so?
PM: Well, I am never a party to undertakings. They are made
between the Leader of the Hcuse and the spokesman, whoever it may
be generally it is Barnard on the Opposition side. So I can't speak
from direct participation. I can only say that I just don't believe that
this has happened, and I haven't seen evidence produced that it has
happened. It is claimed that there was an agreement broken in the
necessary Constitutional one-day sitting, but I don't believe that
was so, and there was a claim that on another occasion an agreement
was broken. I have seen nothing to support that whatever. On the
other hand, the Leader of the House tells me that there have been
many occasions on which agreements have been made with the
spokesman for the Opposition, and the spokesman for the Opposition
has later come along and said " Sorry, I can't keep this agreement.
I can't control my own boys. Now this is a sort of an agrument
between the people making the arrangements. / 3 
Q. But woulcxi't the Opposition have more time for its urgency
motonsand the Government more time to conduct its business if
the Pairltiment sat more often? There was quite a long break over
Christmas.
P M: We had a long break over Christmas indeed, and I think
that the results of that long break are probably showing up in the
greatest legislative programme perhaps that has ever been bmvught
before the Commonwealth Parliament. There is a need, you know,
for Cabinet to sit with its advisers and to work out the details of the
legislation which it wants the Parliament to pass. And the programme
that was brought forward in the Governor-General's Speech reflects,
I think, the work that was done in this direction over that break.
Q. Moving on to another field, Sir, it seems from Canberra
these days that you are a much more confident Prime Minister than
you were when you fought the election last October. Some of your
closest advisers even insist that you are a changed man. Why have
y you developed this new confidence and what has been responsible for
the change?
PM: Well, I don't know that I would agree that I was a changed
man. I hope whoever it was that said it would agree that it was a
change for the better. I am not sure, but I don't really think I am.
I suppose one becomes more confident when one has won an election
in one's own right, even if o-ne has only just won it. We have a team
of Cabinet Ministers which I have picked myself completely and I
think it is a good team and I think it is working very wiell indeed. I
think we have got a programme which has been brought forward
showing just where we are going in defence, just what our goals are,
what our foreign affairs approach is; and on the legislative side,
the tidying up of a great deal of legislation, and the bringing in of such
important things as the Health Bill, the Industries Development
Corporation, off shore legislation for minerals, a whole number of things
which I believe are quite important to Australia. Perhaps that is the
explanation, I don't know.
Q. In contrast, last month only, I think it was, you gave an
interesting interview in which you said one reason for your added
confidence might " maybe I have a new philosophy" were your
exact words. Now what does that mysterious sentence mean? / 4 
PM: Well, I think it means that one understands precisely
what it is one is seeking to do in many fields not in every field
one is convinced after long thought that the reasons for those goals are
proper reasons, one seeks to get a team behind one and explain them
to the Aust ralian people and why they are good, and one says that as
long as all this is done and genuinely done to one's own satisfaction,
there is always going to be an awful lot of people vAio disagree with you
and who criticise you on everything. Well, that's too bad. I am not
going to let that grind me down any more.
Q. Looking at the Liberal Party, it was assumned when you
came to power that you were determined to make changes within the
Par-ty and its philosophy and thinking. Is this assumption still correct?
Are you determined to push the Party in the direction you think the
events are moving it anyway?
PM: I don't know that any one man, even a Prine Minister, can
push a Party in any direction that it doesn't want to go, but I think
it is possible to get a Party rethinking, re-examining the basic dogma
if I can use that word which it has had for such a long period of
time, and I do want, and I think I have succeeded, in getting the
Liberal Party to stand off and have another look at a number of things
which had previously been taken for granted. And I think that this is
good.
Q. Prime Minister, you mentioned just now, a couple of items
that were on your agenda. The were things we intended to question
you about, anyway. One was the Industries Development Corporation,
as I see it in relation to olir overseas credit, and the other was the
Health programme. I wonder if we could look first at this Industries
Development Corporation which I believe you have recently two
days ago been talking about in Perth. Does it lend itself to a layman's
explanation in simple words?
PM: Oh, I think it does, but I should give this preliminary
statement. We believe that we must have overseas capital flowing
into Australia for development and for processing minerals and for
all the expansion which is required. We can't generate enough inside
Australia and rather than not progress, it is much better to have
overseas capital flowing in. Anything I say is not directed against
an inflow of overseas capital, because this is essential, but there
is a price to pay for the inflow of overseas capita there are
great benefits but there is also a price to pay. There are the
e 9. 
requirements to pay interest payments overseas when the enterprise
becomes viable. -There is repatriation of capital. There are all sorts
of prices which need to be paid. And we would like to keep that price
as low as possible by seeing as much Australian participation in
enterprises as is possible. Statistically, this isn't now happening.
Statistically, the amount of Australian ownership and control in nmany
industries is dropping, and this is due to either one of two things. Either
there is no will in Australian industry for Australian participation
and ownership. I discount that. I am sure there is and I am sure
there is a will. Or there are not sufficient avenues by which the
Australian ownership and control can be retained, and this is an attempt
to provide another avenue by which this ownership and control can be
maintained. You see, many of our smaller industries must expand.
They have got to become more massive than they have ever been
before if they are going to compete on the world with the big companies
of the world. If they are going to be able to sell inside Australia with
a minimum of tariff protection, they hi ye got to expand, so they have
got to get capital. Now, at the moment, very often they have to take
in an overseas partner, maybe a majority partner in order to get that
capital from overseas. We are seeking to set up a corporation to which
a small company can go a relatively small company in world terms
to which it can go and say " You, the Industrial Gorpoiation have a status
and a standing internationally at least as good as Comalco or Hamersley
or any other of these companies. Will you, if you judge that our
proposition is a good business proposition, will you try and borrow
overseas capital for us so that we don't have to give away our equity",
and this is the basic objective of this new exercise.
Chairman: Mr. Sykes, would you like to come in on this?
Q. How high is the danger that this corporation could be used
as a political tool?
PM: The legislation will divorce the corporation entirely it
must, from any governmental or any ministerial con~ trol. The board
of directors will be drawn predominantly from private industry,. It will
be required to make its judgments on the same sort off business judgements
that any other private board of directors would mak', e, and it is completely
and utterly essential to the scheme you put your finger on it that
it must be divorced from government control.
Q. Was there any thought when Cabinet agreed on this one
that it was necessary because the Australian Resources Development
B. nk was not doing the job that it was set up to do? / 6 
Q. If the economy is overheated, the farmers suggest they
are in a deep freeze.
PM: They are.
Q. What is the Government proposing to do about the
plight of rural industry? Mr. Nixon addressed some farmers here
and suggested he was taking a message loud and clear to the Cabinet.
Was that message received loud and clear?
PM: You asked what the Government is going to do. One of
the things we have done and one of the things for which we have been
attacked by, I think, some rather troglodyte economists, is we have
not raised the interest rate for the farmers because they are that
is for people who draw the major amount of their income from rural
production because they are in this difficult situation. You see
the objective of raising the interest rate was to make money dearer,
to damp down demand, to damp down requirement. Well, the farmers
haven't got the demand, they aren't making the requirements, because
wool is at the lowest price it has been since i942, so we felt it was
using a kind of a bludgeon to hammer people who weren't in fact
putting out inflationary pressures. That is one thing that we have
done. You asked me what we were going to do. Yes, Mr. Nixon
and Mr. Fraser both brought back to Cabinet their reports of the
meeting that was held in Melbourne. That meeting didn't put forward
any proposals, you may remember. It just said " We would like
things to be better, and it is now up to the Government to seek to put
forward proposals". Well, what are you going to do? Take wheat,
for example, you can't just go on growing increasing quantities of a
commodity that the world market doesn't want. It is just impossible
to do that, or that if it does want, it will pay a price that isn't viable.
And so there, quotas on growth are coming in, and I believe that
will reach a stage where the demand will meet the supply. Dairyfarming
we are still seeking to iron out with the States and have
almost reached the stage of reconstruction of dairy farms. Wool
is a commodity which is different, because there the world does
want it. There is no question that everything that is produced is sold,
but they are not prepared at the moment to pay the price that is
required for it. Now we have got to look into whether the marketing
methods are sufficiently good, whether more could be obtained there,
whether fringe benefits in the way of core testing andi sample selling
and these sort of things could be done, and we are waiting now on a
report from the committee set up by the Wool Board on vii ich we will
finally do what we can to help this industry. / 8 
Q. Prime Minister, another section of the community which
is rather hot and bothered is general practitioners and the health
insurance. Can you tell us anything about the prospects of a
compromise or a settlement with them?
PM: Well, all I can say on that is that we said that there should
be no economic bar to a patient going to a specialist and getting
specialist treatment if he needs it. That he should not, as he had
in the past, have to pay the difference between a general practitioner's
fee and a specialist's fee. He must be protected. Anid this we will
not depart from. This must happen as far as the Government is
concerned. Anybody who needs to have specialist treatment and Vhio
has paid his insurance should be relieved of the fear of great expense
as a result. And differential rebates are absolutely essential. Now
if there are areas in which we can have discussions the general
practitioners, I think, call it updating of rebates N~ hich in fact
means periodic increasing of their fees, if these sort of things can
be worked out, fine. But the basic thing is that we must continue
to prctect the patient. Now the general practitioners fear that if
we do this, everybody will go to a specialist even to have a boil
lanced or a toeache looked at or something of that kind. This is
just a fear they have expressed. Only experience can show whether
it will be true or not. I don't think it will, because even now you have
got to wait awhile before you can go and see a specialist. If everybody
went it would be weeks before you could get in. Also, I think people
would trust and rely on their general practitioner family doctor.
If tnat did happen, and I don't believe it will, we would be just as
disturbed as the medical profession because of the cost to the taxpayer.
We would then have to see whether there was some referral system
that could prevent that. But basically, we have got to protect the
patient as we said we would against the great cost of specialist fees.
Chairman: Could we now have just some quick, short questions.
Q. Could I just ask one, coming from the tropical North? We
are interested greatly, of course, as other places are in offshore
development of various kinds. Has your Government any specific
programme for control particularly and for the preservation
of Australian rights in these enterprises? a / 9 
PM: In the enterprises which may enter mineral exploration
off shore? Well, we are bringing legislation forward to resolve the
question of who it is that has the sovereignty and owns the right
over the sea bottom from low water mark to the continental shelf.
Both the State Governments and ourselves now claim it. We are
bringing legislation forward to put it beyond doubt. if it is challenged
in the High Court, then that will be it. It will be settled. That
would have to be decided before we could say yes, vie had intentions
of doing this, that or the other. But were it decided in our favour,
then we would want to see two things. We would want to see that
th ere was no danger from a conservation point of view, or a pollution
point of view or changing the ecological balance point of view, and
we would want, insofar as it was possible to see, that Australians had
some share in anything that went on in that way.
Q. One quick one, Sir. Do you propose to go to New Guinea
this year?
PM: Yes, I do. I can't tellI you when, but I definitely wish to
go at some stage before the end of the year.
Q. Another quick one. In the potentially menacing economic
situation, when are we likely,, if ever, to see an easing of the load
on the middle income-earners taxation load?
PM: Well, what we have to do is to make sure that the general
economy grows but that inflation is restrained. This is essential, as
I think you would agree. We have set forward our aims in regard
to reducing taxation on middle and lower income groups and this is
an aim which I thinkqas I said before, is an aim which we will achieve
with responsibility, as soon as we can.
Chairman: A last quick one.
Q. D oesn't the imposition of higher interest rates just to put
the brakes on inflation hurt a lot of little people?
PM: Well, it probably could be argued that it did. You might
have housing in mind.
Q. I have.
PM: Yes, I thought you might have housing in mind. It could well
be argued that it did, although I am told that in most cases the yearly
cost to those people will not be greater but the period of time over
which they have to pay off what they owe will have to be extended. But
that has to be balanced against what would the cost to the house builder
be if inflation were not to be checked in this way. The capital cost of
each house to somebody who now moves in would rise considerably, and
I think in the long run they would be worse off.
Chairman: Prime Minister, I am afraid our time for questions has run
our. One of the easiest question times I am sure you have had: 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRLIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
GLADSTONE POWER STATION AGREEMENT BILL
Second Reading
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 14 April 19701
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
[ 4.61-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
On 26th September last year I announced
to the House that the Commonwealth Government
was prepared to provide a loan
of up to $ 80m to the Queensland Government
to help the State finance the construction
of a proposed large scale power station
at Gladstone in central Queensland which
would provide low-cost power and, through
it, attract a viable export oriented industrial
complex to central Queensland. The offer
was conditional on the State being able to
satisfy the Commonwealth that it could
attract such special industrial development
to the region. Since that announcement
negotiations have progressed between the
State and Organisations likely to establish
industries in the central Queensland region,
and also between the Queensland Government
and the Commonwealth. The result of
these negotiations is that the Queensland Government
has satisfied the Commonwealth
that major export oriented industries are
likely to be attracted to central Queensland
through the provision of the low-cost power;
and the Commonwealth and Queensland
governments have reached agreement on
the terms and conditions of a Common-
14461/ 70 wealth loan to the State to assist with the
necessary works. On 8th April an agreement
between the 2 governments was signed
by myself and the Premier of Queensland.
The purpose of this Bill is to seek Parliament's
approval for the agreement to come
into effect and for the provision of the
financial assistance specified in the aggreement.
The estimated cost of the proposed power
station together with local reticulation at
Gladstone, at 1968 prices, is $ 155m. It
will have an approximate total installed
generating capacity of 1100 megawatts, of
which about 600 megawatts will be reserved
by the State for special industrial purposes
in central Queensland. For the purpose of
the agreement the Queensland Government
shall produce evidence satisfactory to the
Minister for National Development that the
State has entered into or proposes to enter
into agreements, arrangements and options
for the consumption of electrical power by
industrial organisations which will export
a substantial proportion of their products
or which will produce goods of a kind
which will be supplied to industries producing
goods predominantly for export.
As in other similar arrangements, provision
is made in the agreement for the 
approval by the Minister for National
Development of the letting of major contracts-
in this instance those for the performance
of works to a value in excess of
Sim. The actual amount of the Commonwealth
financial assistance will depend on
the cost of construction of the power station
and local reticulation. The agreement provides
for a variation in the amount of
finanical assistance above or below $ 80m
according to any variation which occurs in
the total cost above or below $ 155m. Thus
the amount of financial assistance may be
-expressed arithmetically as 80/ 1 S5ths of the
total cost of the project. Commonwealth
financial assistance will be available towards
expenditure by the State on the project
during the period commencing on the date
of my announcement, 26th September 1969
and ending on 30th June 1977. The assistance
will be in the form of an interest
bearing loan repayable over a period of
years commencing when the power
station is completed. The loan will carry
interest at the rate of 6.4% per annum to
accrue and to be capitalised during the construction
of the project. There is, however,
provision for the State to make payments
of interest, instead of allowing the interest
to be capitalised, once integral components
of the station are commissioned and producing
power. There is also provision for
interest charges not to be payable during
the early stages of construction of the project,
thus reducing the overall interest cost
to somewhat below 6.4%.
Honourable members no doubt will be
interested in an outline of the background
to this important project. Prior to its consideration
of a major power station at
Gladstone the State had already envisaged
the construction of a thermal power station
in the region as part of its programme for
a general expansion to meet normal growth
in the demand for electricity. The initial
planning involved interconnection of the
supply networks located in southern and
central Queensland. A number of studies of
the prospects for development of central
Queensland, including a study by the Department
of National Development in conjunction
with the State Department of Industrial
Development, have pointed to the imposing
array of natural resources which exist in
the region. These resources have been
shown to be outstanding in bath variety
and magnitude, yet still relatively underdeveloped. The official studies and various
industry inquiries have indicated that these
resources could well be a base for the
establishment of large scale export oriented
industries. In saying this, it should be remembered
too that impressive developments have
already been taking place in the region.
For example, large coal mining and export
operations have become established, the
ports of Gladstone and Port Alma have
been considerably developed and a large
scale alumina project established at Gladstone
is entering a major expansionary stage.
The region possesses very large resources
of steaming coal, considerable quantities of
which are mined and produced together with
coking coal by companies principally engaged
in the production and export of
coking coal in the region. This steaming
coal will be regularly available to the State
at low cost.
Against this background of resources and
potential the Premier of Queensland in
September 1968 raised with me the possibility
of the Commonwealth assisting the
State with capital in order that a power
station could be built at Gladstone to provide
the high load factor and low-cost
supply required to attract major export
oriented industries to central Queensland.
At that time negotiations had commenced
between Queensland Ministers and officials
and several companies interested in major
industrial development in the region. Since
then the proposals put forward by the
Queensland Government have been closely
examined by the Commonwealth. I would
mention that, in the course of these investigations,
the Snowy Mountains Authority
was engaged as consultants. The Commonwealth,
as a result of these investigations,
is greatly impressed with the potential of
the power station project both for attracting
major industries to central Queensland and
for bringing about a substantial lift in
exports. Naturally the negotiations between the
Queensland Government and the companies
concerned are confidential. I can say that
the Commonwealth is satisfied from the
evidence presented to it that major export
oriented industries will be establishing in
central Queensland. In fact, the Government
believes, as the Governor-General said in
his speech on 3rd March, that the power
station will result in the construction of an 
aluminium smelter, possibly the biggest in
the southern hemisphere, and in other industrial
development. We are confident, along
with the Queensland Government, that the
power station will attract a major chemical
industry using the extensive salt resources in
the area and we have high hopes that operations
in this field may commence in 2 or 3
years time. There is indeed a whole range
of industries which could be attracted to
central Queensland by the power station.
To the best of my knowledge these have
not been brought to finality, but it is fully
expected that that will happen. The Government
believes that its support of this project,
besides encouraging new industrial development
and a lift in exports, will prove to be
a concrete example of decentralisation.
There is one further matter which I
should bring to the attention of honourable
members. The Queensland Government has
also asked that the Commonwealth give
consideration to further financial assistance
at a later date should the demand for power
from the special export oriented industries
to be established in the region increase to
such a pronounced degree that further enlargement
of the power station would then
be required. While the Government cannot
at this stage give any commitment in relation
to decisions that will have to be taken by a future Government in the circumstances
existing then, we have informed the Queensland
Government that we would approach
the matter sympathetically when it arrives.
I would like to give to the House an
example of the kind of development to
which this project might lead. If the
aluminium smelter to which I have referred
should be established in this region it is
likely that at its first stage of production
it could be producing 240,000 tons of
aluminium a year at a value on present
day prices of about $ 126m. At a later stage,
should a go well, it could be producing
320,000 tons of aluminium at an export
value of $ 165m. The taxation revenue alone
from such a development, should it come
to fruition, would make this indeed a
proper business proposition. But this is not
only a business proposition. It is, as I have
said, a concrete example of decentraiation
and it may well prove to be the greatest
step yet taken to awaken in that area of
Queensland-a State which has been called
a sleeping giant-really significant industrial
development, a real increase in population,
a real benefit to the State, and, through its
exports, a real benefit to the nation. I
commend the Bill to the House.
Debate ( on motion by Mr Stewart)
adjourned.
W. G. MuKRAY, overnment Printer, Canberra 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 54/ 1970
PRIME MINISTER'S PROGRAMME FOR JAPAN
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, will have an audience
with the Emperor and be given a Dinner by the Japanee Prime Minister
when he makes a brief visit to Japan next month for Australia's National
Day ( 8 May) at EXPO.
Mr. Gorton will leave Canberra for Tokyo at 10 o'clock on
the night of Tuesday 5 May, after taking part in that day's sitting of
Parliament. He will make the journey in a BAC 111 aircraft of the
RAAF, returning to Canberra in the early hours of Sunday, 10 May.
Mrs. Gorton will accompany the Prime Minister on the visit,
which is primarily designed to enable Mr. Gorton to be present at the
special day when Australia is the featured country at EXPO
CANBERRA 17 April 1970
NOTE: Programme attached. 
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO TOKYO AND OSAKA
PROGRA MME
Tuesday 5 May
00 p. m.
( Canberra time)
Wednesday 6 May
2. 00 p. m.
( Tokyo time)
4. 30 p. m.
7. 00 p. m
7. 30 p. m.
Thursday 7~ M~
2. 00 p. m.
6. 30 p. m.
Friday 8 May
00 a. m.
10.30 a. m.
12. noon
12. 30 p. m.
2. 00 p. m.
00 p. m.
30 p. m.
7. 00 p. m.
7. 00 p. m.
9. 00 p. m.
Saturday Maj
00 a. m. Depart RAAF Fairbairn by RAAF BAG aircraft for
Tokyo, Arrive Tokyo Internatioiral Airport
Welcoming ceremony.
Imperial Audience ( Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton).
Prime Minister calls on Primie Minister of Japan.
Dinner given by Prime Minister of Japan in honour
of Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton.
Depart Tokyo by train for Osaka.
Arrive Osaka.
Dinner given by Osaka authorities in honour of
Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton.
Official welcome at EXPO for Prime Minister . and
Mrs. Gorton.
Visit Australian pavilion.
Lunch given by EXPO authorities in honour of
Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton.
Visit Japanese Government pavilion and other pavilions
at EXPO.
Reception at EXPO given by Prime Minister and
Mrs. Gorton.
Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton attend " Waltzing
Matilda Revue".
Depart Osaka International Aidrport by RAAF BAG
aircra-ft for Canberra. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
VIETNAM
( Mfiisterial Statement)
( From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 22 April 1970]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-Since 1965, Australian ground
formations have been engaged with our
allies in resisting armed attack on the Government
of South Vietnam. Since that time,
the question of whether Australian forces
should have helped resist that attack has
been debated in Australia. This Government,
as previous governments, has
approached this question in the spirit which
was crystallised in one sentence by the right
honourable member for Melbourne ( Mr
Gaiwell) when he was Leader of the Opposition.
That sentence is:
The overriding issue which this Parliament has
to deal with at all times must be
judged by this one crucial test: What best pro.
motes our national security, what best guarantees
our national survival.
The Government believes that judged on
this standard, our engagement in Vietnam
is right and that it does best promote our
national security, and we believe that for
these reasons: It is surely incontrovertible
that in Vietnam aggression is taking place
and is being resisted. It is surely incontrovertible
that the war there is only being
sustained because large numbers of troops
from North Vietnam are constantly dispatched
to invade and subjugate the South,
15004/ 70 and that if that troop flow stopped the war
would stop. Resistance to such aggression
does best promote our national security,
because we must strive to ensure that history
is not repeated and that invasion and
aggression is not allowed to be successful.
For if it is successful, then the short span
of history through which many of us in this
chamber have lived shows that once
successful, it is repeated and repeated until
it becomes insufferable and has to be
stopped-but stopped at a cost in blood
and treasure infinitely greater than would
have been the case had it been stopped at
its initiation.
Surely something of what happened in
the last generation can be taken as experience
by the present one. We saw Fascist
and Nazi aggression raging unchecked and
subjecting one small country after another
to conquest until it had to be stopped-at
the cost of a world war-which need not
have happened had the aggression been
stopped at its beginning. I thought that these
lessons, which, let us never forget are of
more import to small nations than to large,
had been learned. Because for some years
after the close of the Second World War,
resolute action was taken to resist and
defeat subversion in Malaya as it then was. 
This took some 12 long years or moreyears
when civilians were murdered by
terrorists-when bands of guerillas with
grenades and Sten guns sought to overthrow
by force a government the people
in Malaya wanted. Australians were there,
with British and local forces, resisting that
aggression. We were told then-and the
words are strikingly familiar today: ' Australians
should not be in Malaya. The war
will go on forever. It cannot be won'. But
it was won. That aggression was not successful
and Australia's national security was best
promoted because of that lack of success.
Then we saw aggression in Korea. We
saw the people of the North sweep across
the frontiers of the South in armed formations.
Because the prevention of aggression,
then, was the basic concept of the United
Nations, we saw United Nations forces
moving to defeat that aggression. Australians
were there. And the aggression was
defeated. And Australian national security
was best promoted because it was defeated.
We saw, and the principle is the same,
Malaysia threatened during the confrontation
and armed incursions into Malaysian
territory. Australia helped to repel this
aggression. And our national interest was
best served by this. And then we saw the
pattern repeated in Vietnam. It is Communist
aggression there as it was in Korea
and Malaya, but the source of the aggression-
significant though it may be-is not
as significant as the fact that it was
aggression. For the Government believes
that if small nations are to survive and
prosper, then aggression from whatever
source-whether it is inspired by Communism,
Fascism or old fashioned
nationalism-must not be allowed to
succeed. The one consistent thread of principlethat
small nations are best rendered secure
if other small nations are not allowed to be
overrun-has distinguished our policv
through the post-war years. That is why
we are in Vietnam, and that we should be
there is a proposition supported by three
of the significant political parties in Australia
and opposed by one-the Labor
Party. I put it to the House that Australian
security is bound up with seeing that
aggression does not succeed. I put it to the
House that it is immoral to launch
aggression but not immoral to resist it. This is a proposition which has been twisted
and turned inside out by those who cry
that this is an immoral war. So it is-but
the immorality is in those who began it,
who continue to invade, who will not
negotiate for peace, who are bent on conquest
and nothing but conquest.
We have said that successful invasion of
South Vietnam by the North would lead to
further attempts at conquest in Laos, in
Cambodia, and on the frontiers of Thailand.
This was scouted and denied by those in
the ranks of the Opposition who support the
case of the invaders. But the history of
recent days shows, I submit, how dangerously
wrong they were. Sir, I have thought
it necessary to speak of this background
in discussing the latest decisions on our
participation in Vietnam. It was and is right
for us to help to stem aggression. It was and
is in our national interest-and that of all
small nations-for aggression to be
defeated. It is in our interest to help to
secure by negotiation peace with selfdetermination
for the people of South Vietnam.
And in the meanwhile, while the
invader will not negotiate, it is right to help
resist him. Against this background, I speak
to the House of the Government's decision.
Following a review of the situation in
Vietnam which led to the earlier
United States decisions to reduce the level
of its forces by 115,000 by the middle of
this month, President Nixon yesterday
announced his decision to introduce a new
and long range programme of United States
troop reductions involving the withdrawal
of 150,000 men over the next 12 months.
On 16th December last I announced the
Government's decision that when the
military situation in Vietnam permitted a
further substantial withdrawal of allied
troops, then somne Australian units would
be included in the numbers scheduled for
withdrawal. Since then we have, with South
Vietnam and the other allies, continued to
keep developments and prospects in Vietnam
under close study. The Communist
side maintains its intransigence and continues
to set its face against a negotiated
settlement. There is no progress to report
as regards peace talks.
As the President has stated, there has
been some overall decline in enemy force
levels in South Vietnam in the last few
months, though their actions in Laos and 
Cambodia must give us all cause for concern.
The development that gives
encouragement is the progress in what has
been called ' Vietnamisation'-the movement
towards South Vietnamese selfreliance.
We see one result of this in the
progressive reduction of allied forces. But
it must be understood that ' Vietnamisation'
means much more than the assumption by
South Vietnamese forces of a greater share
of the combat burden. Behind it lies a
massive programme of expanding and
modernising those forces. And behind that
again is the progressive assumption by
South Vietnam of the responsibility for all
aspects of the war-a war fought across
the widest fronts, embracing a complexity
of military, political, psychological, social
and economic factors. In all these areas
much still remains to be done by South
Vietnam, assisted by its allies across a wide
civil and military spectrum. Yet progress
has been such that important qualitative
changes are being made, and will continue
to be made, in regard to the assistance
required by and given to the Government
of South Vietnam in pursuit of the objective
shared over the years by that Government
and its allies.
I reiterate that that objective is to
establish the circumstances in which South
Vietnam can determine its own future without
fear. There can be no thought of
abandoning that objective by a precipitate
withdrawal of allied forces. But in continuing
to give assistance to South Vietnam,
our intention will be to take account of
their own growing strength and to strike the
most appropriate balance between an Australian
military contribution and other
forms of Australian assistance to Vietnam:
We are mindful particularly that the process
of ' Vietnamisation' obtains no less in
Phuoc Tuy Province than in other parts of
Vietnam and that it is both desirable and
feasible for Australia to undertake, as the
circumstances permit, qualitative changes in
the shape of our overall contribution
towards the goal we seek.
Accordingly, I now announce to the
House that after consultation in recent
weeks with the governments of Vietnam and
the United States, who understand and
accept our approach, the Government has
decided that one Australian infantry
battalion and some supporting personnel will be withdrawn from South Vietnam.
This reduction to our force in Vietnam will
be effected by withdrawing, without replacement,
the 8th Battalion, Royal Australian
Regiment, which at present is scheduled to
complete its tour of duty in November next.
This will require a modification of the role
at present played by our forces--a modification
made feasible by the forces of Vietnamisation
and national acceptance of
responsibility by the Vietnamese themselves
in Phuoc Tuy.
But let no-one say that because there is
a modification of the role we play therefore
we should play no role at all. Reducing our
forces because the Vietnamese are able to
assume more responsibility is one thing.
Totally removing our forces before the
Vietnamese are able to accept full responsibility
for replacing them is quite another.
The timing of the battalion's departure
from Vietnam remains to be determined. It
will be governed by general circumstances
within the area in which Australian forces
are operating and by the progress of Australian
projects to assist the growth of
greater capability in the South Vietnamese
forces, and I shall touch on those later.
Whether or not the battalion's departure
may be brought forward from the November
date will depend on developments in
these fields.
After the initial withdrawal, should the
progress of pacification and Vietnamisation
succeed as the President hopes and believes
that it will, then at some stage during the
12-month period, we will consider phasing
additional troops into the planned withdrawal.
But the future situation is so uncertain
and the future strategical situation
so unpredictable that it is impossible to be
any more definite than this. In co-operation
with the Government of South Vietnam, in
pursuit of our basic objectives, we are
actively examining further ways in which
we can contribute to the growth in South
Vietnamese self-reliance.
Following consultations with the Vietnamese
Government, we have decided to
provide a number of small mobile Army
teams, totalling some 130 men, to work
with the regional and popular forces in
Phuoc Tuy province. The teams will have
a liaison and training function and will
operate on a pattern similar to that
developed by some members of our existing 
Army Advisory Training Group, which will
continue its work. We are also developing
a further proposal that Australia provide
instructors and other assistance to a South
Vietnamese training centre for junior leaders
-leaders of the popular forces and regional
forces-planned for establishment on the
site which will be vacated by the Australian
battalion to be withdrawn from Vietnam.
It is envisaged that courses at this centre,
which would accommodate 400 to 500
students at a time, would give particular
attention to instruction in methods of jungle
warfare which have been developed by
Australian forces. studies now being made of other forms of
assistance which might be offered to Vietnam.
Sir, I am glad to be able to tell the
House and the people of Australia that the
situation has been reached when withdrawal
of some Australian forces can be made.
I would be yet happier when all Australian
forces could be withdrawn, provided that
our object is in no way endangered. And
I believe that history will show that Australia
in Vietnam was right, as she was
right in the other instances of which I have
spoken, not to stand idly by and refuse to
lift a finger to help a small country attacked
from without. For whenever one small
In addition, Cabinet will give urgent country loses its freedom let us not ask for
attention to the results of comprehensive whom the bell tolls; it tolls for all.
W. 0. MuRRAY, Government Printer, Canberra 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 55/ 1970
GREAT BARRIER REEF OIL DRILLING INQUIRY
Statement by thePrnime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister said today that he and the Premier of
Queensland expected to be in a position in the near future jointly to
announce the composition of the Royal Commission to inquire into the
risk of damage to the Great Barrier Reef from drilling for oil.
The Inquiry will be conducted under the Commonwealth's
Royal Commissions Act 1902-1966 and Queensland's Commissions of
Inquiry Acts 1950 to 1954.
Arrangements to establish the Inquiry are proceeding
smoothly with complete co-operation between the two Governments.
Approaches have been made to the persons whom it is
proposed to appoint as Commissioners for the Inquiry.
CANBERRA 28 April 1970 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
DROUGHT RELIEF IN QUEENSLAND
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 5 May 1970]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-Honourable members are
aware that the State of Queensland has been
affected by serious drought conditions for
several years. They will also be aware that
the Commonwealth has been providing substantial
drought relief -assistance. Under
present arrangements, the Commonwealth
has agreed for 1969-70 to meet on a $ 1 for
$ 1 basis expenditure on eligible drought
relief measures up to $ 4m and to meet the
full cost in excess of $ 4m, and it is currently
estimated that the Commonwealth
will need to provide some $ l5m under these
arrangements in 1969-70. That would bring
total Commonwealth drought relief assistance
to Queensland since 1965-66 to over
$ 32m. Honourable members will also know
that the Premier of Queensland recently
proposed certain modifications of existing
relief measures. Following Cabinet consideration
of the Premier's proposals, I have
now informed the Premier that the Commonwealth
is prepared to reimburse the
State for carry-on and re-stocking loans
made to graziers to enable Queensland to
extend the existing limits on those loans.
The Commonwealth has always adopted
a flexible attitude to the limits of drought
loans. Our main concern has been that
normal commercial sources of finance
should first be exhausted and that in making
a loan the State authorities should satisfy
-themselves that the applicant has a reasonable
chance of recovery. It will be for the
156811~ 70 State to determine the new limits, and the
rate of monthly payments of loans, in the
light of the circumstances of individual
graziers. I have also informed the Premier
that the Commonwealth is agreeable to his
proposal for graziers who have received
drought relief carry-on or re-stocking loans
under the 1969 drought relief arrangements
to have their loans, including any unpaid
sums under the earlier 1965 arrangements,
consolidated as at 30th June 1970. 1 understand
that the State's objective is to give
further relief to graziers by extending the
period during which interest will be
capitalised and no redemption payments
will be required.
The Commonwealth has also agreed that
rebates on the transport of stock for restocking
purposes, which at present apply
only to breeding stock, should be extended
to cover all stock transported for re-stocking
up to a property's normal capacitywhether
this involves stock purchased or
stock returning from agistment-provided
that the stock are held for a minimum
period on the ' grazier's property before
being elfigible for rebate. In addition, because
of the widespread effects of the drought
on Queensland pastoral areas and the fact
that New South Wales could be a major
source of stock for re-stocking when the
drought is over, the Commonwealth has
indicated its willingness to reimburse the
Queensland Government for expenditure
on freight rebates on stock purchases in 
New South Wales for re-stocking and on
returning from agistment in that State.
The existing measures provide for additional
carry-on loans to assist droughtaffected
graziers with the payment of crown
rentals and local authority rates in 1969-
We have now agreed to further assistance
in this regard in the form of grants
to the State to enable it to meet half the
cost of rates payable in 1970 by graziers
who have experienced drought for more
than 2 years in the 2 droughts of 1965-67
and 1969-70 and who are demonstrably in
need of such assistance. Even before allowing for the additional
cost in 1969-70 of the agreed extensions
to drought relief measures to which I have
referred, the Commonwealth contribution
towards drought relief measures in Queensland
this year would be easily the largest
amount ever provided to any State for
drought relief in a single year. The Government
believes that the additional measures
which I have now announced will make a
further substantial contribution to the relief
of those farmers and graziers in Queensland
who continue to be affected by
drought.
W. G. MuUAY, Government Printer, Canberra 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
GREAT BARRIER REEF
INQUJIRY INTO DRILLING FOR PETROLEUM
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 5 May 1970]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-I am pleased to announce that
the Premier of Queensland and I have
agreed on the details of establishing Commonwealth
and State royal commissions to
inquire into the risk of damage to the Great
Barrier Reef from drilling for petroleum.
The royal commissions have been established
under the Commonwealth's Royal
Commissions Act 1902-1966 and the
Queensland Commissions of Inquiry Acts
1950 to 1954. The Commissioners and the
terms of reference will be identical for each
royal commission. The Commissioners are:
The Honourable Sir Gordon Wallace,
Sydney, New South Wales, Chairman; Dr
James Eric Smith, Plymouth, England; and
Mr Vincent John Moroney, Calgary,
Canada. The terms of reference for the
royal commissions are:
Taking into account existing world
technology in relation to drilling for
petroleum and safety precautions
relating thereto, what risk is there of
an oil or gas leak in exploratory and
production drilling for petroleum in
the area of the Great Barrier Reef?
What would be the probable effects
of such an oil or gas leak and of the
subsequent remedial measures on-
The coral reefs themselves;
The coastline;
The ecological and biological
aspects of life in the area?
15682/ 70 Are there localities within the area
of the Great Barrier Reef and, if so,
what are their geographical limits,
wherein the eff ects of an oil or gas
leak would cause so little detriment
that drilling there for petroleum
might be permitted?
If exploration or drilling for petroleum
in any locality within the area
of the Great Barrier Reef is permitted,
are existing safety precautions
already prescribed or otherwise
laid down for that locality regarded
as adequate and, if not, what
conditions should be imposed before
such exploration or drilling could
take place?
What are the probable benefits
accruing to the State of Queensland
and other parts of the Commonwealth
from exploration or drilling
for petroleum in the area of the
Great Barrier Reef and the extent of
those benefits?
The area of the Great Barrier Reef referred
to in the above terms of reference includes
the entire area from low watermark on the
mainland of Queensland to the outer line
of the Reef and includes also the area outside
and adjacent to the outer line of reefs.
These agreed terms of reference incorporate
some improvements and changes of
a drafting nature from the agreed terms 
announced on 29th January following the
conference on that date between the Premier
and myself.
The Premier and I are pleased that 3
persons of such eminence have agreed to be
the Commissioners. Sir Gordon Wallacc
recently retired as President of the Court of
Appeal of New South Wales. He had
previously been a judge of the Supreme
Court of that State. While at the Bar he
held office as President of the New South
Wales Bar Association in 1957-58 and Vice-
President of the Law Council of Australia
in 1957. Dr Smith is a Doctor of Science,
a Fellow of the Royal Society, Director of
the Plymouth Laboratory of the Marine
Biological Association of the United Kingdom,
Chairman of Trustees of the British
Museum of Natural History and Chairman
of the Indian Ocean Biological Centre Consultative
Committee. He has held teaching
appointments at the Universities of Manchester,
Sheffield and Cambridge and for
some years was Professor of Zoology at the
University of London. He has served on
the Science Research Council of Great
Britain and on the Council and Committees
of the Royal Society of London. As Director
of the Plymoruth Laboratory, he organised
the research undertaken by the Plymouth
staff on the effects of the ' Torrey Canyon' oil pollution on marine life. Mr Moroney
is a consultant petroleum engineer with
experience in problems of off-shore operations.
He has had over 40 years experience
with oil companies in engineering and
managerial positions throughout North and
South America. He graduated from the
Georgetown University and is a member of
the Canadian -Institute of Mining and
Metallurgy and of the American Institute
of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers.
The inquiry would be an open one and
the royal commissioners have sufficient
authority to collect any evidence required.
All interested parties could appear beforc.
the commission and state their views and
adduce evidence to support those views. The
commissioners will make announcements
on arrangements for the hearing of such
evidence. Counsel assisting the royal commissions
will -be Mr A. E. Woodward,
of the Victorian Bar and Mr
C. E. K. Hampson of the Queensland Bar.
I present the following paper:
Great Barrier Reef, Inquiry into Drilling for
Petroleum-Ministerial Statement
Dr Patterson-Will the Prime Minister
move that the House take note of the paper?
Mr GORTON-Yes. I move:
That the House take note of the paper.
W. G. MURAY.&amp; G, overnment Printer, Canberra 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
CAMBODIA
( Ministerial Statement)
lFrom the ' Parliamentary Debates', 5 May 1970]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins Prime
Minister)-by leave-For some years
North Vietnamese regular forces, and other
forces controlled by North Vietnam, have
been withdrawing across the Cambodian
border after battles in South Vietnam. The
North Vietnamese have built, in Cambodia,
base camps in which their forces could rest,
refit, regroup, and be prepared for further
military action against allied troops in
South Vietnam.
This military disadvantage was endured
with great forbearance by United States
and South Vietnamese forces-for even
though the neutrality of Cambodia was
being violated by the Communists, the
Allies continued to hope that the protests
of the Cambodian Government might lead
to a cessation of the North Vietnamese
invasion. This was a vain hope and since
the displacement of the Sihanouk Government
by the Lon Nol Government in
Cambodia, North Vietnamese and forces
controlled by them have extended and
expanded their invasion of Cambodia's
neutrality. There has been a gradually increasing
violation of this neutrality-a violation
which was grossly wrong in itself-which
was carried out by a nation which had
signed the Geneva Agreement to respect
Cambodia's neutrality-and which increasingly
gave a military advantage to the
enemy and posed growing military danger
to Allied forces in South Vietnamn.
15622170 The North Vietnamese have extended
westward from the bases they had been
occupying. They have attacked, in
Cambodia, administration centres, communications
and populated areas in Eastern
and South Eastern Cambodia. And along
with this increasingly cynical and increasingly
overt invasion, they have taken steps
desiganed to create a zone in Cambodia,
occupied by them, along virtually the entire
length of the South Vietnamese border with
Cambodia. As President Nixon pointed out,
they have embarked on a programme to
make Cambodia a vast enemy staging area,
and a springboard for attacks on South
Vietnam along 600 miles of frontier.
Thzy have in fact begun a wider invasion,
and embarked on a course which poses
greater military dangers to Allied forces
than before. This new military threat,
increased in gravity, has led to South Vietnamese
and United States forces taking
action to protect themselves by crossing the
bordcr into Cambodian Territory occupied
by thc North Vietnamese. The idecision,
reached by the President of the United
States, was taken on operational military
grounds and was designed to protect the
lives of Allied servicemen.
Those who condemn this decision, as the
Government does not, must either argue
that there has not been an increased threat
to Allied forces as a result of North Vietnamese
action-and this is scarcely arguable
or tenable-or they must hold that it 
does not matter whether there has been an
increased threat or not-that regardless of
increased danger Allied forces should be left
in that danger from the flank and should
not try to prevent it. We do not accept this.
Our own Australian forces are not engaged
in this operation and I see no prospect
that they will be. But the effect of the operation
could well be to make all Allied forces
in South Vietnam, including our own, more
safe. Our own objective for Cambodia is
known. We wish to see a neutral Cambodia
-a country which is not used by anyone
as a base or a battleground; a country
which enjoys in truth that freedom from
interference, that real neutrality which it
was guaranteed under the Geneva Agreement
and which was breached by North
Vietnam. We will try by diplomatic means to bring
this about-and to bring about a method
of international inspection designed to
ensure that respect for the neutrality of
Cambodia is real and is continuing. For let
me make this clear. We do seek a Cambodia
whose neutrality is respected in fact and
in truth. We do not seek a Cambodia which
is called neutral but which is occupied in
greater or lesser part by North Vietnam.
For this would be a continuance of the
pretence which has prevailed. It would not
mean that the neutrality of Cambodia was
real. And it would mean that South Vietnam
was endangered.
In the Government's view this is the
situation. The neutrality of Cambodia has
been consistently and progressively violated
by North Vietnam. The increasing tempo
of the violation has posed an increasingly
grave military threat to the lives of Allied
servicemen. It has also, by widening and
escalating the war, threatened to prolong it,
and to delay vietnamisation and to delay
the time when Allied forces could be
withdrawn. The action taken by the United States
and South Vietnam was action to protect
the servicemen against attack by an enemy
which was increasingly occupying a neutral
nation. We understand the reason for their
action and we find it odd that the Leader
of the Opposition ( Mr Whitlam) should, on
behalf of his Party, viciously criticise that
action. It is worth noting, Mr Speaker, that so far as I know not one member of the
Opposition, at any time, has criticised the
violation of Cambodian neutrality during
the last 5 years by the North Vietnamese.
( Honourable members interjecting)--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask honourable
members on both sides of the House
to come to order. This is an important
statement and I believe that the Prime
Minister should be given the courtesy of
being heard without interruption.
Mr GORTON-There have been no
claims that these Communist actions were
' fatefully widening the war' or that their
increasing invasion of Cambodia ought to
be condemned. There were no fulminations
from the Opposition against that violation
of neutrality. Those were Communist
actions and immune to criticism from the
Opposition. But now that counter action
has occurred, our Allies are criticised in
the Opposition-they, we are told, have
widened the war; they, we are told, have
engaged in escalation; they are in the wrong
now that this has happened.
Sir, such comments I believe are support
for the theory that Communist forces should
be allowed to operate as and when they
like; that they should be excused for
invading and occupying neutral countries;
and that it is wrong for action to be taken
to stop them and that such comments by
giving that support, to me, Sir, show a
willingness, even a desire, to accept defeat
or surrender of Allied forces in South
Vietnam. I can understand-though strongly disagree
with but I can understand-those who
wish to surrender in Vietnam, and abandon
the South Vietnamese, and let aggression
succeed. But I cannot understand those who,
while the struggle continues, are prepared
to subject Allied forces to military threat
and to endanger the lives of soldiers in
action. We entirely reject this attitude. We
will continue to work for a truly neutral
Cambodia by all means we can. But we will
not excuse our enemies and attack our
Allies in our joint endeavours to bring
peace and self-government to South Vietname
in the way the Opposition has done.
I present the following paper:
Cambodia-Ministerial Statement, 5 May 1970.
W. G. MURRAY. Government Printer, Canberra 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 56L90
CHANGES IN TOP PUBLIC SERVICE POSTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
A number of changes in top Public Service posts
will take place as a result of the retirement on 22 July of. the Chairman
of the Repatriation Commission, Brigadier Sir Frederick Chilton.
Mr Richard Kingsland, who has been Secretary of the Department of
the Interior since 1963, will succeed Sir Frederick as Chairman of the
Repatriation Commission. The Secretary of the Department of External
Territories, Mr G. H. Warwick Smith, will take over as Permanent
Head of the Department of the Interior, and at External Territories, he
will be succeeded by Mr David Hay, who has been Administrator of
Papua and New Guinea since 1967.
The new Administrator will be Mr L. W. Johnson, who
has been Assistant Administrator ( Services) since 1966.
Sir Frederick Chilton has been Chairman of the
Repatriation Commission since 1958. He was a gifted and imaginative
administrator, and established and maintained good relationships with
ex-servicemen's organisations, the medical profession and other
related authorities. Mr Warwick Smith has served for six years in the
exacting position of Secretary of External Territories. In selecting
Mr Hay as his successor, the Government has appointed a man with a
first-hand knowledge of current conditions in Papua and New Guinea.
This intimate knowledge of the country and its people should be
particularly beneficial in the period of development ahead.
The changes will take effect from 23 July 1970.
CANBERRA, May 1970 



PRESS GOñ IFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
M R J OHIN GORTON IN TOKYO, JAPAN., 7 MAY 1970
Q. Mr Prime Minister, did you have any substantive talks
yesterday with Mvr Sato about Cambodia? Could you tell us how
close are Australian and Japanese attitude s to the Cambodian
issue and America'is recent actions there?
PM: Yes, we did have some discussion on the Cambodian
situation which has of course been caused initially by the North
Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia's neutrality. I think we are
very close together in that both our countries, as I understand
it, have as their desire a really neutral Cambodia one which is
genuinely neutral, one which is not occupied by any other for-ces
and one, which, as a result of some kind of international
inspection, can be seen to remain neutral. On the question of
America's recent reaction, our own Australian attitude I think has
been made perfectly clear.
Q. I understand that very recently your Minister for
Development, Mr Swartz, has told your Parliament that Australia
is considering the possibility of offering weapons to Cambodia.
Has Australia indeed offered weapons or decided to provide
weapons assistance to Cambodia?
PM: This is a matter which is not dealt with by the Minister
for National Development in fact, but by the Minister for External
Affairs and the Government. There was a request as I understand
it for some kind of assistance from the Cambodian forces but the
Government has reached no decision on this as yet.
Q. What do you expect the Djakarta Conferenace to accomplish?
PM: L I think that the question is one which is rather a difficult
one to answer since I am asked what I expect an international
conference to accomplish. I can answer what I hope it would
accomplish and what I think it has a chance of acE-inplishing.
And that is I would hope for an expression of opinion by a number
of powers in the Asian area that a truly neutral Cam~ bodia would be
a step towards genuine peace, and that it would be in the interest
of the peoples of the world if the North Vietnamese, the Viet Cong
all those the South Vietnamese all those who are now in Cambodia,
all were to withdraw and to allow a truly neutral Cambodia. As
I said in our own House of Parliament, one means by that that
one hopes for a truly, genuinely neutral Cambodia, not one which
is called neutral, but occupied in whole or in part by North
Vietnamese forces. 2 
Q. I would like to ask you a question in Connection with the
planned British troop withdrawal from east of Suez and the question
of security in Asia. After the British withdrawal, what kind of
role would you expect Japan to perform i~ n the interests of security
in this region of the world? Precisely, do you expect japan to make
any direct contribution to the defence and security of this area?
PM: t Well, it is not for me to come to Japan and state what one
thinks Japan should do, and I understand that was the question.
What is likely to happen, although it depends to some extent onl the
result of the next election in Great Britain, is that there will be
a withdrawal of British forces, as is known,. But this does not
mean that there will not be a capacity and a willingness to bring
British forces back should a crisis develop, This is not something
which, as far ar I know, has been worked out in the detail of the
number of forces, but there will be a withdrawal and a capacity and
a willingness in certain circumstances to bring British forces back.
For our own part, we are maintaining in the area elements of an
air force, some ground troops and some naval support which we
hope will contribute to the s tability of the area. It is not for me to
comment on Japan what Japan might wish to do and I don't propose
to do that.
Q. Sir, do you believe that Prince Sihanouk, in the present
circumstances, is able to achieve the genuine neutrality that you
spoke of, and if he isn't, do you think the Lon Nol Government itself
can do it?
PM: The present Lon Nol Government is the government which
is the-government of Cambvtdia, and I would hope that the discussions
in Djakarta might make it clear that a genuine neutrality i~ s desired
for Cambodia, and that as a result of that genuine neutrality, all
foreign forces would be removed from that country. If that genuine
neutrality were in fact achieved, then surely i~ t would be a matter for
the Cambodians to decide which government then ran that country
in that kind of neutrality. But I should make it clear that as far as
Australia is concerned, the Lon Nol Government is the government
with which Australia is dealing.
Q. When you said you would hope P. 2 foreign troops will be
withdrawn from Cambi-dia, do you mean, Sir, simultaneous withdrawal
of US troops, North Vietnamese troops, and Viet Cong troops, all
of them together, at the same time simultanleously? Do you
contemplate Australia will make this request at the Djakarta
conference? ,3 
-3
PM: I wouldn't want to anticipatc the precise form that the
Djakarta Conference would follow, but I believe that the objective
that would be sought would be a Cambodia which was neutral and
in which there were not troops from other countries any other
countries. And therefore, a Cambodia which did in fact have that
neutrality which was guaranteed to it under thle Geneva Agreements
but which was violated by the North Vietnamese actions. The
only way in which that neutrality can be a reality is if there are
no foreign troops in Cambodia. This would be the objec-tive.
just exactly how that objective would be attained must obviously
be a matter for the conference. But I cannot myself see it being
attained if the suggestion is that all troops other than North
Vietnamese troops should be withirawn.
Q. Sir, you said that you might like to see some ind of
international inspection body checking the n eutrality of Cambodia.
What kind of international inspection body something from the UN
or some other kind of organisation?
PM: I understand that the Lon Nol Government itself has
suggested that the International Control Commission the ICC
might be re-established. There have been some comments on that
from the Canadian spokesman, I believe myself that as long as
there is an effective international method of inspection, and I
emphasise an effective international method of inspection, it is
not of terrific importance j ust how that international inspection
is arrived at or made up. Perhaps it might be something which was
put in by the United Nations. But the composition the actual
arrangements for such an international inspection are, I would
have thought, less important than the end result of having an
effective international inspection. Perhaps I might add perhaps
I should have said, effective and impartial.
Q. Sir, both India and Pakistan have declined to take part in
the Djakarta conference. Do you have any comments to make on
that?
PM: Only that I believe that taking part in conferences of this
kind is a matter to be decided by the Governments concerned.
If the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan have
decided that they don't wish to take part in it, that is their decision
to make and that is the comment that 1. would make upon it. ./ 4 
4
Q. Sir, in your talks with Mr Sato yesterday, did you reach
an agreement with him that you would support the ICC as the
international inspection body, or did MVr Sato agree that he would
support an Australian proposition of this kind?
PM: The talks with Mr Sato didn't go into detail of that kind at
all. A large part of the talks that we had were engaged with relations
between our own two countries in fields of trade and in fields of
cultural relations. This indeed took up most of the time, quite
contrary to what has taken up most of the time of this press conference.
But on the question of Cambodia the question that you asked me
what we did agree on was that we would like to see a genuinely
neutral Cambodia. We didn't go into the sort of details of which
you have spoken.
Q. To get away from Carntbadia, could you elaborate on j ust
what you did discuss on the matter of trade was there a complaint
from Mr Sato?
PM. No there was no complaint by Mr Sato. We were glad,
both of us, that trade relations had grown in the way in which they
have. As you know, Japan is our best customer now, and we, I think,
are Japan's third best customer. There was the problem which I
raised of the very low price for wool which is bei n g paid at the
moment not paid by Japan as a result of negotiation this is not
a niatter of any complaint, but I pointed out that the auction system
had led to a price for wool which was disastrous as far as Australian
woolgrowers were concerned. I did notice in one of the newspapers
this morning that this was reported as me asking for Japan to buy
more wool. This was not strictly accurate. What I was suggesting
was that the price for the wool that was bought might, to the ultimate
advantage of both our countries, be made higher. I pointed this out
as a difficult that Australia suffered. There are many other countries
that buy our wool, but Japan buyy more than others.
Q. To cntrry this Cambodian thing out of the repetitive realm,
assuming that the North Vietnamese troops in Cambodia do not
withdraw, and assuming that the American troops somehow get
bogged down, does your Government have a policy with respect to the
indefinite continuation of hostilities inside Cambodia? 
PM: Both my Government and myself have a policy of not
answering hypothetical questions based on assumptions which
have no basis.
Q. Prime Minister, when you were referring to wool a
moment ago, can you tell us if you put to the Japanese Prime
Minister any concrete way in which this disastrously low wool
price position could be overcome? Did you tell him that your
Government intends to suspend or do away with the auction system
which has created this?
, PM: No, Mr Barnes, I didn't do that. The object of what I
had to say was to make it clear to the Japanese Prime Minister that
this was a matter of very great concern to Australia and of
great concern to our economy. And that we believed that it would
be necessary to find some way to remedy that situation, and to
indicate to him that this should be the subject of continuing
discussicas between the two Governments and between businessmen
in Japan and the people concerned with the selling of wool in
Australia. I believe that this message that it was something which
really did need to be worked out and discussed between our
Governments was accepted by the Prime Minister and I am
hopeful that the discussions which I suggested will, as a resu lt,
take place. Perhaps they would have taken place anyway, but
I think they will now take place and I think that the Government
of Japan does know of our genuine concern. That was the object
of raising this matter not to try and work out at that level the
detailed remedy. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 57/ 1970
APPOINTMENT OF NATIONAL LIBRARIAN
otatement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. A. P. Fleming, 0. B. has been appointed to the position
of National Librarian. Mr. Fleming currently holds the oYffice of Parliamentary
Librarian. Prior to taking up this appointment in 1968, Mr. Fleming was a
Special Commercial Adviser, Department of Trade and Industry.
He will assume the duties of National Librarian on the retirement
of Sir Harold White in June.
CANBERRA 14 May 1970
BACKGROUND NOTES:-
Mr. Fleming is aged 58 and is a Bachelor of Arts of the
University of Melbourne.
Before and immediately after the war, he was a journalist with
the Argus and the Courier Mail. Mr. Fleming served in the A. 1. rising
from Private in 1939 to the rank of Lt. Colonel n 1943. He was awarded
the 0. B. E. and twice mentioned in Despatches,
His work with the Commonwealth Public Service has included the
planning and conduct of research as the first Director of the joint Intelligence
Bureau and later Controller of joint Service organisations within the
Department of Defence until 1958. Later, he was Trade Commissioner in
Paris and London and First Assistant Secretary in charge of the International
Trade Relations Division.
Mr. Flemii-g has been a member or leader of delegations to
S. E. A. T. 0. G. A. T. T. and United Nations con'ferences on trade and
development. Sir Harold White, C. B. E. has been National Librarian since
1947. When he vacated the office of Parliamentary Librarian which he had
held jointly with that o! National Librarian early in 1968, Sir Harold had
been in service of the Parliament for 45 years believed to be a record
period. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
BACKGROUND TO COMMONWEALTH-STATE
TALKS ON OFF-SHORE LEGISLATION
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates,' 15 May 1970.]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-This is not a statement on the
control of off-shore minerals or on the need
to decide where proper legal authority for
that control should lie. That is best left for
a discussion of the Bill. But last Friday the
former Minister for National Development,
the honourable member for Farrer ( Mr
Fairbairn), placed before the House his
interpretation of meetings with the States
and his belief that the Commonwealth
Government had broken commitments which
he had made with the States. I think that
that interpretation is mistaken and I believe
I should put on the record the Government's
interpretation in this matter. In
February 1969 Cabinet decided that the
Commonwealth should legislate to assert
total rights over the seabed outside the
3-mile limit. It deputed the Minister for
National Development to inform the State
Ministers for Mines of this decision. This,
Sir, was not an offer to the States. It was
not an approach which said: ' If you agree
to us legislating for control outside the
3-mile limit we will agree to you controlling
inside the 3-mile limit'. It was simply a
clear and unequivocal statement of intention
on the part of the Government.
At the Australian Minerals Council meeting
of 3rd March, the Minister made a statement
setting this out very clearly. The state-
16067/ 70 ment begins on page 39 of the tc-anscript
and the significant words are on page 41.
They are:
As to off-shore minerals other than petroleum,
the Commonwealth is of the view that it should
proceed on the footing that it enjoys total rights
outside the three-mile limit. It proposes to legislate
in pursuance of this position.
On page 44 of the transcript the Minister
was asked:
When do you intend to legislate?
And he replied:
No date has been set but I assume it wilt be
done as soon as is reasonably possible.
From that time forth all the discussions and
all the proposed arrangements were held
against the background that the Commonwealth
had announced its intention to
legislate and to legislate as soon as was
reasonably possible The Ministe'r undertook
at that meeting that there would be further
discussions with the States before the legislation
was actually introduced. But those
discussions were not to be on whether the
Commonwealth would legislate, or when it
would legislate, because clear statements of
intention had been made on that. They were
to be discussions on consequential matters
which would arise as a result of the legislation
we had announced-matters of
administration, royalties and things of that
kind. Such discussions were in fact held in 
September 1969. The March 1969 meeting
closed with the ordinary, normal, machinery
provision that the next meeting of the
Minerals Council, to discuss these matters,
would be held in Perth in February 1970.
Then on 30th July the former Minister for
National Development wrote to me. He said
that he wished to write to the States and
indicate that he was unable to hold a meeting
before the one scheduled for February
1970, and he also wished to write to them to
tell them that the Commonwealth would not
legislate unilaterally until there had been an
opportunity to discuss fully and frankly the
views he had expressed to them at the
March meeting. I replied on 18th August
raising no objection to his writing to the
States on the general matter of the meeting.
However, I said:
I would want to avoid if at all possible a situation
where the Commonwealth became committed to
long drawn out discussion or consultation with
the States on this matter. For this reason I would
prefer that you eliminate from your proposed
letter the suggestion that the Commonwealth will
not legislate unilaterally until after the completion
of full and frank discussions with the States on
this matter.
I think the Minister fully understood that I
did not want to give any assurance to the
States that we would defer legislation, for
after receiving my letter the Minister did not
write to the States in the terms he had proposed,
or, indeed, write to them at all.
Further, I think the Minister was in no
doubt that the introduction of legislation
did not depend on prior agreement with the
States, for his quotation from his letter to
me of 30th July is immediately followed by
In the meantime my Department is pressing on
with the basic work necessary for the preparation
of legislation. This will be of value whether or not
we eventually succeed in achieving an amicable
arrangement with the States.
The ' amicable arrangement' referred to was
on the regime-not on whether we should
legislate. The Minister then arranged, or
agreed to, a meeting of the Minerals Council
to be held on 26th September 1% 9. That
meeting was held against the background I
have just outlined. That is, the State
Ministers had been told by the Minister
that we proposed to legislate as soon as
possible. The discussions wbich had been
suggested were not discussions on whether
or when we should legislate, but discussions
on the administrative and other consequential effects of our legislation on what is
called the regime. And the Minister was
proceeding on the basis that the introduction
of legislation did not depend on agreement
being reached with the States.
I can see no evidence in the records
before the House that in the September
transcript there was anything to show that
this position was changed. The Minister
does not retract his previous statement that
we intended to legislate. Nor did he retract
the statement that we intended to legislate
as soon as possible. He did agree that there
would be further discussions. There have
been further discussions and I have no
doubt that there will continue to be more
discussions. But I can see no commitment
that he would delay our legislation until
after those discussions had been held. In
short, Sir, it seems to me that the transcript
shows that we were committed to further
discussions but not to prior discussions.
What happened was that the State Ministers,
through Mr Griffith, made an opening
statement expressing the view that the
petroleum legislation should be taken as
the model for further legislation. That is,
it was suggested that no attempt should be
made to discover where sovereignty and
responsibility in this matter legally residewhich
was the object of the Commonwealth
Government's legislation. The Minister
undertook to place these views before
Cabinet and, Mr Speaker, he had verbal
authority to say that he would place those
views before Cabinet. This was done by the
incoming Minister. Cabinet considered them
carefully, but it decided that -the question of
legal responsibility should in the national
interest be determined.
That meeting of 26th September then
discussed, from page 6 of the transcript
until page 39, the method by which new
titles should be granted in what was called
the ' interim' period, or the ' interregnum'.
That is, I take it, the period between the
date of the discussions and the date when
Commonwealth legislation was to be introduced.
That discussion on the method of
issuing titles arose because the Minister had
told the States in March that pending the
introduction of the legislation he had
announced to them he did not wish the
States to issue new titles outside the 3-mile
limit unless the Commonwealth had first
concurred. 
The States did not wish to accept this.
They wished to issue titles themselves out
to the continental shelf, with the Commonwealth
merely having the authority to
object if there was a Commonwealth bead
of power involved. It was this matter with
which the discussions of 26th September
were concerned, from, as I have said, page
6 to page 39 of the transcript. I can see in
them nothing to substantiate the claim that
they contained -any commitment, or any
agreement, as to whether or when the Commonwealth
should legislate. But the former
Minister thinks he does see in them passages
which show he entered into a commitment.
So I will examine these passages which he
quotes, for while I do not for a moment
reflect on his own beliefs, I do not think
that the passages he quotes support his own
beliefs. He quotes a passage from his letter
to me, which reads:
I will suggest that the matter be taken up at the
next scheduled meeting of the Minerals Council,
which is set down for February 1970.
And he says rightly that I did not object to
this. But this means merely that the
Minister had written to me saying he did
not feel that he could propose a firm date
for a meeting before February and the
' matter' referred to is the discussion on the
administrative arrangements consequent on
the Minister's announcement that we intended
to legislate. Next he quotes a
passage from page 18 of the transcript in
which he agrees to hold a meeting in
December, instead of February, if the States
wish. This is evidence that there was to be
another meeting or meetings, but that question
was never in doubt. In fact there have
bbee enm omree, e tibnugts ita nids ntohte rae cwoimll, m iIt maemn t suthrea, t'
nothing would be done by the Commonwealth
before there was a further meeting
or meetings. After all, we had already
announced our intentions to legislate as
soon as possible and discussions had to be
held on matters flowing from that discussion.
The former Minister next quotes Mr
Griffith on page 24 of the transcript:
I have pressed you to a meeting in December and
with this in mind-the possibility of the status quo
arrangements being continued until the Commonwealth
and the States come to a mutual arrangement-
I would gladly withdraw and suggest you
call the meeting when you are ready.
The former Minister asks: ' Are not those
the words of a man who believes he has
entered into an agreement?' But the transcript shows that the answer to that question
must be no, because what Mr Griffith was
saying to the Minister was: ' Let us-the
States-continue to issue titles as we are
doing at present. Do not change that during
the interregnum. If you will agree to this I
will not press for an early meeting.' But the
Minister replied that he could not agree to
the suggestion as put and that if the States
issu~ ed titles without first conferring with
the Commonwealth-' It is on your own
head.' Mr Griffith at once replied-page
26 of the transcript:
It looks to me as if you will not come our way at
all. You are not proposing to budge an inch from
the March statement. You are not prepared to
give us anything.
Mr Speaker, those are not the words of a
man who believes he has entered into an
agreement. The next passage quoted, from
page 30, is an exchange between Mr
Griffith and Mr Bowen which shows nothing
except that Mr Griffith was asking what
would happen under the legislation which
the Commonwealth had said it proposed
to introduce to assert control outside the
3-mile limit. The last passage quoted by
the Minister arises in this way: The Minister
stated on page 36 that in the interim period
the Commonwealth could not go further
than to say that it would support titles
issued by the States if there had been consultations
with the Commonwealth, but he
would not guarantee to support such titles
if there had not been consultations. Mr
Griffith said he was prepared to leave that
matter on that basis and suggested not that
the States would accept a later meeting to
meet the convenience of the Commonwealth
but that they wanted a later meeting
-in May-so that there would be an
opportunity for some of the members to
visit the north of Western Australia at that
time. To this the Minister replied:
All right, and we would have an interim meeting
as soon as we are ready to discuss this particular
matter. Since the particular matter discussed for the
last 30 pages of the transcript bad been the
method of issuing titles in the interim
period I think it is difficult to think that
this particular matter can refer to anything
but that.
Sir, I have spent some time on these
excerpts quoted by the former Minister
because they are the evidence he produces
to suggest a breach of commitment by the 
Commonwealth. I do not think that they
support that charge. They do show a commitment
to further discussions. But the
Government does not think they show a
commitment to refrain from announcing
legislation before those discussions. Mr Fife,
a member of the Council, summed it up
on page 39 of the transcript when talking
about the Press release which might be
made. He said:
I think all we need to say is that we have
asked the Commonwealth to agree to a proposition
similar to the off-shore petroleum legislation.
Secondly the Commonwealth has agreed to consider
this proposal.
That was all. Yet I do not believe the
honourable member for Farrer would make
the statements he has made unless he
thought he had a basis for them. We have
only the transcripts to go on. It may be that
there was an impression not shown by the
transcripts. Maybe there was an impression
left around the table that there would be
discussions-not just discussions but discussions
before the Commonwealth proceeded
on the course or announced again
the course which it had previously
announced, with additions. But the records
do not show it. All they show is that while
there was an undertaking for further discussion-
which has taken place on some
matters-there was no undertaking recorded
by the Minister on behalf of the Commonwealth
that that legislation would be
deferred until after those discussions.
But, even assuming that there was an
impression, an understanding, a feeling in
the minds of the people around the table,
which does not appear in the records of the meeting-let us assume that that is so
-what in fact flows from that? It would
mean, on that assumption, that there was
an impression in the Minerals Council that
before further discussion the Minerals
Council would be informed of the Commonwealth's
decision on their proposals to
it. Well, the Minerals Council was not so
informed. It was not called together. It
was not so informed although each
individual member of the Council was
individually informed. So I suggest that
even if that impression was there-and this
is not evident in the transcript-that is the
most that can be made from that approach.
So I believe that the records sustain no
charge of ill faith. I think the most that
can be said of any impression, if there was
any, was that the Council was not called
together to be told of the Commonwealth's
rejection of its proposals for petroleum
legislation. I think that all these papers are before
the House for analysis by each honourable
member. I believe that that seems a flimsy
ground on which to accuse the Government
of dishonour and it is not supported by the
record. I do not doubt for one moment
that the former Minister has given his
interpretation with sincerity and that he has
expressed his views of the feeling of the
meeting at which he presided-and he could
well be supported by others. I do not doubt
that he has given that interpretation with
sincerity. But, Sir, so has the Government
on the record which it has placed before
these Houses of Parliament.
Motion ( by Mr Snedden) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
W. G. MuRRAY, Government Printer, Canberra 



LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF THE PRIME MNISTER
OF CANADA, MR P. TRUDEAU, AT PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA 19 MAY 1970
Speech ~ Y the Pr~ ime Minister, Mr John Gorton.
Mr Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen
It is my great pleasure on this occasion to propose the
toast of our distinguished guest and I do this for a variety of reasons.
One, Sir, is because we are very glad indeed to welcome you here as
a person, and because we are very glad indeed to welcome you here as
the Prime Minister of Canada.
It is a long time I think 1958 s3ince we last had a visit
from the Prime Minister of Canada, and Sir, this is far too long a time
to intervene before there are reciprocal visits from Prime Ministers of
Australia to Canada and of Canada to Australia.
We have a great deal in common. Your country, Sir, Ithink
became officially at any rate a British country on September 18,
17 39 when the surrender of Quebec to Wolfe on the Plains of Abraham took
place. If it had not been for that little disagreement which was settled
in that way, Australia might not have had to wait so long before out East
Coast was discovered in 1770 because the discoverer of our East Coast
was a Captain Cook who was in the boats which took the soundings to
decide how the army of Wolfe could get to the Plains of Abraham in order
to deal with Q uebec. But at least we have that in common.
Some other things we have not had in common. We have
never been invaded by the hardy colonials who cut their way through the
Maine wilderness in order to invade Canada. But you have repelled on
e very occasion both then and in 1812, the incursions from your neighbour
to your South. We, on the other hand have been delighted to welcome
them when we needed their help in order to remain a country.
But this is not all that we have got. This is only the
beginning. If you take the two countries Canada and Australia the
physical way in which you see them on a map must immediately strike
your imagination. The size is roughly the same... you are bigger, I
know, but the size is roughly the same. Then there are large areas
in both our countries which are underpopulated and which because of
the climatic and other conditions which exist are likely to remain
underpopulated. 
2-
We both have populations which, on a world basis, are
not large but are growing, and we both have a vibrant economy,
we both have a feeling of excitement and development in our countries.
We also have a great number of problems in common.
I think you, Sir, have to deal as a Federal Government
with what are called provinces in Canada and there are some
difficulties about arranging things about taxation and other matters.
We have much the same here except, of course, we are not dealing
with provinces. We are dealing with States. But there is that same
difficulty, that same awkwardness in making a Federal system wor'k
which your country and our country both have.
There is, too, the desire that you have and which you
have expressed and which we have, to try and see that as much of the
ownership as possible of the development inside our countries is
retained by the citizens of those countries. Rumour has it, Sir, that
there will be established in Australia something called an Australian
Industry Development Corporation, and rumour also has it that
there will be established in Canada something calledi a Canadian
Development Corporation both with the same objective in mind. So
there is another instance of the approaches to the problems we
have in common. Who is going to pay for the infrastructure for the mineral
developments in your country and in our country? It is extraordinary
how closely our problems parallel each other. This applies even
when we come to the problem that both of us are growing grains of
various kinds which the world does not wish to buy in the quantities
we wish to grow them at the price which is payable for them to be
grown. All of this indicates that what we decided this morning
that there should be, if possible at intervals of not greater than
two years, consultations between Ministers and officials of our
two countries on these various problems, on how we would compete
with each other in the world, but compete in a way which did not
allow one to be used against the other, of how we would explain to
each other the approaches we took on the problems we had and perhaps
learn from each other; of how in the field of science where we have
a unique opportunity in the Barrier Reef to out up an Institute of
Marine Biology, and you in the Arctic have unique opportunities for
scientific investigation in that field will be of benefit to both our
countries. 3 
-3
But even mine, may I express our very
great delight that Canada, a country which has naturally in the past
been more oriented towards Europe than t cverds the Pacific, should
now under your Leadership be showing increased interest, increased
desire to understand, increased desire to help those countries whom you
have described as countries which live on the rim of the Pacific.
We are delighted that this interest is extending to the Pacific and to
the countries of South-East Asia, because here is another great
opportunity for two countries such as ours to help, to the top of our
bent, in a region which must be of interest to us both. For our own
part, what happens in South-East Asia is cf continuing concern for us
for we live on the perimeter of it. For your part, , ou are now showing
an interest there too, and if I may say so, Sir, I believe that in doing
that you are play: ing the part of a world statesman for what happens in
Asia in the future and what happens to their people in the future could
well decide the future peace and progress of the world as a whole.
For all these reasons, Sir, for the thinge -we have in
common, the problems we have in common, the ways we can help each
other, the interests we are now having in common in this part of the
world, we are delighted to welcome you, we hope you will come back
and I beli eve that this visit will show that during the decade of the
seventies, our two countries will1, in a region of interest to both of
us, help other people, and by doing that, help the world in general.
So you are welcome, Sir. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 58/ 1970
MEETINGBETWEEN THE PR~ TI MINISTERS
GF CA NAA t AUTRALIA
joint oita~ er. nent19 M A Y 1970
In the course of his official visit to Australia the Prime
Minister of Canada, the Right Honourable P. E. Trudeau, M. P. met vi th
Mr. Gorton at Parliament House this moraing for official discussions
and later with Cabinet Ministers in the Cabinet Room.
The Australian Government exnoressed great pleasure at the
Canadian Government's increasing interest i the Pacific and South East
Asian area. The Prime Ministers' talks affirmed the importance of
the closest relations between Australia and Canada. They discussed
means of fostering periodic consultations between the two Governments
and between Canadian and Australian Ministers and officials. These
consultations will bring under review matters of common interest
affecting the two countries including those in the economic field,
international political developments, multilateral trade and economic
conditions as well as the future development of trade, investment and
other business activity. The Prime Ministers envisaged these talks also
extending to matters relating to cultural exchanges, communications,
science, technology and civil aviation. Whilst there would be no fixed
timetable for regular meetings it was expoected that these discussions would
take place either between Ministers or oftficials not less frequently than
every two years alternately in Ottawa and Canberra.
The course of recent events in Cambodia and the Djakarta
conference, including the call for the reactivation of the International
Control Commission, were brought under review in the course of a
discussion of world trends. The ' rnDorta:: ce of foreign aid to the
stability and the welfare of developing nations and the scope for the development
of Australian and Canadian aid programmes in the region were discussed.
The discussions in Ottawa between exporter members of the
International Grain-s Agreement on 4 and 6 May and the problems likely
to arise from Britain's ' negotiations to enter the European Economic
Community were reviewed.
Mr. Trudeau reviewed the development of Canada's nuclear power
programme and its role in the country's economic and industrial future.
The visit of Mr. Trudeau, following upon Mr. Gorton's official
visit to Canada last year, symbolised the ess-ential quality of the historic
and friendly relationship between the countries and served to re-emphasise
,~ the value to this relationship of continuing exchanges on the manymatr
of common interest.
CANBERRA, 19 May,. 1970
Mr. Trudeau noted that if the International Control Commission were
reactivated it would be essential to have its functions clearly defined and
effectively supported. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 58/ 1970
( FFSHORE MINERALS LEGISLATION Y
StateMent bytePrm inister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, announced today that the
Mmister for National Development as President of the Australian Minerals
Council had invited the State Ministers for Mines to attend a meeting of the
Council which would be held in Adelaide on Tuesday 9th June.
Early next week and well prior to the meeting of 9th June, the
Commonwealth would send to the States the draft Offshore M1ining Bill together
with the Heads of Agreement suggested by the Commonwealth to be the basis
of arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States for the administration
of the legislation. The Offshore Mining Bill would not be introduced into the Commonwealth
Parliament until after the discussions with the States in the Australian Minerals
Council. In the meantime the debate on the Territorial Sea and Continental
Shelf Bill which was introduced in the Federal Parliament on 16 April, would be
held over until after the meeting.
Mr. Gorton said that the Commonwealth Government remained
firmly of the view that it was highly desirable in Australia's national and
international interests to have the legal position as, to the respective jurisdiction
of the Commonwealth and the States in offshore areas resolved as soon as
possible. As had been indicated by the Minister ffor National Development in
his second reading speech on the Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill on
16th April 1970, this would be a matter for decision by the courts.
Mr. Gorton added that as an earnest of the Commonwealth's desire
to see this matter settled, the Commonwealth Government had decided that it
would meet the legal costs of the States in conducting their case. Although
the Commonwealth wished to see the issues determined by the High Court, this
in no way detracted from the Commonwealth's wish to work in close co-operation
with the States in the effective and eff ic ient administration of Australia's off shore
areas. With this in mind the Minister for National Development at the meeting
of the Australian Minerals Council on 9th June would be seeking to establish
a sound working relationship between the State Governments and the
Commonwealth Government.
CANBERRA May 1970 



3JUjs7oV
FOR PRESS PM. No. 60/ 1970.
HAROLD HOLT PORTRAIT FOR KING'S HALL
The Prime Minister, as Chairman of the
Historic Memorials Committee, announced today that, on the advice
of the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board, the Committee had accepted
a portrait of the former Prime Minister, Mr Harold Holt.
The portrait will hang in King's Hall at Parliament
House, Canberra. It was the work of the Sydney artist, Mr W. E.
Pidgeon, who had to do the painting from photographs and films of the
late Prime Minister. Mr Holt had not sat for his official portrait at
the time of his death in 1967.
CANBERRA, 22 May 1970
BacLkground Njotes
The Historic Memorials Committee comprises
Mr J. G. Gorton, Prime Minister ( Chairman)
Sir Alister McMullin, President of the Senate
Sir William Aston, Speaker of the House of Representatives
Mr A. S. Hulme, Vice-President of the Executive Council
Mr E. G. Whitlam, Leader of the Opposition
Senator Lionel Murphy, Leader of the Opposition in the Senate
The Art Advisory Board comprises:
Mr W. A. Dargie ( Chairman)
Sir Daryl Lindsay
Mr Robert Campbell
Mr Douglas Pratt
Sir Russell Drysdale.
Bi -o graphical Notes about the artist
Mr Pidgeon won the Archibald Prize in 1958 and 1961 and has
painted portraits of a number of prominent people including Sir William
Aston, Speaker of the House of Representatives. 



* 4,
sAg f# 0
FOR PRESS: P. M. No 61/ 1970
VISIT BY THE POPE
Statement by the Prime Minister, John Gorton
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, said tonight that he was
delighted that the Pope would be visiting Australia.
It would be an historic occasion for Australia and for the
Catholic Church. It would be the first time the Po0pe had travelled so
far from the Holy City.
Mr. Gorton said he felt sure the visit would be warmly welcomed,
not only by the large Roman Catholic community, but by all Australians.
CANBERRA 29 May, 1970 



J; 4
FOR PRESS P. M. No 62/'-970
ELECTION RESULTfS
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
My warmest congratulations go to Sir Henry Bolte on leading
his Liberal Government back for its sixth term of office. Victoria can
be sure of a continuation of" stable, responsible and progressive Government
with Sir Henry and his Liberal team returned to the Treasury Benches.
I am sorry that Mr. Steele Hall was unsuccessful in South Australia.
He was a vigorous champion for his State, and had achieved much in his
two years of office. T here was little variation in voting trends compared
with the last state election in South Australia, but electoral redistribution
was a key factor in Labor's success.
The huge drop in ALP support was the feature of the by-election
in the A. C. T. The Labor Party's first preference vote was down by a
staggering 31 percent fromn 67. 72 percent in, the General Election seven
months ago to 36.06 percent on the votes counted so far. To some
extent, this is a tribute to the personal popularity and standing of the
previous Labor member, the late Mr. Jim Fraser. But such a massive
defection must be cause for concern for the Labor Party.
Despite the field of seven candidates, the Liberal candidate,
Mr. Hermes, has improved marginally the vote for his Party, compared
with the General Election last year. However, it is disappointing that
more of the former Labor vote did not come to us.
For the first time since Jim Fraser entered the Parliament in
1951, the election in the A. C. T. will be decided on preferences, and
so it will be some days before the result is known..
CANBERRA 31 May 1970 



-5JUN D9ElP0
FOR PRESS: P. M. No 63/ 1970
RE-APPOINTMENT OF SIR ALEXAINDER DOWNER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Sir Alexander Downer, K. B. lhas been re-appointed as
High Commissioner for Australia in the United Kingdom for a further
term until 24 October 1971.
Sir Alexander has given distinguished service as High
Commissioner since his appointment on 25 October 1964, and I am
grateful that he has agreed to serve our interests in the United
Kingdom for an extended period.
CANBERRA 2 June 1970
BACKGROUND Sir Alexander Downer's initial appointment as High
Commissioner was for a period of five years from 25 October 1964.
He was re-appointed in 1969 for a further term until 24 October 1970. 



FOR DREjS Jfpg
P. M. No 64/ 1970
THE TASMAN PARTNERSHIP
Statement Issued b1y the Prime Ministers c Australia
and New Zealapdat Canberra on 5 June, 1970
We have reviewed the community of purpose which inspires
all our dealings as partners across the Tasman. We believe that our
two Nations have attained a degree of harmcny unique in international
relations. We believe also that as our two countries l~ ace up to the
challenges of a rapidly changing world they must nurture the full
strength of this spirit in order that the Australia/ Nlew Zealand partnership
may attain its highest potential. This joint commit tnent should not be
pursued as an end in itself but rather as a bilateral e2ifort at Government
level which will, in turn, reinforce the aspirations coi our two peoples
to promote a tangible improvement in the climate of international relations.
In the final analysis, therefore, the fruits of Trans-Tasman collaboration
are intended to benefit the nations with which Australia and New Zealand
are associated in the wider search for peace and security in the world.
Over the past year, it has been rewarding for Australians
and New Zealanders to join in celebrating the epic voyages of Captain
James Cook two centuries ago. After this firSt common strand in our
history there came a parallel sequence of exploration, settlement and
economic and social development. Moreover, it is no accident that
in times of stress and challenge, the threads of our history have again
been intertwined. Our partnership was baptized by the gallantry at
Callipoli and during the last world conflict. The C" anberra Pact is a
contnqtrg pledge by Australia and New Zealand to joini their efforts
in peace as in war, and thus to forge a lasting bond between the two
nations. It is fitting, therefore, that we should in 111970 meet in this
same spirit of partnership to intensify the range of our joint co-operation,
for the logic of history and the realities of political and economic geography
suggest that Australia and New Zealand should act in close concert one
with the other. Indeed, if our two peoples are to fu] lfil the vocation of
nationhood in the modern world, their energies should be harnessed in the
most productive way.
In charting the future course of Australia, New Zealand
partnership, we continue to be guided by the following principles: ./ 2 
On all major matters affecting our common interest, including
tile conduct of our international relations, whether at the regional
level, in the Commonwealth context, in the United Nations or
elsewhere, we will continue the closest bilateral consultation:
recognising that there are cases in which our national interests
may not be indentical or in which we may adopt different
approaches to the solution of common problems, the habit of
sustained contact between our two Governments assumes special
importance. In questions of Defence, the co-ordination of effort in areas
such as planning, purchasing, standardisation of equipment,
training and operational procedures should be regarded as a
first priority by our Armed Services.
In the field of Trade, the good progress made under the aegis
of NAFTA should be consolidated and expanded to lead to the
maximum flow of trade and the highest practicable degree of
economic rationalisation between the two countries in the
interests of their national development.
The administrative effort of both Governments should be directed
towards facilitating increased collaboration in all fields.
Attempts by non-Governmental agencies to promote new areas
of Australian/ New Zealand co-operation, or to lend greater
substance to the wide range of existing contact between our two
peoples should be encouraged.
CANBERRA June 1970 



PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF
THE RT. HON. KEITH HOLYQAKE, CH MP
CANBERRA, ACT JUNE 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, MP
Mr Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have welcomed many Heads of Government at Parliamentary
Luncheons, but I think that none has been more welcome than our Guest
of Honour here today. In one way, because we know him so well and
we have had such close associations with him and with New Zealand,
this official function may seem a little peculiar; for after all, Mvr
Holyoake, the P rime Minister has been virtually a commuter to
Australia over the years, constantly coming in and out. But this is
the first occasion on which h_ 3 has paid us an official visit, and we
are delighted that you have done this, Sir, because it gives us the
opportunity to provide an official welcome and to underline the
relationship between our two countries in this way.
You have, Sir, been Prime M. inister of New Zealand for ten
years which have brought new problems to your country as it has to
all others and you are not only the Prime Minister of New Zealand, but
the doye n of all Commonwealth Prime Ministers.
We have, in Australia, a special affection for you and a
special family feeling for New Zealand and for all New Zealanders.
I remember with pleasure that the last occasion you and I were at
a Parliamentary Luncheon was in Wellington when you gave an official
welcome to myself and this is a delightful chance to return that on
behalf of all Australians.
Although Captain Cook, in a way, discovered both of us
two hundred years ago, it was not really until 1944 that our two countries
entered into the first comprehensive bilateral agreement that has been
between us, an agreement for co-operation in defence, for consultation
at Ministerial and other le vels in many other matters. We had formal
trade treaties dating back to 1922, but the Canberra Pact of 1944 was the
first broad, direct agreement, out of which our association and the
relationship between our two countries has grown and strengthened
over the years since then. 
2
Yet we had already fought together in one World War,
and we were fighting in another at that time, and we had together
immortalised the name of ANZAC.
But since that first formal agreement almost thirty
years ago, -e have continued that partnership and sat side by side
in world councils and in regional councils. Together we spoke with
the same voice for the smaller nations at San Francisco when the
United Nations Charter was drawn up. Tugether we joined our Pacific
partner, the United States of America, in the ANZUS Pact. We
are in SEATO and ANZAM together, in the Colombo Plan, in ECAFE,
in ASPAC and in the Asian Bank.
We have both played our part i n the Commonwealth of
Nations. We have been in Korea and Malaysia together, and we are
now together in Vietnam. More recently in Djakarta, our fbreign
Ministers sat together at a conference which, I think for the first time,
indicated the interest of the Asian countries of this region and of ourselves
in seeking to find a political settlement to the problems of Cambodia,
a diplomatic break-through and again, one in which we both shared.
We have had our Free Trade Agreement which has worked
well for both our countries. We have had our discussions on defence
standardisation and have declared our jea diness to share military
commitments in Malaysia and Singapore after the British withdrawal.
There iS ahead of both of us in this decade of the seventies,
as the points of power and pressure around the world shift and change,
and have different effects, a new opportunity for doing things together
for our own national interest, and for the security and advancement
of the region in which we both find ourselves.
It may be possible to make a greater impact with aid to
developing nations in our region if some of it is given jointly by
Australia and New Zealand. This is one matter that you have raised
already, and we look forward to examining it more closely and
s ympathaically. But Australians and New Zealanders, living on the perimeter
of Asia, are becoming more involved in that region as each year goes
by. There are changes taking place there which will shape the whole
course of our future and, as I think, the future of the world. These
changes there, and in the South Pacific, are changes which offer to
your country and to my country, further opportunities of that joint
interest, that joint assistance which we have given over the years just
past. ./ 3 
3
Together we are providing substantial aid already,
but perhaps the contribution we can make can be measured not
just in terms of physical aid but by example, the example of
democracy at work in a stable environment where progress,
material progress is joined to the higher values of the individual
happiness in a society, where the imperatives of youth are
understood and given their proper place alongside but not superseding
the judgment and wisdom of older generations.
I think that our two countries can together be a bridge
between the old civilisations of Europe and the new civilisations
or not new civilisations but the developing countries of our own
region. I am sure we can do more things together than we could do
apart. And, therefore, this visit, as an indication of our
intention to do things together, gives the opportunity to welcome you,
but not only to welcome you, but to welcome the fact that these two
countries, with so much in common, so close together, have the
same outlook, share the same determination to do what we can
for ourselves and our neighbours as we have in the past. This is
another great reason, Sir, why I am delighted to welcome you on
this occasion.
L 



FEDERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF THE
LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA
Canberra, A. C. T. 8 JUNE 1970
õ peech! th_ ePrime Minister, Mr. 14ohngorton
Mr. President, Parliamentary Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen:
It will be twenty-one years next December since the
Liberal Country Party coalition assumed the Governme.. of this nation.
They are twenty-one years in which there have been three wars Korea,
the Malayan emergency and now Vietnam; twenty-one years of great
national development and industrial progress. There has been an
increase in the population perhaps greater than any other country has
had, except Asian countries, in that period of time. It has been
a periodd gready a~ pnded trade; a period in which our exports have
been immensely developed; a period of growing involvement with
that area of Asia to which we find ourselves contiguous; a period of
improvement of the living standards generally for our population; a
period of greatly expanded social services; a period a2 greatly
expanded opportunity for the individual.
We have helped to bring this about, because at the time when we
came into office, wa stood for the right of the individual to engage in the
occupation of his choice and to so conduct himself in that occupation as
he believed best. We stood ainstthe concept that the individual
ought to be told by the State that his enterprise could riot be f reely
used in a field of his own choosing because there were ce-rtain areas
in which the state might forbid it.
We stood for the concept that the Government should create
a climate where individual enterprise was encouraged, and where
the planning of enterprise and its expansion was a matter for the
myriad individuals engaged in it. We stood against the concept that
all planning in all fields should be undertaken by a government or
governments and forced upon the citizens of this country.
We stood for a political system where elected representatives
of a party should themselves decide the policies to be followed by that
party. We stood &amp; Insjt a system which made elected representatives
subject to direction and instruction from unelected persons from
outside. And that we were right in all these attitudes ic, I believe,
evident from the results of this past twenty, nearly twenty-one years. / 2 
Since I spoke to you-: ast, s~ e _ j
two years ago, other significant advances havedeen made in many
areas in Australia, and new initiatives have been taken.
We have found ourselves in a situation where our own
defeuce has necessarily had to occupy our attention in a way which
it has never needed to do in the past years of our history. We have found
ourselves in a situation where our involvement with the countries -of Asia, our
political involvement, our economic assistance has necessarily hald to
grow because we have become contiguous to, and in a sense, a part of
this region of the world, this region of Asia in which we live.
I do not need, I think, to explain to you the new initiatives
which my colleague, the Minister for Defence has undertaken in the field
of defence, the new burdens imposed upon this country, n or the new
economic assistance which my colleague, the Minister for External
Affairs has beea instrumental in extending to the countries to our North,
nor the political initiatives which led, just recently, to that Conference
in Djakarta initiated by an Asian nation to which we were asked and to
which we so greatly contributed.
In other areas, we have gone into an overseas shipping
service let me quickly add, Sir in, partnership with private
enterprise. We have given attention to the requirements of the aborigines
in our midst. We have managed, after some attempts which did not
succeed, to redistribute electoral boundaries. We have given attention
to new roads agreements, adding $ 500 million over five years and
breaking the old requirement that 40 per cent of this must be spent in
country areas. We have taken the decision to convert to the metric
system. We have taken the decision to introduce nuclear power. We
have taken many initiatives, one of which I will speak of later, to provide
incentives for, and to help to maximise Australian ownership of
Australian industry. We have greatly increased aid for the performing
arts, established an Australian film and television development
corporation. We have introduced a tapered means test which gives
incentive to people to save and to earn because their pensions are
not automatically cut out if their means as assessed or their earnings
are above a small amount, and in this particular field of social
welfare, increased pension rates, increased unemployment and sickness
benefits, given full health insurance for low-income families and newlyarrived
migrants, are in process of introducing the new health scheme
and embarked on a omprehensive -programme of. homne care for the aged.
Sir, these are only sonio of ihe new things, some of the
new initiatives which have been taken in-. that period of time, and I
believe that they continue the tradition of this Party to care for people
and to bring new thought to new problems as they arise. 
-3-
Sir, we had in -the progranmme which we have followed,
three proposals in particular which have occasioned much debate in
the country and in the Parliament. One is the health scheme promised
at the last election which I very much hope will become law this week;
one is the Act to set up the Industry Development Corporation which has
already become law, and one is the proposal to discover which Government
has the legal responsibility for the seas which lap Australia's coast.
Each of these matters is important. Each of them, I think, is
illustrative of an approach of the Libemal Party, and about each of them
I wish to talk to you briefly.
The medical benefits scheme, or the health scheme, is
designed, as you know, to remove the fear of heavy doctors' bills
from the insured patient. In order to do this it was necessary to
remove that fear from those patients who had to attend special ists
and who therefore became liable for the higher fees which specialists
charge. And in order to achieve that it was necessary that Government
subventions and fund benefits should be greater for such patients than
they were for patients who did not need or receive specialist treatment.
This led to considerable opposition from a section of the
doctors and this opposition was reflected in debates in the Party room
and in the Parliament. It also led to protracted negotiations and
discussions between my colleague, the Minister for Health, the
Australian Medical Association, and organisa tions representing sections
of thc. general practitioners.
The main arguments advanced agains t the proposals
were if specialists received higher bcnefits frorm the funds and the
Government, evc.,-y doctor would seek to become a specialist and
there would be no general : izactitioners. But since specialists now
charge and receive higher fees from their patients, it is, I think,
doubtful if this argument is valid.
The second argument
consult specialists without having to
everyone would consult a specialist.
not believe that this will happen, but
scheme will finally decide this point,
out to be well grounded, then further
to it. was that if patients were able to
pay a monetary penalty, then
For a variety of reasons we do
only time and the operation of the
and if the fears expressed turn
attention will have to be given
But now, or shortly, all those who need medical
attention, even of the most specialised kind, will be able to get it
without incurring a burden of crippling debt. I think this is an advance
which illustrates that care for the individual which is the Liberal
approach and of which the organisation and the Party can be proud. 
-4-
but I must warn you of one thing.
Neither our scheme, nor the scheme of our opponents,
will achieve its desired end unless the majority of doctors charge the
co~ mmon fee and unless that common fee is only altered at reasonably
spaced periods and by reasonable amounts.
Turning now to the Austral ian Industry Development
Corporation, I speak of an Act which was attacked, for reasons
incomprehensible to me, as an Act which somehow violated . Liberal
principles. Let me give you some of the reasons for passing this
Act. Ouir nation is going throtgh a period of industrial
expansion and of great mineral development. We need large and
continuing infusions of capital from overseas in order to sustain this.
In the last five years, one-sixth of all such investment capital came
from oversea-s. And inevitably that infusion of capital tends to bi ing
with it a greater degree of overseas ownership and control of our
la rger industries and our mineral developments and ultimately cf
our processing of our minerals.
As one example of this, overseas investment in mining
five years ago was $ 34 million in the year. It has risen to something
like $ 250 million in the year, while Australian control production
in minerals alone has dropped from 63 per cent in 1963 to 47 per cent
in 1967. At the same time, Australian requirement to service
existing capital by remitting abroad, has risen from 8. 3 per cent
to 10. 5 per cent of our export earnings in the last five years. And
there is a build-up ot commitment s for further remittances in the
future because income earned in Australfia by overseas investors
and ploughed back has more than doubled in five years.
Sir, these are prices we can afford to pay for
development. We can afford to pay, for 4w benefits ' we
get outweigh the costs of which I have spoken, and we couldn'.. develop
as we should without this influx. But though they are prices we can
afford to pay, they are not prices we should pay unless we must.
So we should provide the opportunity to retain as much Australian
ownership and as much Australian control as we can, provided we
do not inhibit growth. To that end, we have brought down guidelire s for
borrowing inside Australia which provide incentives towards
Australian ownership. We have brought down a'takeover code"
and we are proposing to bring down the matter of convertible notes
which again -will provide an opportunity and incentive for Australian 
5.7
ownership. And the Australian Industry ievelopment Corporation is
designed to further these ends.
It is designed to borrow abroad, on behalf of Australian
companies which ask it to do so, which it judges to be viable, and which
might not themselves be able to borrow, and which might '-ereforo
have to surrender equity to an overseas partner.
Its objectives cannot be claimed to be opposed to Liberal
principles, and indeed, I do not think I have heard its objectives so
claimed. Nor, do I believe, can its method of operation. True, it is
provided with capital by the Government, but it will be autonomous.
It ' will be governed by directors drawn from the field of private
enterprise and applying the judgments and standards of private
enterprise to applications to borrow. It will have no power to
interfere with a company or to act financially on behalf of a company,
unless it is by that company asked to act. It will be subject to the
same taxes as other companies engaged in its field. It will compete
on equal terms, and it cannot do any more than compete.
It will indeed offer a choice to a borrower, and the
preservation and expansion of the right of choice has always been a
basic tenet of Liberalism, ever since 1949 when Sir Robert Menzies
pointed out the need to retain the right of choice.
Sir, if this is a departure from Liberal principlae,
a foray into socialism, then I suppose on that test, so is TAA, or
the Commonwealth Trading Bank or the State Savings Banks or the
Australian National Shipping Line, or a myriad other enterprises.
I think that this action will, in the future, be hailed as a service to
Australia. I believe it will help to retain the greatest possible
Australian ownership of growing Australian enterprises without
interfering with that inflow from abroad that we need. Indeed, I think
it will be an adjunct to the growth of Australian private enterprise,
of Australian private enterprise industry and to help it grow as
Australian industry. Surely, Sir, these aims are proper ones for a Liberal
Party. In turning to the proposal, somewhat loosely described
as offshore minerals legislation, we turn to one which has, I think,
been greatly misunderstood. It has been referred to as an attempt
to take the benefits of mineral deposits on the seabed away from the States.
It isn't. It has been described as an attempt to take away States' legal 
-6
rights. It isn't. It is purely and simply an attempt to discover,
by the only means known to me, who is legally responsible for the
cortrol of the seas around Australia, who has legal rights which are
at present in unresolved dispute.
We want, and we believe, that the nation needs a
clear legal definition of this matter which we do not now have. Both
the State Governments and the Commonwealth Government claim this
legal responsibility and both claim it from low water mark to the outer
Continental shelf. The legal claim of the States is not confined to the
area between low water mark and the three-mile limit any more than
the cl aim of the Commonwealth is confined to the area from the threemile
limit to the Continental shelf.
We are the only nation which does not know what the
legal position is and where sovereignty lies, and it can surely not be
claimed to be an act of centralism to seek to discover this. In
Canada, the issue was resolved by stating a hypothetical case to the
High Court or the equivalent of the High Court. It is not possible
to do this here. Here, all that can be done is for an Act asserting
legal responsibility to be passed and for that Act to be challenged in
that High Court which was set up by the Constitution for the purpose
of interpreting the Constitution in cases which are not clear. Nor
will this clarification, when it comes, prevent full Commonwealth,
State co-operation. The petroleum agreement, which specifically does
not resolve the q uestion of legal responsibility, will continue. And
agreements patterned on the same lines can be entered into concerning
all other minerals, and we are prepared to enter into themn.
But as a nation we will know where we stand. We
will know whether the nation's writ runs inside and outside the threemile
limit, whether it runs in part of the area but not the whole, or
indeed whether it runs in any of the areas. And it is hard to see why
this question should remain any longer in doubt, hard to see why this
question should remain in doubt any more than questions relating to
defence or overseas trade or the other sections of our Constitution
where primary responsibility is not in doubt.
It is hard for me to see why there should be
objections to Constitutional methods of clarifying the Constitution, and
it is certain that after clarification, Commonwealth and State co-operation
in the granting of leases for minerals, and Commonwealth, State
agreement s for royalties and fees in administration can be patterned 7 
-7
on that petrolewnm agreement which it is so oftmauggested should be
followed. Those, Sir, were three of the new initiatives, the
new actions taken which, because they have occasioned country-wide
debate, I thought I should speak of to this Conference.
I turn now to another question of debate, of relations
between the Commonwealth and the States.
As far as financial relations are concerned, Sir,
you will know that the previous agreement is shortly to run out and a
new financial agreement requires to be negotiated. At the moment,
discussions are continuing between Com,-monwealth Treasury officials
and State Treasury officials on this matter.
At the Premiers' Conference, it was made clear, I
think by me that there would bejia new agreements to be worked out
between us, more available for State Governments than would have been
the case bad the old agreement continued with its set down yearly
increases. And we were able to meet one of the specific requirements
of the Steering Committee, which was that the area of State debt should
be reduced and gradually taken over by t. he Commonwealth, and the
charges on it revoked, and that there should be, each year in the
future, a sum of money which previously would have been provided
as Loan money on which interest wac charged but which, for the future
would be provided as a share of revenue for the States to spend as
revenue rather than as Loan funds.
For the rest, the matters of betterment factor and
things of that kind, this is still the subject of negotiation between us.
Last time I spoke to you on this general matter, I
said this: ,' In my view, Sir, it would be unthinkable for an
Australian Government not to have the overriding power
over the maintenance of the Australian economy as a whole".
And this, I am glad to see, has been endorsed by the report of the
Steering Committee. I also said
" If there is a requirement for cheap power in, for
example, Gladstone in Queensland, in order to be able to
bring about industrial development which vtill benefit the
nation; if there is a need for a pipeline or some other work
in South Australia to carry natural gas, which in turn will
benefit the nation, and if these things cannot be achieved without 
-8
' hssistance from a national governmnent, then a
national government needs the right and capacity
to assist in these things.
I imagine there would be few here who Wo uld dispute that approach,
and particularly in view of the Steering Committee's recommendation
that provision for the needs and problems of the less populous States
be maintained. Last time I spoke to you, I suggested that there was
a need to see that the facilities for the education of a child were
roughly comparable no matter in what part of. Australia that child
was educated. And I suggested there wEas a need to ensure that
facilities for the care of the ill in Australia were roughly the same,
no matter in what part of Australia that citizen becaine ill.
I said then I did not think it right or proper to
describe such suggestions as those of a centralist. And I repeat
that I do not think they indicate a centralist way of thinking. But there
are always those who seek to over-simpl ify everything and to apply
labels. There are always those who seek not to have the kind of
discussions I called on us all to have and which we have had with
benefit, but rather to make prejudgment and to use these labels.
In his address today, the President referred to
the word " centralism" and " centrali&amp; e. I am not entirely sure what
these words mean for they are rarely defined by those who use them.
But if they mean a system or person who wants all power, all policymaking,
all administrative decisions concentrated in one place, then
there are none of us here who could possibly be described as centralist.
And I believe that all of us here could properly be described as
opponents of centralism, if that is what it means.
Similarly, if a federalist is one who believes that
a national government should have no responsibility and no voice in
such matters of nation-wide importance as education or health or
national development or agriculture or in any other fields, that there
is no room there for co-operation between a national government and
a state government, then I do not think that such a person is a true
federalist or serves the nation well.
Indeed, Sir, these words, these labels, unless they
are defined in depth, have no real meaning, but the danger is that
they are labels which can be used as a substitute for thinking. A
proposal may be advaoced or a practice may develop which is new
or different and I speak not only of proposals advanced for po-wers
to come to Canberra or practices which develop, I speak of the
living thing of federalism where, in either direction, proposals can / 9 
9-
be advanced. And in such a case, always if such a thing happens,
there should be analysis and examination in depth to see whether what
is proposed is advantageous to the nation as a whole, to each of the
citizens who make up the nation, just as they make up the various
States, and whether it is adva~ ntageous to a State or States or to the
citizens who make up the State or States.
There should in such circumstances always, in an
ad hoc matter, be debate of a friendly and constructive kind, not
debate designed as an advocacy of previously-determined positions,
but debate designed to discover argument and to discover where
the true balance of advantage lies, whether the goals sought are
proper goals and whether they might perhaps be better attained in
some other way; to discover whether the proposal fits properly inlto
the co-operative federalism which we seek to retain. Too often,
this exercise in thinking can be avoided and sometimes is by the
initial use of a label and the condemnation of a proposal on the basis
of that label. Let us always, Sir, examine these things on the
basis of a close analysis, close examination, looking at the merits
or demerits of any proposal and looking at the continuance we all
desire of an evolving but not static Liberal federalism in Australia.
I think that those who do not wish to do that perhaps will do both
Australia and the Liberal Party a disservice, for we cannot remain
static, and we do wish to preserve a federal system which our
opponents, should they have the chance, would undoubtedly destroy
completet. y as they have made more than evident over the last -year.
Sir, we believe in a federal system but not a static
one. Our opponents don't believe in a federal system at all, and this
is a great and continuing difference between us.
We were told this morning, Sir, in your speech,
that we must discover what the Australian people hope far and that
we should seek to govern as a government and seek to Zdvise as an
organisation in such a way that we can best attain those hopes and
wishes, and indeed we must.
Many of these hopes and wishes must already be
knownqjqeAd the wish of young people to be able to obtain adeposit for a
block and to build a house on it without facing a lifetime of heavy
debt, the hope for continuing improvement in education opportunity
and let us not be apologetic on this, for education opportunity under
the various State Governments and with some assistance from the
Commonwealth has improved immensely over the last decade. But
there is always room for further improvement. 
There is the hope otbeing-able. to-retire in
modest comfort and of being cared for when ill without crippling
bills; the opportunity for personal development, personal development
of talent and personal atisfaction in life by engaging in an occupation
which gives satisfaction to the individual.
Then there is the wish for reasonable stability
in prices and the cost of living, the desire to cleanse the environment
in which many now live, the sense of bel tonging to and contributing
to a nation growing in material wealth, . In personal opportunityy , in
Christian concern for the unfortunate. And, of course, the desire
and the wish that all this should be done with, if possible, no taxation
at all: Many of these new hopes and asplxations are good.
But they have sprung from the prosperity created in the climate we
have provided in the last twenty years A-which has taken the more
pressing problems which used to intrude away. Well they cannot
all at once be met. But the way which will meet them best is the
Liberal way, the way of creating a climate where individual enterprise
and the right of choice to the individual will be continued, the way
where competition is fostered but laissez-faire is not allowed to run
wilId, the way that has stood the test of time and which has made
Australia not a perfect state for it is very far indeed from that
but a country which offers its citizens be cause of their exertions, and
because of the wise husbandry of the results of their exertions, a
fuller life, a life of more opportunity than perhaps of any other country
I know. We will go into the future as a. Party with heavier
burdens for our defence than we have ever known before because of
changing world situations, with greater involvement with the-nations
who our neighbours, with these new problems I have sketched to you
before us needing to be overcome, but with the firm and unshakeable
belief that the way to overcome them is not by all-embracing state
planning, is not by abolition of a federal system but by that general
approach which we -have followed for over twenty years and which,
projected into the future, and changing slightly to meet changing times
and changing problems after debate, will best meet those problems
for the good of this nation and all those citizens who live in it. 



FOR PRESS"' -PM. No. 65,1970
RECEIPM DUTlY: OPPOSITON CHALLENGE
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Whitlam seems to be under two false impressions. One
is that it is he and not the Government which decides what are election
issues. The other is that he is thwarting the Commonwealth
Government when in fact he is thwarting the States.
He is apparently threatening that the Labor Party in the
States House, the Senate, will deny the States access to a field of
growth tax to which they want access, and trying to claim that this
affects the Commonwealth Government.
In fact, in this matter, the Commonwealth Govera~ ment is
only acting at the request of the States, as the agent for the States,
to enable them to collect revenue in the future which they would not
otherwise be able to collect. This revenue would be in addition
to any agreed amounts made available from Commonwealth Reven ue
as a result of the new arrangements being worked out between us and
the States. Labor will therefore deny the States the capacity to help
themselves in the future, If he accepts this responsibility, his
quarrel is with the State Governments, not with the Commonwealth
Government, and he should direct his posturing to them.
CANBERRA, June 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 66/ 1970
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE AND AUSTRALIAN
LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Arrangements have now been completed with the State
Premiers for meetings of the Premiers' Conference and the Australian
Loan Council to be held in Canberra on Thursday, 25 June and
continuing, if necessary, on Friday, 26 June.
I will preside at the Premiers' Conference and Mr. Bury,
as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the Loan Council.
CANBERRA 11 June 1970 



THIRD NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE
INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS
SYDNEY. N. S. WX. .11JUNE J. 970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Thank you, Mr. President, for your introduction. I cannot
remember the long list which you gave of those to whomn I shouild address
my remarks. May I confine it to the Prime Minister of New Zealand,
Mir. Holyoake and the other distinguished persons who are present.
Gentlemen, you have had a long day and you have listened, I
think, to seven speakers from the four corners of the earth, all of them
men with an international reputation, all of them men~ with something of
significance to say to you. And I think that their presence on this occasion
has been a mark of the status which this Institute has reached.
Mr. President, may I congratulate you and your Institute on
becoming an Institute in its own right today and no long-qer just a division of
its founding father, the British Institute of Directors. 1 think that this has
come about with the encouragement and the support of the British Institute.
It is the kind of process which has been going on in many fields ever since
Australian colonies became States, and the States became a Federation, and
the Federation became a nation, and this Institute becamne an Institute in its
own right. I wish you well, Sir, you and your Institute as you set course
on your own, as an Institute on your own. And may I congratulate you, Sir,
on the part your personal leadership has played in the very rapid growth
of this Institute. I know that you are a successful helmsman, both in business
and in public affairs and on " Balandra", although I do seem to recall that
in a recent Sydney to Hobart yacht race you were outpointed by a politician:
In any case, Sir I thank you for giving me a forum where I
can talk to so many key members of our commercial, -financial and industrial
world face to face without having to talk to them throughi the sometimes
somewhat dubious media of third parties who interpret what one says through
various public media. ./ 2 
I have been provided tonight because I really have, over the
last week or ten days had scarcely one minute to myself I have been provided
tonight with a speech that was written for me by the Treasury. As one
would expect, it is a very careful speech. It is one which seeks to cover
every eventuality. kt is one which, as far as possible, seeks to say nothing
which can be held up against it in the future. And consequently, except
in parts, I don't propose to give it. I will from time to time be ad libbing
and speaking " off the cuff".
But some of it I will give because I thfiL it might be of
advantage if I went back a little to look at the recent history of this nation
to see what has been achieved in that period of time, to see where we stand
today and put to you what I believe to be the pressing problems for this
future decade. Ten years ago, in this country and in thle world outside it,
there was much doubt as to where Australia was going and as to what the
future of Australia would be. At that time when some of us m. any of you
in this room, I think began to glimpse the posibilities of the future,
there were others who said Australia would never become a great
industrial country, Australia could never sustain a great population,
Australia should remain a hewer of wood and a drawer of water and a
grower of wool for the rest of the world.
Yet three years later in 1963 an economic survey put
out by the Treasury said this
" Over the past ten years, and especially over the past three
years, Australia has achieved -its greatest breakthrough in
point of resources since the crossing ofZ the Blue Mcuntains
a hundred and fifty years ago. That earlier event opened
the first doorway to the pastoral and agricultural wealth
of the continent on which our growth has since been built.
But until not very long ago it was commonly held that
Australia would not be a great industrial1 nation and therefore
could not support a great population. The quick succession
of rich mineral discoveries, bauxite, copper, iron ore and
now oil, go far to dispel this view. We do not yet have in
adequate quantities all the essentials for well-rounded
development, arid in the background lies our deficiency of
water, likely perhaps to prove the costliest and most stubborn
of barriers to large-scale expansion. Yet, taken with the
resources already known, these new riches beyond doubt lift
the horizons of Australian growth quite incalculably. 
This was written seven years ago not by me but in a Treasury
Bulletin, and I am bound to say that it has raised my eotimation of the
Treasury greatly to read it.
That was a confident statement at that time, and some thought
over-confident, but the years have shown that it was true if anything,
understated. All the resources listed in it have been chown to exist, many
of them in quantities at that time unthought of, and many new resources have
been added to the list.
The problem of water in the development of Australia remains
water for industry, water for creating a pleasant environment for those
Australians who must live in the towns and cities that miust grow in our
North; water for protection against fire and drought and famine in our
rural areas. Yet even this is not as intransigent a p~ roblem as it appeared
seven years ago, for now atomic power, desalination, new water resources
proposals and programmes offer a hope that even this barrier will be removed.
I think, Sir, that today only a chronic and cofirmed peosimist would say
we lack the foundation for really large-scale industrial development in
Australia. In short, the debunkers and the knockers ten years ago have
been shown to be completely wrong.
But might there not be another problem before us? Having
shown these things to be wrong by a certain amount of luck and a considerable
amount of effort, there still could be a risk of another mood entering into
Australian thought, potentially as dangerous as that mood which said years
ago we never would grow great. I am referring to a disposition to believe that
most of our underlying problems have been solved because of the progress
we have made, because of the opportunities that have opened before us; a
disposition to believe that the progress we expect, the progress these new
resources have made possible, will come more or less of its own accord
and without the brains and effort and hard work-and sweat which ultimately
are the only bases on which progress can be made.
There has been a spreading of affluence amongst our society,
and some of those to whom it has spread not tClose who took part in the
real development, but those who indirectly profited from it must perhaps
think it came rather easily and that it will continue to come easily.
This is a mood which, if Australia is to grow as quickly
as it can, we must eschew. You must see that this mocod does not enter
into the Australian consciousness, because I am talking to an audience of
men who direct companies, who know that when one problem is solved,
another problem arises; who'. know that nothing is easily done, who in 
4.
their everyday lives must say " Right, we have got over that hurdle, there
is another one in front of us. It will not be easy to get over it. We must
continue with the effort that we have put in. ThiB is done, and I think
the leadership for it can come in great part from you. Then the possible
mood of complacency into which Australia could fall will not become the
danger which it otherwise might be.
I said that many of our problems had been overcome and they
have, but there are still many before us. May I enumerate to you those
problems as I see them, and Derhaps take this opportunity to explain to
you why the Government has done some of the things it has done to try
and overcome these problems.
We, in Australia, must have vast and increasing amounts of
overseas capital if we are to develop. Yet we must also try to see that as
much as possible of Australian industrial development is in the hands of
Australians, remains in the hands of Australians and grows in the hands
of Australians. Our nation is going through a period o! industrial expansion,
of great mineral development. We need large and coatinuing infusions of
capital from overseas in order to sustain this, and in the last five years,
one-sixth of all such capital investment in Australia has come from
overseas. And, Sir, inevitably that infusion of capital in our larger
industries brings with it a greater degree of overseas ownership and control,
both of our mineral developments and ultimately of the processing of our
minerals, which is a highly capital intensive enterprise.
And if I may give you some examples o! what has been
happening, overseas investment in mining five years ago . was $ 34 million
in the year. It has risen to somr-ething like $ 250 million and Australians'
control of production in minerals alone has dropped i-n that time from
63 percent to 47 percent. At the same ti-me, Australian requirement to
service existing capital by remitting abroad has risen from 8. 3 percent
to 10. 5 percent of our export earnings. This has happiened in the last
five years. And there is a build-up of commitments 1or the future because
inccm= earned in Australia by overseas investment Cand ploughed back into
AusL* alia has more than doubled in five years.
I do not mention these facts in order to complain about them.
We are glad about them because these are prices we can afford to pay for
the development we must have in the time scale in which, in this world,
we need that development. We can afford to pay it, because the benefits
which come to us from it as fifty percent shareholders in every enterprise
because of taxation and other benefits, do come to us, and we could not
develop as we should without this influx of capital. So 1 don't complain.
But though they are prices we can afford to pay, they are not in their
entirety prices we should pay unless we must. And so, as a government,
we have tried to provide the opportunity to retain as much Australian 
ownership and as much Australian control as we can, provided we don't
iiuaibit the inflow of capital, and provided we don't inhibit growth.
And to that end we have adopted a number of policies. We
have adopted a " takeover code". We have adopted a guidelines policy for
borrowings in Australia. We will be laying on the table of the House of
Representatives this week for discussion by you, and all those interested,
proposals for convertible notes, so that those Australians who have money
to invest and who must get an income from it, will have an opportunity to
invest it in notes, get an income from it, and have an opportunity to convert
it to equity at some later stage.
And we have introduced now into law what appears to have
been a rather controversial proposal for an Australian Industry Development
Corporation. Sir, this Corporation is designed to borrow abroad on behalf
of Australian companies which ask it to do so and only on behalf of
Australian companies which ask it to do so; and cornmanies which it judges
to be viable and which might not themselves be able to borrow and which,
because they were unable to borrow, might have to surrender equity to an
overseas partner. Its objectives are simply those, and I do not think that
those objectives could be attacked by anyone with an interest in Australian
development and Australian ownership of development.
After all, although the interest rates may from time to time
be high in the Eurodollar market or the United States, if Hamersley can
borrow at 10 or 11 percent on these markets and makie a profit from it,
then why shouldn't an Australian company be able to do the same if it can
find a corporation of the stature to act for it? And this is what the Australian
Industry Corporation is all about.
It will have no power to interfere with a company or to act
financially on its behalf unless it is asked. It will be subject to the same taxes
as other companies engaged in its field. It will compete on equal terms
and it can't do any more than compete. It cannot dominate. In fact, Sir, it
will offer a choice to a borrower and, after all, the right of choice, as
everybody in this room would agree, is one of the essentials of a freely
growing economy, whether it is a choice of the bank from whom one can
borrow, the company with whom one will go into partnership or the lines of
action one will take as directors of a company.
And I believe, Sir, that this Corporation, under the control
as it will be of directors drawn from private enterprie, will help to
retain the greatest possible Australian ownership of growing Australian
enterprises. It won't interfere with the inflow of capital from abroad that we
need and must have, and indeed, I think it will be an adjunct to the growth
of Australian private enterprise and will help it grow as Australian
private enterprise. That is the way in which the Government has approached
one of the problems we see before us now which is, having reached this stage of
our development, more and more capital is required, more and more
capital we will take; but we want to see as much of it as possible retained
in Australian hands for economic or, if you like, for nationalist reasons. 
What are some of the other problems that now face us that
will nct be easily overcome?, I, without putting them in their proper order,
would say that the problems of rural industries now and in the future are
perhaps the most significant. I do not see how we can possibly go on
growing more and more or indeed as much, of the commodities which the
world either does not want or is not prepared to pay for at a rate which
will cover the cost of pr-oduction. And with the very possible entry of the
United Kingdom into the European Economic Community, this problemn
looms before us with even greater urgency.
Subsidies can be a palliative, but only a palliative, not an
answer, and this problem will niot go away because of' industrial development,
because of mineral development, because of the application of the minds of
you gentlemen to your own businesses. This is a problem I merely flag
at this stage as one of great significance to the future. I can't do more
than flag it at this stage, because we are talking about it very deeply in
Cabinet itself, and I wouldn't want to say anything wihich was in advance
of what Cabinet might say. But it is one of enormous significance.
We have in this country and this affects business too
the problems inherent in a federal nation. You will all have heard various
epithets applied to me, one a! which is " centralist". The other day I said
I didn't quite know what it meant and I don't know now-, in spite of the
" Sydney Morning Herald" endeavouring to tell me in one of its editorials.
But there is in a federal systemn, which I think is the best system under
which to live, always inherent difficulties between governments, and those
difficulties often wash over on to the companies who have to carry out their
enterprises in Australia. If somebody wants to export iron ore in Western
Australia and they can deal with one government to do that, then they have
to decide at what price they will be allowed to export it, and they have to
deal with another government to do that. And so it goes.
But these problems themselves will be worked out, I think,
within this framework that we cannot and must not and will not have
six separate nations in the boundaries of this continenl-t. We will have
one nation, but we will decentralise the running of that nation as f ar as
it is humanly possible to do so. This is the bes-t way to bring not only
the people but the leaders of industry such as you into the operation of
the economy of this country.
Can I give an illustration I hope I dor't try your patience
an illustration of the approach that I have to this matter, by referring to
something you might have read about in the papers from time to time,
quite wrongly, quite loosely called offshore minerals legislation. Because
I think that does illustrate the approach which I and my Government have
to this affair. / 7 
It has been claimed that we as a central government want to
take away mineral rights from the States. That is quite wrong. It has
been claimed that we want to get control of all minerals, but that is quite
wrong. But there exists a situation in. this nation now where nobody knows
who controls, who is responsible for, the seas which lap the coasts of
Australia. Nobody knows who is responsible for the resources of the
seabed not only minerals but other resources. Nobody knows who is
responsible for the conservation of fisheries. Nobody knows whose law
runs either between the low water mark and the three-mile limit, or
between the three-mile limit and the outer continental shelf. it is unknown.
It is in dispute. And we believe that we should not be the only federal nation
in the world that doesn't know who is responsible for these matters, and so
we believe that there should be a legal decision on these matters by the
High Court which has been set up for the very purpose of interpreting
constitutional matters which are in doubt.
Once that is done and I hope it will be I don't know what
the results will be. I don't know whether it will turn out that the States
own and are responsible for the seabed and for the sea above it from the
low water mark to the three mile limit or from the low water mark to the
outer continental shelf, or whether we are responsible for it I don't know.
But I think we should know. And once that has been decided, then
irrespective of the decision, we want to move into an area of co-operative
federalism by saying " No matter who has got the legal responsibility, if
we have got it, then let us co-operate in a federal way. You administer it.
You take 60 percent of the royalties of minerals. You deal with the
overseas companies who want leases. You come to us for a final
decision. This is the approach to federalism which we have and which
has led, 1 think unjustly, to centralism being put upon us.
But if this is not done, then nobody will ever know who is
responsible for what. If a tanker runs aground, ( as it did in Queensland)
two miles offshore, no-one will know what government has the responsibility
to see that that tanker is pumped out so that there vwill not be pollution of
the area around it. No-one will know who has the right to arrest fishing
vessels who are outside or inside the three-mile limit. No-one will know
who controls the continental shelf which runs between us and Indonesia
whether we do or whether Western Australia does. No-one will know,
when New Guinea becomes independent, who is able to decide where the
median line should be on the continental shelf between us and New Guinea
whether the Australian Government does or Queensland does. No-one
will know how to go about closing the Gulf of Carpentaria to fishing, because
no-one will know who has the legal responsibility to do it. And these are
matters which in the future could be of great significance to Australia.
Perhaps they are not problems which directly concern you, gentlemen,
but you will forgive me if I take the opportunity to expound to you some
of the problems which beset me. / 8 
Well, what do I see for this country in this next decade?
Nhat are my aspirations? What are my hopes'?
I would hope to see a country in which industrial development
continues at the same rate as it has. I would hope to see a country in
which we process more and more of the minerals in raw state which we
take from the earth. I would hope to see a country in which we clean
up the environment in which we live. I would hope to see a country
and indeed I must see a country, which devotes more and more of its
resources and efforts to the sterile but necessary requirements of defence.
I would hope to see a country which provides more and more opportunity
for its citizens, enabling them to express themselves, to engage in
occupations which give them satisfaction. I would hope to see us gradually
moving towards satisfying the aspirations of Australians for better
education, for better health, for better social services, for better roads,
for all the requirements which are made on the public sector. This is
what I would hope for.
But I would know that government cannot do that by itself.
I would know that it is the people in this room and others like them who alone
could do it because I would know that the provision of these matters for the'
public sector could only come out of what was produced in the private
sector. I would believe that it was the task of a government to see
that a climate was created in which those in the private sector were given
the fullest possible opportunity to make their judgments, to reap their
profits, to sustain their losses, because by this interplay in the market
place, as I believe experience has shown, will come the greatest possible
contribution of wealth to the country and from thiO grctest contribution of wealth
to the cod~ rtrygovernment cnrtake'that which I havr-e ; d I woul. d like to see provided
from the public sector.
Sir, as long as I am in this position, or my successors, what
we would seek to foster is not laissez-faire it is rot laissez-faire. What
I would seek to foster is true competition, true private enterprise, true
opportunity for individual judgments as to where a company should go and
what it should do, because I believe that in that way a government and a
people of a nation best benefit. We must see that as prosperity grows you
are given this opportunity, and if you take it, the fruits of it are shared
amongst the whole nation. This is essential.... shared in the ways of which
I have spoken by a government providing health, social services, education.
And in doing that, must keep a careful balance and judgement to see that
that which is taken to provide these things from the government sector is
not so much that it removes incentive from the private sector to retain
that which it has earned.
And if this careful balance can be sustained, and if we can
look to each individual, each company director to acceot responsibility
for his decisions, and to try to make those decisions not necessarily on
the basis of'what is best for GMH is best for America", but " what is best
for Australia is best for my company", as I think we can look to you, then / 9 
I tahink we will in this nationattain the kind of goals I have set before you.
. ut I am sure when we have attained them there will be new problems rearing
their head, and-what-a dull and uninspiring world it would be if that were not
so. It is because I think this kind of partnership the kind of
work that you do, this kind of management which we do for well or for
ill is of such significance, it is because of this that I finish as I began
by thanking you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak to such a representative
gathering, a gathering of people who have contributed so much to the
growth of this nation and who have so much more to contribute. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 67/ 1973
PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT NEW GUINEA
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, will visit Papua-New Guinea
from 5th to 1lth July.
His itinerary is still being finalised, but he will travel extensively,
visit a number of key centres, have discussions with elected Members of
the House of Assembly, and with the Administration, and meet with representative
groups and organisations throughout the Territory.
Mr. Gorton said today that he wanted to get a first-hand impression
of developments in Papua-New Guinea, and to meet and tal: with a wide
cross-section of the community.
Mrs. Gorton will be travelling with the Prime Minister, and he will
also be accompanied by the Minister for Territories, Mr. Barnes and the
retiring Administrator, Mr. David Hay, who will become Secretary of the
Department of External Territories at the end of July.
CANBERRA 12 June 1970 



PRESS, RADIO A111 TV CONFERENCXE
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, IMR. JOHN GORTON
AT PARLIAMENr HOUSE, CANBRA A. C. T. 18 JUNE 1970
PR IME MINISTER I'll be quite short, gentlemen, I thin:' w e have
recently concluded a Session which you will agree wao -full of
incident and which, I suggest, was full of some accornF, 113hment.
There have been significant statements on defence and on
foreign affairs, charting our course for the future. We at for 38 days,
which is a long Session, the longest Autumn Session, 1 think, in the
last ten years, and we passed 61 bills. Up to lunch-timle, the Senate
had passed 51, which is not quite a record, but, agair, close to it
for the last ten years. A lot of them were comparatively small
bills, but I think bills of some significance for a lot of people in
Australia and some of them for Australia -itself bills
dealing with capital assistance to handicapped children, dealing with
paying higher pensions to married couples who are separated,
setting up commissions of enquiry into dangers to the Barrier Reef
and into the Crown of Thorns star fish, providing a loan to the
Queensland Government for the development of central Queensland
which could be an extremely significant development for Australia.
And a whole variety of bills which I won't go into.
But three significant proposals, two of which have now become
law, two passed through the House during the time; one, the
establishment of an Australian Industry Development Corporation and
one, the Health Scheme which has taken some considerable debate
before it finally reached its present stage. And on the n~ otice paper
is still the bill for the territorial sea and the continental shelf. So
there was quite a lot of incident, quite a lot of accomplishment and
some significant things which I believe were done. I wifll now pass
this conference over to you. You will no doubt have other matters on
which you would like to ask questions but I hope there will be some
on what I have considered to be significant actions.
Q. lack Commins, ABC In the Senate just a while ago, the
DL? did say that it would vote against the Receipts Duties Bills
which would mean the defeat of the measures. Will the Government
take it as far as a double dissolution?
PM. Well it can't take it as far as a double dissolution unless
it is defeated twice, can it? All this legislation does is to enable
the Commonwealth Government, acting as an agent or, behalf of the
States at the States' request, to collect a particular portion of a tax
for them. We told the States we would try and do this . r: them. If
the States' House won't help the State Governments who have indicated
that they want this revenue, then that is a matter which affects the
States more than it affects us. But the question of a dou.: ie dissolution
doesn't arise until quite a period of time has passed and inatters are
rejected twice, as far as I can remember. a o. / 2 
Q. David Solomon of the Australian On the same subject,
Mr. Prime Minister, will you have an election for the House of
Representatives because of the defeat soon to come of the Receipts
Duties Bill and will you provide money for the States to recompense them
the $ 50 million which they would have got under the bill, will you
provide this in some other way?
PM. The answer to the first question is of course wie won't have a
House of Representatives election on a matter which is not our legislation.
It 18 legislation we are acting as agents on behalf of the States for. As
regards the other part of your question, we would have to discuss that
with the States. In any case, there are always other op-ortunities, you
know, for continuing endeavours in these fields In that ) articular field
of legislation.
Q. Frank Chamberlain, AEP, Macquarie btr. ' Prime Minister,
on the question of States, you have a Premiers' Conference next week.
Will this question which was raised in the Senate today be discussed
with the Premiers?
PM. Which question was this?
Q. The receipts duty. Will you discuss that and also will the
opportunity be taken to discuss again the offshore minerals problem?
PM. We haven't had an agenda from the States on this. We have
asked the States for proposals they would like to have on an agenda,
but so far we haven't received them. I would doubt very much if
the offshore minerals. 1 et me call it by its proper tit'le The
Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill would be the subject of
discussion. If it was sought to be, it could be, and similarly with the
whole field of financial assistance to the States which could well involve
the attack on their taxation rights which the Labor Party seems to be
making in the Senate. You see, no matter what arrangements are made
in the future for Commonwealth grants r~ f finance to the States no
matter what arrangements are made in the future if the States are
denied the opportunity for us to act as their agen. ts to raise this
particular tax, then no matter how much we give themnthey will always
be denied the extra amount which they cotId have raised.
Q. Wal Brown, Courier Mail When do you propoce to proceed
with the territorial sea legislation in the face of the strong opposition
from several States?
PM. I would hope to proceed with it in the Budget Session.
Q. Do you hope to confer with the States again before you go
ahead with it? / 3 
PM. We would be quite happy to confer with the Statces again. What
we would be conferring with the States about would be the heads of agreement
and the arrangements for administration and royalties and all the rest of the
matters which form a part, at the moment for example, of the petroleum
agreement. Now, the petroleum agreement deals with such matters as
administration, royalties, various fees, things of that k4-ind, granting of
titles, but it specifically puts aside without resolution the claim of the
States to have legal sovereignty, not only over the territorial sea but
right out to the limits of the continental shelf, and the claim of the
Commonwealth to have the same sovereignty. It puts that aside, it
doesn't resolve it, and the resoltuion of that is necessary. But it is a
completely different question from the working out of administrative
arrangements and spreading of royalties and so on, which would need to
be brought in to operation, no matter which way the decision in the High
Court went on this matter. So does that answer your question?
Q. Peter Martin, Seven National News Prime M-nister, does that
mean that there will be rno discussion on the question of the Territorial
Seas Bil1, on the question of the legal rights, but there may be discussion
on administrative arrangements for other things like the offshore
minerals?
PM. Yes, I think we need to resolve the question of who has the legal
sovereignty over the seas which lap Australia's coast. It seems to me to
be quite absurd for Australia to be the only nation in the world that
doesn't know, the only Federation in the world that doesn~' t know who has
got sovereignty over the seas around it s coast. And this needs to be
resolved. Now, it will' be resolved one way or the other. I mean, even
if our legislation didn't go ahead and I am not suggesting for a moment
that it won't but even if it didni't it would be resolved because this question
having been raised by the various High Court decisiozs, there will
undoubtedly be cases concerning fisheries or concerning minerals or
concerning something which will lead to a case which will ultimately
resolve it. But the sooner we can get it resolved the better, as the
Premier of New South Wales agreed with me the other day.
Q. Stan Stephens, Adelaide Advertiser While we are still on State
matters, Sir, could I get in a parish pumper which is rather important.
The South Australian economy, as you know, is geared to the motor
body industry and to the home appliances industry. The South Australian
Government is deeply concerned over the effects of the higher interest
rates and the credit squeeze on the South Australian economy. Will the
Commonwealth do something to help South Australia urgently? / 4 I 
PM. 1 haven't studied this particular matter that you raise, nor has
it been brought to my attention by either the previous or the present
South Australian Government. Perhaps because one hasn't had time.
But you used the phrase " credit squeeze" and I wonder whly you used it?
Q. It was the term Mr Dunstan used. It was a pity I didn't introduce
the subject better, but he made an appeal for assistance for South
Australia. He made an appeal yesterday.
PM. It is not unusual for him to say that. I am intrigued by these
words that you used or he used " credit squeeze".* I have always thought
of a credit squeeze as an occasion where a government calls up money
from the trading banks and puts it into the Reserve Banlk or where it gives
directions or guidance as to fields in which money should be lent or
shouldn't be. 7The sort of thing that happened in 1961. 1Nw what is
happening today is nothing whatever like that. Last time I came and
talked to you gentlemen, you were talking about the economy and you
pointed out that the Treasurer had said there was a dangerous situation
those were the words, I think. Don't hold me to them....
( Interjection) Menacing.
PM. Menacing, right. And I said, " Well, I think it is potentially
menacing. But I think it is only potentially menacing because there is
going to be towards the end of this year a considerable decline in liquidity
because we budgeted for a $ 500 million surplus and that is going to have
its effect towards the end of this year, and it is having its effect, it is as
a result of the surplus which was budgeted for, tightening up the amount
of money available. But this is different, I thinklr, from what people
have in their mind, when they talk about a credit squeeze. And I
believe it will loosen again as soon as the financial year is over and
people begin to get refunds of taxation which will be quite considerable
in the first quarter of the financial year.
Q. Does that mean, Sir, that you are suggesting that we can hope
that the Budget mightn't be as tight as at present it appears it might?
PM: Well, I am not going to talk about the Budget except to say that
I don't think that is completely logical because if there is going to be a
considerable loosening up of finaince available, then the conclusion you
draw from it wouldn't necessarily follow. I wasn't putting this in a
Budget context at all. I was just saying I believe that at the present time
there is a very tight money mark-et which was foreseer-, which I pointed
out to you last time we were here, which is a result of budgeting for
a surplus. This will again I say this this will, in the first quarter
of the next financial year quite considerably be relieved by a very
rconsiderable amount of taxation refunds which will tak,-, e place, apart
from anything else. 
Q. A taxation adjustment for middle income groups, for instance?
PM. Wouldn't you be surprised, really, if I gave you answers to
things that are going to be in the Budget?
Q. On that very question, Sir. Your last preas curierence ended in
some confusion Barnes from " The on this question of taxation
cuts for the middle and lower income groups. At the time you said you
didn't want to discuss the Budget. What I want to do is to draw your
attention to the fact that you had already discussed the Budget in the
Governor-General's speech when you said the Government aimed to put
before Parliament specific provisions for relief In the next Budget. Does
that still stand, Sir?
PM. What you have quoted, let me repeat to you, vias that I said it
would be my Government's aim to put proposals before Parliament
designed to carry out our promises. Now, the Budget should be brought
down about August 18 and at that stage, your queries ought to be fully
answered.
Q. I just wanted you to give your aims, Sir. That's all, just the
aims....
PM. One always aims to do the best possible.
Q. Peter Samuel, the Bulletin In the middle of 1, Aril, the
Cambodian Government -switching to foreign policy the Cambodian
Government made an urgent request to the Australian Government and
other governments for military assistance to defend itsoelf against the
Vietnamese communists. For two months now, there has been no
response that we have heard about to that request. If there hasn't been
a ny response, when do you expect there will be a res' onse? And,
secondly, how important does the Australian Governme-nt consider the
independence of Cambodia,
PM. Well, in answer to the first part of your question, the request
has been under consideration by the Depart ment of External Affairs
and the Department of Defence. They have now :; repared a joint paper on
what they are prepared to recommend to Cabinet that it should do, and
we will quite shortly be deciding on what is suggested by these Departments.
We attach a considerable amount of importance, a very great deal of
importance to the independence of Cambodia. That, of course, was one
reason why we were so pleased that our Foreign Minister was able to go
to Djakarta to join in a conference with other Asian nations designed to
try to mobilise world opinion in support of the neutrality of Cambodia
and therefore of the independerce of Cambodia. I don't suggest that
this corference has had any concrete effect. I don't suZgest that. / 6 
but I do, in answer to your question say that we regard it as of very great
importance indeed and that we regard the fact that this conference in
Djakarta was held as being of great importance, even though it may not
have any concrete effect.
Q. Laurie Oakes, Melbour-. ne Sun One of the problems with this
press conference format is that you don't get a chance to follow up
questions. Sir, you haven't yet answered Stan Stephenc' question atout
your attitude to the South Australian Government's appeal.
PM. Well I gather from Stan Stephens that it was made yesterday
apparently publicly and not through the normal channels and I would prefer
to wait and see whether it was made through the normal channels before
I consider it. You can't go answering anybody who rushes out in a
newspaper I beg your pardon, gentlemen anybody who rushes out in
public and makes these sort of remarks or whatever they are.
Q. And now my question, In September last year, you were quoted
in Parliament that the new Melbourne airport at Tullaryarine does not
necessarily come under the night flying ban. I know that you spent today
looking at files in view of the current controversy, but I am wondering
can you announce now whether you are prepared to lift the ban, or
whether you are sympathetic to Sir Henry Bolte's demands that you should?
PM. Well, first of all, I have not spent the day looking at files on this,
but nevertheless it is an important question. I have been looking at it but
not at files. One of the things that fascinates me about it is the way everybody
rushed in and assumed and has gone on television on the assumption
that the Minister has said he wouldn't lift the ban on jet flying at
Tullamarine. As far as I can discover he has never said anything of the
sort. What happened, as I understand it, from examining it today, was that
a representative of the " Melbourne Herald" rang up the Minister and the
Minister said I quote from memory but it is pretty accurate " There is
at the moment no proposal before me from the Department or from any
other source for altering the hours of jet curfew." That's all he said.
That was comparatively faithfully reported in the " Melbourne Herald",
after which a whole lot of people made comments on the assumption that
he said he wasn't going to lift the jet ban. Now the position is this.
There is a joint Commonwealth/ State Committee which has been looking
into the operation of Tullamarine. It comprises representatives of the
Department of Civil Aviation, of the State Town Planning Authority, and
the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works, and they have, so I am
told, just reported to the Minister for Civil Aviation and to the State
Minister concerned on their recommendations of how Tullamarine
should be operated, and both the State Minister and the Minister for
Civil Aviation are examining those reports. So, you know, it is not quite / 7 
so frantic as it has been made to appear, and I think the line they are
taking when they operate these airports is to endeavour to see how you
can get the greatest operational efficiency out of the airport married with
the greatest protection for populations living around the airport. They
shouldn't be living around there anyway, but we won't go into that at the
moment, or the reasons why they are. But I think there is no decision
taken on this yet. This Commonwealth/ State Committee Report is being
examined in both places, and there is a report of our own House of
Representatives Committee which would also have an elfect upon any
decision which is ultimately taken, though I understand the Premier of
Victoria is not very well disposed towards Senate or -buse . d Representatives
Committees, but nevertheless, we would pay some attention to this one.
Q. Michael Willesee " Four Corners" Prime Minister, the Press
and the media have been under some examination recently. I wonder if I
can ask you what you see their funct ion to be in relation to what you
think their function should be in relation to government and politics. And
having told us that, I wonder if you could then tell us if you think that
function is being fulfilled adequately?
PM. What should their function be? I think they have got a very
important function, and quite inalienable rights in fulfilling that function.
I think their function should be to criticise.... well, let me change that.
I think their function should be to examine proposals which are brought
forward by a government and after that examination to give criticism or
support, supplyingtheir readers with the reasons for that criticism or
that support, not suppressing reasons, not inventing reasons, not
slanting anything. And also to report anything that appears to them to be
instances of governmental injustice to individuals or groups of people
or matters of that kind. This, I believe, is a function of the Press which
is essential if a democracy is properly to run. And they have that right.
Having that right, they have also got a duty because you cannot have a
right without a duty or an obligation in any field. And that duty is to
report accurately, to comment having given both sides of the question, but
coming down on one side not to suppress one side and only put forward
the other and not deliberately to misrepresent it. So they have the
right which it is necessary to defend to the utmost, and they have a duty
which I think they should carry out. I would add just one more thing to
this. I haven't been particularly terribly disturbed, as far as I know,
about criticisms of me, and I think the Press should never or the media,
let us say should never get into a position where they could be thought
to be saying " We are above criticism. Nobody else is, but we are.
We musn't be attacked for what we have done or what we have recorded
because we are above reproach." They haven't got that right but they
have got every other right that I have mentioned. / 8 
The second part of the question, Prime Minster do you think
that function is being fulfilled adequately?
PM. I think it is being fulfilled adequately, though if you ask me
personally, I think there are instances I could point to where I would think
the criteria I have laid down have not been fully Zliowed,. so can Members
of the Cpposition. But I an not only talking of political inatters. I am takinig
generally. You asked me, let me give you an example ai2 a field which is
not strictly political where I don't myself think a full a: zd proper coverage
was given, and that is when " Four Corners" went to M' ze a story on
Duntroon. I think a great deal too much lam alot getting personal here
a great deal too much was devoted to people cleaning their boots and getting
shouted out by a sergeant-major walking around on a parade ground and
all that sort of stuff, and far too little attention given to the fact that it
is a place where more academic work is done than the sort of work that
was shown, that people come out of It with the equivalent of a university
degree, recognised by the University of New South Wales and that it Is
not really a spit and polish establishment and a place to bring up
automatons but a place to partak. e of a university education as well as the
discipline of an army. Now anybody can argue against that view that I
hiave got, but I have got a right to put it.
Q. If I could just say one little bit more there, Prim-e Minister. Do
you go along with the sort of expressions that the Postmaster -General and
the Queensland Premier have made in the last week?
PM. I don't go along with the expressions o&amp; the Queensland Premier...
I think one of them had something to do with me -if I reinember rightly,
and I haven't read in detail what the Postmaster-Gerteral said last week,
but surely, having just answered your questiort at some Length in the way
that I have, my own position ought to be fairly clear.
Q. Tom Connors " Financial Review" Githe question of assistance
to the wool industry, you said at the last confereince that we had that you
were waiting for the report of the Gunn Committee?
PM. Yes.
Q. I believe that they have completed their first report. I was
wondering whether the Government has received it and have you any
comment at this stage?
PM. Well, I haven't received the report of the Wool idustry
Advisory Committee. I don't think the Minister for Priniary Industry has
received it, but I was talking to him today and we expect to receive the
report within the next fortnight. / 9 
Q. I just want to hop on to that question of wool. Mv~ r. McEwen is
going to Japan. I thought this might be an opportunity for you to clarify
the reports that when you were in Japan you discussed the idea of a
-negotiated price..., in the unofficial reports. Would you clarify this for
us, Sir?
PM. Yes, I think so. Clearly, the question of an auction system
completely unchanged from the present auction system; a system where
you have one purchasing authority which has been put forward without
any detailed explanation of what iAs meant by it by the various woolgrowers'
bodies; a question of some kind of rarrying of an auctica system and a
negotiated system for particular classes of wool are all possibilities and
this matter of seeking to shall I say sell wool in the na.: ne way as we
sell iron ore, or partly seU wool in the same way as we sell iron ore is
a matter that would need to be discussed and taken into consideration.
Q. Alan Reid of the Daily Telegraph Oil health. The New South
Wales medicos are reported to be contemplating a rise of nine per cent in
fees. How will this affect your health scheme? Rill it affect it adversely,
and if the New South Wales medicos take unilateral action, will this prompt
you to implement your suggestion of a part icipa tory scaeme?
PM. Well, I was talking to Dr. Forbes on this matter, perhaps two
days ago and I am not sure of the basis of the report, and neither is he,
that the New South Wales Branch of the AMA is consider~ ng adopting the
rise you spoke of. I understand there was some membex of an economic
advisory committee who leaked to the newspaper.-, or Leaked to somebody,
the idea that he thought that thio could be justified. But I have got nothing
so far to indicate to me that the New South Wales Bran-c'. of the AMA would
adopt his proposition. If they did, they would be adopting it in a way which
I think is not normal because normally they have been Waiting two years, all
the time, and it is only less than a year before there = as a ri se. So I am
not by any means accepting that this would in fact happen. Noiv, if it did
happen then of course it would adversely affect the patien ts of our health
scheme in New South Wales, because there would only be two courses open
to us. One would be to increase the scale of benefits so that the patient
didn't suffer, which would mean that the doctors at their own sweet will
could decide what burdenis the taxpayers would have to gay. One would be
to increase the scale of benefitoo, or the other wiould be riot to increase the
scale of benefits whereupon the patient benefits would be eroded. Now this
clearly would affect the patient adversely, and ' we would have to consider
if this became a common thing just what we could and should do to protect
a patient without slugging the taxpayer at some outside body's instigation.
As I said when I was talking to thie Liberal Conference, our health scheme
and any other health scheme medical benefits scheme must depend
on most of the doctors charging an agreed common fee and that common
fee only being increased at reasonable intervals and by reasonable
amounts. Now, that sort of co-operation is essential from the doctors
for any health scheme of this kind to work, and if it is not forthcoming
and I have no indication to say that It won't then we really will have to
look at how we can make it wor,. 
Q. John Bennetts of the " Canberra Times" Does tie Government intend
to prosecute any of the people who in recent days have been urging defiance
of the National Service Act?
PM. Well, you are talking mainly I take it of the Victorian Labor
Party Conference....
Q. And others.
PM. I think the really serious part about this is the Victorian
Labor Party Conference and what their delegateo said and did there, but
I have been in touch with the Attorney-General on that question and his
preliminary advice at any rate is that he believes there is not sufficient
grounds to prosecute and also there is the difficulty inherent in prosecuting
every member of a political party in particular which could be extraordinarily
divisive. But it is a very difficult question this one and one that
I would want to talk a bit more about with my Cabinet colleagues. But the
really serious thing in this is that not more than eight nonths ago there
was an election this country in which specifica4y the Government said
they believed ,' ey would have to continue Naticnal Service and they would
continue National Service, and they put that before the -eople. And,
specifically, the Opposition said they would abolish National Service and
they put that before the people. And by the ballot box, tae people
supported the proposition that we would continue Nlational Service. Now
it is a really grave and sombre thing in Australian politics so soon after
that, or at any time after that, any political party in Cp; osition could
urge not that the law be changed, not that all sorts of arguments should be
put forward to make the people change their mind or the Government change
their mind, but that the law, as propounded by a gover:. innent and supported
by a people should be broken, urging that it should be broken. This is
something new in Australian politics. Having been done in this case,
how many other cases can it be done in? Does it not really completely
break down the concept of democratic government we have got in this
country for any Party in Opposition to take this sort of line? In a shortterm
political way, it could, on my judgment, be advantageous for this
sort of thing to happen advantageous to my Party. In the long-term
Australian way, I think it is extraordinarily grave and dangerous.
Q. Bob Baudino, " Daily Telegraph" Talking about the law, it is
equally important to enforce the law as it stands. We have been told by
your Minister, Mr. Snedden, that there is something lik. e fifty people
who have broken the law now by refusing to register for National Service.
Nothing has been done against these people as yet. Is anything to be
done against them? 11 
11.
PM. Yes, I think the law will have to be enforced. As you know, the
Cabinet was looking to try and find a civilian alternative for people who
reffused to carry out the declared obligations. I think you will forgive
me if I point out to you that there are many ways in which people can avoid
being called up for National Service. For example, if they join the CMF,
they do not have to be called up for National Service. If they can convince
a court that they are conscientious objectors, they are not called up for
active service. And there are the people who remain who take their chances
in a call-up, and 99. 8 per cent of them accept their obligations. For those
who don't and who can't show they are conscientious objectors, we
nevertheless looked to try and find a civilian alternative, a civilian
alternative which would need to be as subject to discipline as would service
in the Army, which would need to require as much dislocation of life as
service in the Army, which didn't give an advantage to the person who said
" I won't go into the Army". And we couldn't find one which we felt did
that, so we believe we will have to enforce the law as it stands.
QO Has the civilian alternative been abandoned, Sir?
PM. Well we haven't been able to find one which meets the criteria
that it doesn't give an advantage to the person who....
1Q. Sir, you say you will prosecute 2O-ye rx-old youths who don't
register, and yet you imply you are not going to prosecute the Victorian
ALP Conference delegates, Sydney poets, professors, and GPS headmasters
w~ ho defy the Crimes Act. Isn't this selective enforcement of the law'?
PM. Well, it is two different laws for a start. One is the obligation
to render National Service and if the law was not applied in that instance,
then you might as well not have National Service because anybody could
just say, " I won't go into Natiornal Service" and nothing would happen, and
the whole concept of National Service would be destroyed. The other area
is an area inciting people not to register which is different from the first,
and that is, I think, a difficult field, but I would draw a distinction between
that and refusing to render National Service when one became liable for it.
Q. Is one a less important offence in your mind?
PM. In my own mind, it is~ less important, a less significant offence
to say to people, to say to somebody else you don't believe he should do
something than to refuse to do it, but when I say that, I am not saying it
it unimportant. / 12 
Q. Aren't they saying rather, Sir, " We believe you should not. You
should defy the law rather than. I
PM. Well, some are saying " We believe you should defy the law",
some are not. Everybody has got lumped together in this, but the
Victorian ALP Executive was saying they believed you shaould defy the
law.
Q. Has your attention beer. drawn to the fact, Sir, that the New
South Wales ALP followed your concept, in other words-, advocated the
change of the law rather than the breaking of It.
PM. Yes, this appears to me to be the only proper a!-d responsible
way for a political party to go on.
Q. On a related subject, Sir, can you give any details of plans
to withdraw our troops from Vietnam?
PM. No more than when I announced in the House that we would be
withdrawing troops and they would be out by November....
Q. One battalion only....
PM. Yes, and some supporting troops.
Q. Peter Barron from the " Sydney Sun" On the civilian alternative,
you said " We have not been able to find a suitable altern: ative". Did
you mean " we, the Cabinet" or " we, the Government Parties"?
PM. We, the Cabinet. I am not sure what is inhereat in your
question. We looked for a civilian alternative in the Cabinet and we
put to the party room a possible civilian alternative. The party room
itself was very strongly against it on the grounds that I put forward that
it did not provide for submission to discipline in the way that going into
the Army did; people could get home for weeke--i-ds arind Ypeople wouldn't
have to have leave and people would in fact be living a civilian life
instead of an Army life.
Q. Yes, but when Cabinet put this, was it satisfied that it was a
suitable alternative?
PM. Well, we were satisfied that we could put to the party room for
its views a possible alternative. / 13 
Q. Barry Wain from " The Australian" On the subject of conscription,
regardless of what you say, the impression is still comig across that in
the case of the Victorian Executive, perhaps no action will be taken there
simply because of the numbers involved as you pointed out, it is difficult
to prosecute all the members of a political party whereas in the case of the
very few 20-year-olds who are refusing to register, refusing to answer
the call-up, they will be prosecuted.
PM. h'es, well, if they were members of the Victorian Executive and
who refused to answer the call-up, they would be prosecuted
too. Don't get the two things mixed up. Oae is refusinr, to accept an
obligation imposed by law. The other is particularly in the case of the
Victorian ALP, a significant section of the ALP, I think quite clearly an
attempt to grandstand, an attempt to pose as martyrs, an attempt to get us
to be in a position where we could be claimed to be attacking a whole
political party, and this is a matter which is, I think, quite different.
Q. Ya are not being intimidated by the fact that they are members
of a political party?
PM. I think we would be playing into their hands.
Q. Wouldn't a better solution be to change that part of the Crimes
Act that says " to incite" and transform it into action?
PM. Well I am bound to say that my inclination is tliat if you have a
law either you apply it or you don't have it.
Q. Prime Minister, in this case whether tihe laws are different, the
fact is that various people have broken the law. There h-ave been cases
in both Sydney and Melbourne completely outside the ALP Executive.
Are you saying that one law is one that should be applied and that this
other law should only be applied if you don't think it is going to lead to
some political disadvantage to yourself?
PM. I am saying one offence is quite differe: t from another offence.
I am saying that if it is an offence for a youth to refuse to answer the
call-up, and you don't apply the law to that offence, then you don't have
National Service. I am saying that in the other case, the offence has a
different result.
Q. Sir, the Deputy Prime MUnister said the Senate election will
be in November. Can you confirm that2
PM. No I don't know he said it and I can't confirm it. Did he say it?
/ 14 
14.
Q. Yes. When will be the date Sir?
PM. Towards the end of the at present thtnhdng.
Q. Ted Barker " The West Australian" VW the Federal
Government continue its subsidy to the gold minzing industry after the
present subsidy expires on June
PM. There is a paper before Cabinet on this at the momnent.'
Q. Stewart Harris, " London Times" I was just going to suggest
if you talk about the duty of obeying the law, and it is your duty as a
government, Sir, if there is a low which you are not enforcing, to repeal
that law. Otherwise the law gen~ erally cetnnot be respected.
PM. Is that a question or a statement?
Q. It is a question because I would like to hear your view On it?
It is a statement and a question. Don't you agree with it?
PM. PMIn. general, yes. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 68/ 1970
BRITISH ELECTION RESULT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr._ ohn Gorton,
I warmly congratulate Mr. Heath on his electoral success and
on his becoming Prime Minister. I have had a number of opportunities
both in Britain and Australia to get to know him. As a personality he is
familiar to all Australians not only in his capacity as a British political
leader but as a sportsman. His recent visit to Australia and his close
personal links here mean that he carries with him in his task o Prime
Minister of one of the world's most influential nations a first hand experience
of Australia and its people. I look forward to a close and fruitful collaboration
with him on a wide range of matters of particular and mutual interest to our
two countries.
CANBERRA June 1970 The Prime Minister has sent a personal message of congratulation
to Mr. Heath. 



REVIEW OF FINAN4CIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
ARRANGEMENTS
MR. GORTON I shall read a statement which has
been prepared for me and which I believe is to be circulated.
The main purpose of this meeting is to further discuss the new
general revenue grants arrangements between the Commonwealth
and the States to apply from the beginning of 1970-71. These
arrangements embrace both the method of determining the annual
general revenue assistance to each State, and the forms of
such assistance, and they are therefore of very great
importance in determining the future pattern of Commonwealth-
State financial relationships.
Dealing with the particular question of general
revenue grants, at our meeting in February I expressed a
willingness on behalf of the Commonwealth Government to discuss
matters relating to the financial assistance grants and to look,
as you had suggested, at the base total and to look, as you also
suggested, at such aspects as the betterment factor. I also
expressed a willingness to discuss and seek to ameliorate one
of the problems of the States which has been frequently put
forward; that is, the difficulty which you have seen arising
as a result of some of the loan money which the States secure
being provided, in fact, from revenue gathered by the Commonwealth
rather than by money borrowed from lenders in the normal way.
In the intervening months we have had discussions between our
Treasury officials, that is of the Commonwealth and the various
States, and I think these discussions have been helpful to both
of us. 
2.
Today it is my purpose and my responsibility on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government to put before you proposals for the ensuing five
years commencing on 1st July next. In offering assistance specifically
directed at helping the States to meet interest and sinking fund charges on
the State debt we have had in mind the concern which Premiers have
expressed at the annual growth of State debt and particularly at the rate this
debt has been growing in relation to the rate of growth of Commonwealth
debt. We have also taken into account our undertaking to bear in mind,
during our present review, the question of offsetting any additional financial
burden on the States which might arise from the Commonwealth's
decision in 1968 to remove the income tax rebate on Commonwealth loan
interest. In the Commonwealth's consideration of these proposals, we
have aimed at providing an average annual rate of increase in total
Commonwealth revenue assistance to the States substantially above the
increases that would have been produced if the present grants arrangements
continued unaltered. For example, if on the basis of past trends in
increases in average wages and population the present grants formula
would have resulted in the grants growing at an average of 9. 9% each year
over the next five years, we have calculated that the overall effect of the
Commonwealth's new proposals would be to increase that average rate of
growth to at least 12. 5% per year. 
I turn now to outline in broad terms what we have in mind
for each of the four sections of the Commonwealth proposals. Later I
shall circulate proposals setting out their es6ential features. On the
question of taking over State debt and of interest-free capital grants, we
propose that the capital grant begin at $ 200m in 1970-71 this is the sum
of money which we propose to make available as a grant rather than, as
has happened in the past, as a loan and that it should thereafter increase
at the same rate as the total works and housing programmes. The States'
formal Loan Council borrowing programmes will be lower each year by
an amount equal to the capital grant, of course, and the payment of the
grant by the Commonwealth will be conditional on agreement being reached
on the size of the total borrowing programme. As the primary purpose of
the grant will be to relieve the burden of debt charges on non-revenue
producing capital expenditure, it will be designed to help finance expenditure
on capital works and services from which debt charges are not recouped,
such as schools, police buildings and the like. However, while we would
appreciate from you an informal assurance that the funds will be used in
this way that is, for non-recoupable purposes there will be no specific
or legal conditions attached to the expenditure of the grant. 
As the grant will not form part of the States'
borrowing programmes, its distribution between the States
will not be a matter for legal determination by the Loan
Council. While it will therefore probably devolve on the
Commonwealth to accept final responsibility for determining
the distribution of the total grant each year between the
States, we are hoping that it will be possible to agree to
the distribution with you beforehand and in a co-operative
way. It is not possible to estimate precisely the
deb. t charges savings to the States that will result from this
proposal in the year each grant is made, although in future
years the saving will obviously be a full year's interest
and sinking fund. The savings in the first year will
depend on the timing of loan raisings during the year, and
the overall savings will depend, among other things, on the
size of the States' borrowing programmes in the future,
on trends in interest rates and so on. However, on the
basis of recent trends in increases in loan programmes and of
present interest rate patterns, we estimate that over the
years 1970-71 to 1974-75 the total debt charges savings to
the States from this annual grant will be of the order of
$ 148m, which is additional to some sall saving in 1970-71
which we have not included in the tables which will be
circulated subsequently. In other words, we are saying that
there will be a saving to the States from this in the first
year but it is difficult to estimate how much that saving will be. 
It may only be as much as $ 1 million. We are therefore discounting
it, not counting it in as assistance-to the States, and saying that it
is in the second year of this programme that the States will receive
the full benefit of this $ 200 million, because they will not be
paying interest and sinking fund on $ 200 which they would
otherwise be paying interest and sinking fund on, and that will
be the basis of our calculations on this.
On the question of the taking over of existing State debt,
I understand that officers have agreed that for a number of reasons
it would be impracticable for State debt to be taken over by the
Commonwealth before June 1975 except in a notional sense. That
doesnot matter because it is proposed that from 1970-71 to 1974-
the Commonwealth will reimburse the States by way of section
96 grants for the interest and sinki g fund charges on a progressively
increasing amount of State debt. So that although the debts are
not actually taken over, the cost of the debts to the States is taken
over. Specifically, we propose that $ 200 million of State debt be
taken over, in the sense just explained at the beginning of each of the ,. ext
years so that by the commencement of 1974-75 the Commonwealth will
be meeting the debt charges on a full $ 1,000 of State debt. The
arrangements for the formal transfer of the debt from the States
to the Commonwealth in June 1975 will be a matter to be settled
later. 
I understand that Commonwealth and State officials agreed an appropriate
parcel of $ 1,000m of State debt that is after going through the various debts
which were outstanding the officers agreed that a debt maturing at such and
such a date and at such and such an interest rate, and then another debt,
would make up the parcel which would be taken over. They agreed on a
parcel of $ 1,000m of State debt carrying an average interest rate of 5.
which is significantly higher than the average interest rate of around 5% on
all existing State debt. I do not propose to go through the precise
arrangements here, but the Commonwealth accepts the conclusions reached
by the committee of officials appointed to examine possible procedures and,
with the additional arrangements I have a! hi.. q .) utlined, we propose to
proceed along the lines recommended by the officials. The arrangements
are summarised in the document shall be circulating to you.
The grants, which will cover the average interest charges of
5% together with the annual sinking fund contributions of 25% on the debt
taken over, will be $ 11. 5m in 1970-71, $ 23m in 1971-72, $ 34. 5m in 1972-73
and so on, giving a total 5m available to the States over the next
five years. I point out that there has been some discussion as to the
method of taking ove; this $ 200m of debt. It had been suggested that
perhaps in the first year we would take over half of it, say, in September
and the other half in March, and only from those debts would we reimburse
the States for the interest and 
sinking fund the Commonwealth had to pay. But after discussion, we
believe that when we as a Commonwealth said we would take over $ 200M of
State debts each year it would be accepted by the States that we would take
over that $ 200M at the beginning of the year and pay the interest and sinking
fund at that date for that year, and this is what we propose to do.
It is the Commonwealth's view that the distribution between the
States of the debt notionally taken over ( and hence the distribution of the grants
to meet the debt charges) shouldbe in proportion to total outstanding debt under
the Financial Agreement as at 30 June 1970.
As I have mentioned, the two proposals on debt should substantially
reduce the rate of growth of debt charges over the next 5 years. The actual
saving in debt charges as a result of the two debt proposals that means the
actual additional resources available to the States as a result of the two debt
proposals, is estimated as follows: $ 11.5 M in 1970-71, $ 37M in 1971-72,
$ 63. 3M in 1972-73, $ 90. 4M in 1973-74 and $ 118. 3M in 1974-75, giving a total
of $ 320. 5M over the quinquennium. This is the amount that these two
proposals will add to the resources of the States, subtract from the resources
of the Commonwealth and inject into the spending capacity of the economy.
In addition to this substantial assistance for debt charges, we propose a decided
improvement in both the amount and the rate of growth of the financial
assistance grants themselves. We suggest 
that for 1970-71 the formula grants paid to each State will be determined
by applying the present formula to the formula grants paid to each State
in 1969-70, that is by applying the present betterment factor to the grants
received by each State in 1969-70, which I believe would add $ 100m to the
amount available to the States this year, with the continuing addition in
the case of Queensland of $ 2m to the 1969-70 base but, of course, not
including any special assistance approved last February or other adjustments
made since then. In addition, a further amount will be distributed between
the States in the same proportions as their new 1970-71 formula grants,
and this amount will then be included in the base for determining the formula
grants for 1971-72.
For purposes of determining the formula grants after 1970-71 we
are proposing to improve the grants formula by improving the betterment
factor from its present 1. 2% per annum to 1. 8% per annum, an increase of
in the size of this element of the grants formula.
Taken together we envisage these improvements, excluding the
debt assistance and grants in lieu of loan which I have already mentioned, on
the basis of present estimates of increases in average wages and population
will mean that the total financial assistance grants excluding the ones I
have mentioned should be some $ 384m higher in this forthcoming quinquennium
than they would have been under the existing formula.
We have given very careful consideration to the position of
Queensland and have come to the conclusion that in spite of the considerable
improvement that has been effected in its share of the grants over the last
years, the grants being received by that State are still too low relative to the
other States. 
We therefore propose to continue the arrangements existing during
the present quinquennium of adding $ 2m each year to the base on
which Queensland's grant is calculated.
Other States have also requested an improvement in
their share of the grants, mainly based on arguments about per
capita relativities. We have not been sufficiently persuaded
by such comparisons and we are not prepared at the present time
to suggest any special action to adjust the shares of States
other than Queensland, except for what I shall now say about
Western Australia. An additional grant of $ 15.5m was paid to Western
Australia in 1968-69 and 1969-70 in lieu of the grant it
had previously been receiving on the recommendation of the
Commonwealth Grants Commission. When the State withdrew from
the Commonwealth Grants Commission in 1968, it was agreed
around this table that the sum of the State's 1969-70
financial assistance grant and the $ 15.5m would form the
base of consideration for purpcses of he present review.
Since 1968-69 Western Australia has been receiving increases
in its base grant and they have been escalated, but the
$ 15.5m has not been incorporated in the base grant and has
not been subject to escalation but has been merely paid from
the Commonwealth revenue in lieu of the Commonwealth payout
through the Grants Commission. 
I am sure that it will be appreciated that there
could be no prior commitment by the Commonwealth to continue
to pay any particular amount to a State. We have noted that
since 1967-68 there appears to have been a significant
improvement in the relative capacity of Western Australia
to finance its Budget expenditure at a standard at least
comparable with that of other States. This means that, if
the State continued to receive its present share of the
revenue grants, including the special amount of $ 15.5m,
the situation would become increasingly unfair to the other
States and could result in a significant distortion in the
allocation of governmental funds between the States.
We are aware, of course, that the rapid rate of
population growth and economic development in Western
Australia has brought considerable problems, particularly
on the capital side, and we are therefore prepared to give
sympathetic consideration to that matter. The question
of any special increase in shares of the Loan Council
borrowing programmes is, of course, a matter for the Loan
Council to decide. I make it clear, however, that the
Commonwealth, subject to agreement on other matters,
will support in the Loan Council a special increase of
$ 3m in the State's 1970-71 borrowing programme for larger
authorities. It is not possible to estimate accurately the
effect that the proposals I have outlined will have on 
the total revenue assistance provided to the States over the next 5 years.
The actual amounts and rates of increase in total revenue assistance
each year will depend, amongst other things, on the rate of increase in
average wages and in population. However, on the assumption that these
are much the same over the next 5 years as they have been over the 5 years
of the present grants arrangements, total revenue assistance will be
approximately $ 54m more in 1970-71 and over $ 700m more over the next
years, than if the present grants arrangements had continued unaltered.
These are, of course, very substantial additions indeed. Let me point
out that when one says $ 54m more one means $ 54m more than the $ loo100m
more that the existing formula will provide.
As is well known, the distribution of the financial assistance
grants is weighted in favour of the 4 less populous States in that their grants,
in per capita terms, are higher than those of New South Wales and Victoria.
In addition, Tasmania receives an annual special grant on the
recommendation of the Commonwealth Grants Commission while Western
Australia has recently been receiving an additional grant in lieu of the
special grant which it previously had.
The general principle underlying the distribution of the
general revenue grants is that each State should be enabled to provide
government service s of a standard broadly comparable with those of each
other State without imposing higher taxation or other charges. However, 
12.
the principle is rather easier to state in general terms than it is to apply in
practice and there are many problems both of a practical and conceptual nature
which arise in attempting to determine the correct distribution of the grants.
While we believe that the present distribution of the grants is a fair one, we
do not believe that it is necessarily correct in precise terms. With the
grants being so large an element in the State's finances, we think that it is
of considerable importance that the distribution should come as close as
possible to achieving the general objective I have just stated.
But there are many difficulties in attempting to determine the
correct distribution. These difficulties, if anything, have become more
significant as a result of the very rapid changes recently occurring in the
finances of some States. We encountered some of these difficulties in the
course of the present arrangements when we examined the requests made to
us by individual States. I strongly feel that it would be desirable to have
independent investigation and advice on this question for the purposes of
the next review of the arrangements. I believe that if the Premiers
were disposed to accept this the best approach might be for the Commonwealth
Grants Commission to be given this task.
As the Piemiers know, the Commission has in the past been
responsible for recommending annual grants to the three less populous States,
but only Tasmania now 
remains a claimant State. Whether it continues to do so or not will be a
matter for it to decide. But in any ': ase the Commission c-: uld be given the
task of recommending on the distribution of the grants between all the States,
not necessarily annually but mainly for the purposes of the regular reviews
of the revenue grants arrangements But the success of any scheme along
these lines would obviously depend on full co-operatihn bc-. given by the
States. I therefore ask the Premiers to consider that suggestion and at
a later stage to let us have their opinions.
We would also be prepared to consider the possibility of
giv: . g the Commission the task of examining the share of the grants
paid to a particular State between reviews of the grants arrangements.
For example. Western Australia may wish to put a case before the
Commission as to the appropriate. -ss of its proposed share ef the grants.
If we were to implement these proposals there would of co.,, rse, be a
number of matters to decide as to the way the Commission would work
and we would obviously have to give ' lose thought to them As I say,
I wuld welcome the views of the Premiers on this whole quLstion.
I think that the proposals cutlined constitute a significant contribution
towards an improvement in Commonwealth-State financial relationships. It
will be said, no doubt, that they will not solve all th-financial problems with
which the States are faced. We, for our part, well apprcci-'.-e the continuing
pressure on governments to improve the standard and rang.; f services
provided by governments. But we have got to have regard tc: the limitations
imp. sed L; the supply of real resotr es. In recent !-ears expenditure at 
all levels of government has been in reasing at a signifian. n ly faster rate than
gross national product, a: cd ihe oYf oCtaolm monwealth reven.; e assistance proposed
should ensure the States of a source revenue that will grew significantly faster
than the gross national product, H. wever, progress si: n. cessarily be
achieved in stages and we must havc regard to the ne'ed t" provide scope for the
growth of the private sector of the economy. If we are to pr-' ide such a
substantial increase in revenue assistance and in res'-urces available to the
States it should be on the basis that there are no signifi: an' -hanges in the
financial relationships between the Commonwealth and th. ates during the
peri'd cf th-agreement. In parti-Llar. we would expect rh3. the States and
their authorities will continue to pay pay roll tax and that the distribution of tax
res.-'-Irces between the Commonweal.. h and the States will remain unchanged
W' are aware, of course that it has been one -f " he States' main
arguments that they should share in the natural growth of r venue on income tax
and while I do not accept that there should be any fixed rela-ionship between
inc-. me tax collections and the reve-nue grants any fixed relationship between the
growth of income tax revenue and the growth of revenue grants I would mention that
we -xpect the growth of revenue assistance under the prop-sals outlined to be close
to, if not in excess of the rate of grcwth in the total -f incc. me tax collections from
individuals and companies at the presently prescribed rates
Well, gentlemen, those are the matters which I s-: e as our having to
discuss: First, a taking over of $ 200m of State debt each , e: r at the beginning
of th year and the paying of interest and sinking fund on it, secondly, the provision
each year of $ 200m of grant which would otherwise haive been loan; thirdly, the
question of what additions should made to the bas-grants for 1970-71, and what new
betterment factor should be used to escalate this over the 5 Jears coming. 
I hope that some tables on these matters have been circulated to the Premiers.
It is possible that the Premiers may wish now to examine them during an
adjournment. MR ASKIN Yes, that is the situation as far as I am concerned
and I think the other Premiers feel as I do. As you know we submitted
our case in writing last February and I still think that what we suggested then
is the best way to preserve the federal system. You put up alternative
proposals and they are quite involved. I would like to say quite a lot about
the adequacy of some of the amounts under the different sub-headings or
rather, as I see it, the lack of adequacy. However, I think that should wait
until we have had a talk amongst ourselves. Most Premiers would probably
want to have a talk with their advisers first and then we will get together as
a team to discuss what is involved and the implications of the proposals
you have just put. It may be some time before we are ready to meet again,
because there is quite a lot of meat in these various proposals. At this
stage I can only say that I hope we will be able to prevail upon you to do
a bit better than you have already set out, but to do that I know we must come
back with some cogent arguments. I am sure you will understand that I have
just made a few brief remarks and that I will want to speak at length on
the base grant, betterment factor and so on. I do not think that this is the
appropriate moment to do that and, subject to the concurrence of my
colleagues, I suggest we adjourn so that we may talk separately first and then
together. 
SIR HENRY BOLTE Should we go into Loan
Council now? MR. GORTON It is up to the meeting. I thought
the Premiers might like to examine these proposals first
in Premiers Conference, come back and make a few more
comments on them before we go into Loan Council. The
Premiers will have to move out of this room to study the
proposals. MR. ASKIN I think Loan Council to some extent
depends on a study of the first proposals. I would like
to get these cleared up one way or the other. I recognise
the importance of Sir Henry's suggestion, but Loan Council
will depend closely on matters decided here. I think we
should try to dispose of these matters first. Would it
be possible for us to have a copy of your statement?
MR. GORTON I would hope so. This time it was
written out beforehand. It will get to you as soon as
possible. Mr. Bjelke-Petersen, do you agree?
MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN Yes. I think we ought
to get together ourselves first. This is fairly involved
Mr. Gorton. MR. GORTON That is what we will do, and I
will be at your command when you are ready. Could I just say 
1i7.
that I understand what the Premier of New South Wales has
said about adequacy. However, on two of the matters that are
before us I thought there was virtually complete agreement. The
first of those is the taking over of $ 200M of State debt. I thought
the officers had agreed on that. I thought you would be pleased
that we had decided to take over the interest and sinking fund charges
as from the beginning of the year. I thought we had agreed on the
$ 200M a year grant, which otherwise would be a special loan.
I do not know how the Premiers feel, but I do not anticipate much
discussion on those two points.
MR ASKIN I think the main discussion will centre on
the first two items of the 5-point proposal you made last February
that is, the base grant and the improvement, which you said at the
time would be adequately improved, and the betterment factor.
MR GORTON That is what I thought, too.
MR ASKIN These will occupy most of our time.
SIR HENRY BOLTE Except that there could be a
formula used to decide how to apply these other proposals.
MR GORTON There will be discussion clearly
on whether the distribution should be as we have suggested
it is only a suggestion on the question of taking over State
debt and whether that will be distributed in proportion to the
total debt of the States. 
SIR HENRY BOLTE Or would be in proportion
to the recoup percentage of the States?
MR GORTON That I am sure will be the subject of
discussion amongst the Premiers, but the total amount is
agreed. The payment of interest and sinking fund charges is
agreed. I shall listen with great interest to how various
Premiers think it should be distributed, but the total will be
the same. Then we shall adjourn now until the ringing of the
bells. The Conference adjourned 



FOR PR2SS P. M. No 69/ 1970
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime M nister, Mr. John Gorton
Invitations have been extended to representatives of national
organisations to meet with Ministers in Canberra cn Thursday and Friday
( 2 and 3 July). Mnisters will meet representative national organisations in
three groups primary industry, manufacturing industry and commerce.
In addition, representatives of the Manufacturing Industries
Advisory Council, the Export Development Council and the Australian Council
of Trade Unions will each have separate discussions with Ministers.
I am sure that these talks, to be held before our Budget discussions,
will be most useful in providing Ministers with the current vievws of those
directly involved in commerce and industry.
CANBERRA 29 June 1970 NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS INVITED TC BE
REPRESENTED AT ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Primary Industry Group
The Australian Farmers' Federation
Australian Wool Growers' and G-aziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers' Federation.
Australian Mining Industry Council
Manufacturing Industry Group
The Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber cf Automotive Industries
Commercial Group
The Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers. I 



FOR PRESS PM No. 70/ 1970
BARRIER REEF ENQUIRY: ASSISTANCE
WITH LEGAL COSTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Commonwealth will meet the reasonable legal
costs, including Counsels' fees, of five conservationist bodies
appearing before the Royal Commission on Barrier Reef Petroleum
Drilling. Requests for financial assistance fur full-time
legal representation were received from the Australian Conservation
Foundation and four Queensland scientific or conservationist
organisations; The Great Barrier Reef Committee, the Queensland
Littoral Society, the Save the Barrier Reef Committee and the Wild
Life Preservation Society of Queensland.
Earlier, 35 members of the Queensland Bar had
offered their services gratuitously to assist the conservationists
in presenting their evidence. This would have resulted in each
set of counsel appearing for one week at a time, a course which would
have presented obvious difficulties.
CANBERRA, 1 July 1970 



OPENING OF TULLAMARINE AIRPBORT
MELBOURNE, Vic. 1LJULY 1970
Spe c byj the Prime Minister,. Mr. ohn Gorton-
Mr. Premier, My Lord Mayor, Parliamentary Colleagues and Ladies and
Gentlemen: just about six years ago, on a very dank and drizzling and miserable
September day, in my capacity as Minister for Works, I drove the bulldozer which
turned the first sod for the construction of this air-port.
And very glad indeed I was to do it for two reasons. One was that it
began construction of an airport sooner than it had been thought construction woulld
begin. And the other was that I had escaped the conisequen~ ces of taking a rather
risky gamble. You see, what happens when edifices of this k,, inrd are constructed by the
Government is that after the basic decision, the Department of Works prepares
general plans and then those general plans are submitted to the Parliamentary
Committee on Public Works. And only after the Parliamentary Committee on
Public Works has agreed to the general plans are the detailed plans proceeded with.
This is a very good and a very proper way of going on. But in this particular case
I felt it would add an inordinate time to the date on which construction should begin,
so I instructed the Department of Works to assume that tihe ? arliamentary Public
Works Committee would agree to the general plans and to go right ahead with the
detailed plans. This was a very reprehensible thing to do and I hope it will never
be repeated by any Minister for Works. But the end result was, because the
Committee did agree with the general plans, that we were able to start much sooner,
and I was able tu avoid the embarrassment which would have uccurred if the
Committee had not agreed to what we had put forward. Those were the two reasons
why I was glad to be able on that day to begin this construction.
And I remember then that the whole 5, 000 acres of farmland which was
to become this airport gave the impression of being nothing but a sea of mud and
a rather bleak and a rather repellent cold rural scene. But now today, Tulla marine...
I like the name " Tulla marine.... I'll have more to say about that later, but now
today Tullamarine and that farmland has been transformed into Melbourne airport.
It has become a significant addition to the aviation maps oZ the world, an international
airport international because those who planned it were progressive and
imaginative in their thinking international in siz-e and its sophistication, and
international because it will provide truly internatio-nal services.
So today Tullamarine phases Victoria the international airline
circuit and offers facilities to travellers as a port of arrival and of departure equal
to any facilities offered anywhere in the world. Cne more window on the world for
Australia, one more window through which the world car. look at Australia, and
for that reason, I think, a big day for us. 
This, as you were told by Senator Cotton, has been a record year for
Australian civil aviation.... two international terminals completed in our largest
cities within weeks of each other and record numbers of passengers carried. And
this year we celebrate fifty years of civil aviation and the fiftieth birthday of Qantas
Quee11sland and Northern Territory Air Service which, you may remember, began
with these old machines looking as if they were tied together with wire, in
Queensland and in the Northern Territory, and which today gives its name to our
international service. We have come a long way in half a century to rank as we do amongst
the first six nations of the world, and we can take pride in that. But in taking
pride in it, let us look back a little, let urp look back to past exa~ mples of services
to aviation, because looking back to past examples may sustain a vision for the
future. Let us remember men like Hudson Fysh, Kingsford Smith, Bert Hinkler
and a host of other Australians, and let us never forget that they were the first to
cross the great oceans of the world, except the North Atlantic, andi even there
Harry Hawker almost made it. These were the men who blazed the trails across
hitherto untravelled skies.
So this airport stands today as a monument, as I see it, to the men
of the past and it stands as a promise for what we can do in the future. There are
no limits to the distance we can go if we plan well, if we build well as I think we
have done here and if we are inspired to venture in the years to come, as the
pioneers of aviation of whom I have spoken were inspired to venture in their time.
Sir, before 1 declare this airport open, there are two things I would
like to say. When I declare it open, I am going to call it Melbourne Airport, and
that is what It will officially be. But I hope and I believe and this is a personal
hope and belief that that lovely liquid name " Tullamarine" will not disappear
from our vocabulary, and that around the world Tullamarine Melbourne Airport
in brackets, or if you like: Melbourne Airport Tullamarine In brackets, will be
known by names such as La Guardia or Heathrow or whatever it may be.
So when I do declare it open, I do it in the hope that it will be known
not only as Melbourne Airport bout as Tullamarine and that as Tullamarine, it will
be an airport able to operate for seven days a week and for twenty-four hours a
day. And I hope and believe this will be so if for no other reason than when there
is an investment of this size then the more use that it got from it the better it is
for everybody. And there is no need for an airport not to operate, provided those
living around it are not harassed by the noise of such operation. Those living
around Tullamarine now, 1 believe, would not be so harassed, and it is our
intention as a government that this airport should so operate, subject in the future
to just this one qualification that the State authorities concerned see that there is
not built up around the perimeter of this airport hcusing settlements which, in the
future, might lead to great noise discomfort to those living in them.
Having the airport, let us have a buffer zone around it, and it then
will operate as an international airport should.
Ladies and gentlement, 1 declare Melbourne Airport open and unveil
the plaque which records the event. 



Premiers' Conference
Opening Statement by Prime Minister
It is only a little more than two months since we
last met in Premiers' Conference to discuss the budgetary
situation then facing you in 1970-71o For myself, I carried
away from that meeting a feeling of genuine achievement.
The Commonwealth had, I felt, by its offer to provide special
revenue assistance of some $ 43 million, gone a long way
towards meeting the residual problem with which the States,
even after the efforts they had made in the preceding month
or so, were still faced.
So indeed it has proved. Information about your
expected financial outcome for 1970-71 ( and for 1971-72,
which I shall come to later) has been supplied to us by you
and your Treasury officers and I would like to digress for
a moment to express the Commonwealth's real appreciation
for the ready co-operation you and they have displayed. I
know that the Treasurer would join me in that expression of
thanks, The information for 1970-71 which you have supplied
indicates that, compared with the situation prior to the
April Conference, there has been an improvement of over
million in the States' revenue and loan accounts. The
special revenue assistance which we provided accounted, of
course, for the larger part of that, some $ 43 million. In 
addition, the financial assistance grants payable to the States
under the formula have turned out to be some $ 13.2 million
higher than they had been estimated to be at that time a
fact of which, I understand, you were advised last week.
Finally, the estimates for all but one State show some
improvement, quite apart from these two factors, over the
estimates supplied last Aprilo Overall, whereas last April
the States as a whole had appeared to be facing deficits on
revenue and loan accounts combined of over $ 70 million, on
the present estimates the combined result, taking the States
as a whole, will be a virtual balance
All in all, Gentlemen, I think that is not a
bad outcome from what has obviously been a situation fraught
with difficulty for all parties, both the States and the
Commonwealth. When I recall that in bringing down their own
budgets the States actually budgeted for a deficit of nearly
$ 33 million on combined revenue and loan accounts; and when
I recall also that the effects on State finances of postbudget
wage awards in 1970-71 have been of the order of $ 100
million, I think the outcome that has actually been achieved
is striking. Now I hasten to add that I am well aware that this
outcome has not been achieved without cost. In part it has
been achieved at the cost of the Commonwealth, with
consequences for our own budget and the economy that I shall
come to later. In part, however indeed, in somewhat larger
part it has been achieved at the cost of sharp cut-backs in 
one field or another of State expenditures or, to a much
lesser degree, of increases in State taxation. Those are
the measures, one might say, of the wage inflation that has
been imposed upon State Governments in 1970-71 by circumstances
largely beyond their control. We would all recognise that the
outcome is not, in that sense, a happy one.
So much for the 1970-71 position. Since the
April Conference, however, the States have re-examined their
prospects for 1971-72 and the figures submitted to us in
that regard show a rather depressing picture. In short,
the " full year" effects of the extraordinary wage awards
made this year will mean that the States will face in 1971-72
no less than $ 170 million of additional expenditures on that
score alone, over and above the very large increase already
suffered from that factor in 1970-71. This clearly means that
the States must inevitably face a very difficult year.
In passing, Iwantto underline one point. It relates
particularly to the field of the State budgets, but also to a
very large extent to our own Commonwealth budget.
1970-71 has been a year characterized by increased
wage awards of a startling kind. It is not too much to say
that this factor alone has served to unhinge the budgets
of public authorities throughout Australia at all levels of
government. It will continue to do so through its " full year"
effects in 1971-72. I cannot too strongly stress the
gravity with which the Commonwealth contemplates that situation.
To return to the situation facing the States in
1971-72, no doubt the figures that you have supplied to us
could be debated here and there at the margin; but broadly 
speaking I can say that we accept them as constituting, to all
intents and purposes, a good indication of the order of
magnitude of the problems you are all facing. No doubt you
will all have something more to say about that when we come
to hear you on the positions of your own States.
We are, believe me, very conscious of the
problems you are facing. It is true that, with luck, 1971-72
may prove to be a passing phenomenon for the States indeed
it would be hard to contemplate another such year in 1972-73.
If so, that may provide a basis for lifting our eyes a
little beyond 1971-72 itself, and regarding the problems of
that year as somewhat more manageable, viewed from that
wider perspective, than perhaps they might appear if we
concentrate upon them alone. That, however, is as may be
the States' financial problems in 1971-72 will be difficult
viewed from any standpoint, and you should know that we
acknoiledge that fact fully.
That, very naturally, is the problem as the States
see it. We in the Commonwealth see it too, but see also
an over-riding economic problem. I refer in particular to
our own budgetary position, and the serious situation
confronting us in the field of general management of the
economy. As to our own budget, not only shall we finish
this present financial year with expenditures sharply up,
and our overall position appreciably worse, by comparison with
what we had budgeted for last August, but also the outlook 
for 1971-72 is, to say the least, grim. In large part
because of the sharp increase in our payments to the States,
associated in particular with the compensation for cessation
of receipts duty revenue and with the special revenue
assistance we have provided, our expenditures in 1970-71
seem likely to be of the order of $ 1,000 million up on
1969-70. Revenues will be up also; but not commensurately,
and our overall position will, as I say, show a marked
deterioration from what we had provided for last August.
As to 1971-72, it is of course too early to be
able to gain a fully considered picture of our own budget
outlook. At this point of time we are still in process of
considering the expenditure " bids" submitted by Departments,
based as those purport to be solely on existing policies.
The Treasurer will have his pruning knife out with respect
even to those figures; but, without entering upon the detail
of them at this time, I can say that the prospective position
they reveal with respect to the likely growth in Commonwealth
expenditure in 1971-72 even in the absence of any of the new
spending policies which are being pressed upon us from all sides
( including, I have no doubt, the policy of assistance to
yourselves which you will be pressing upon us) is nothing short
of alarming. So far from reining in the increase in our
expenditures, which is and must be the central objective of
our budgetary policy at this time, it is clear that we shall
have to exercise the most extreme restraint if we are to hold
the increase below that which has occurred in 1970-71. 
Such an increase in Commonwealth expenditures
would, in my mind, give rise to sharp questioning at any time.
It would be doubly open to question in the context of our
present economic situation and prospect. In brief compass,
that situation is that inflationary pressures have not abated.
Overall demand is increasing strongly with continuing strong
escalation of costs and prices, and the public sector is
contributing more than proportionately to that position.
Such a situation, if allowed to continue, and particularly given
the possibility that increased demand from other quarters
could also eventuate, would be fraught with consequences for
the economy of the gravest possible kind. You will therefore
readily see why I say that, in this context, the prospective
increases which are being foreshadowed in our own expenditures
are nothing short of alarming. As to these questions of the
budgetary and economic situations, you may want to hear
further from the Treasurer. All I will say further at this
time is that, in these circumstances, we conceive it to be
the first and foremost duty of the Commonwealth to provide
leadership in contesting this obviously disturbing state of
affairs. It has necessarily been against this background of
our own budgetary difficulties and our continuing concern
with the overall economic situation, that we have been looking
at the whole question of a growth tax for the States which
would assist you in meeting your own difficulties. I say at
the outset that we see a lot of advantage in the States having 
access to a new and broadly based tax field. We have,
consequently, made a wide-ranging study of the whole field
of possibilities. One point to emerge quite early in such a study
is, of course, that there are various constraints upon the
possibilities. For example, and in some ways most
importantly, the constitutional position clearly debars the
States from imposing virtually any form of sales tax
( including, so far as we can see, a value added tax). The
unhappy history of the receipts duty is a salutary lesson.
Nor would such a tax imposed by the Commonwealth on behalf
of the States ( which would have to be imposed at a uniform
rate throughout the Commonwealth) offer a satisfactory
alternative to the States. Indeed we have always regarded
any State growth tax, to be at all satisfactory, as necessarily
offering the possibility of variations in their own rates by
individual States that wish to do so.
That narrows the field considerably. We have, as
I say, looked in detail at the remainder of the field but,
for one reason or another we find ourselves forced to the
conclusion that there are in fact only two areas which offer
scope for any move of this kind. The first is personal income
tax and the second is the pay-roll tax.
As to the first, that is income tax, we have given
close study to the possibilities, as indeed we have on several
earlier occasions, and have come to the view that it would
not be advisable to re-open the field of personal income tax to 
the States. I doubt if much useful purpose will be served by
going in detail into the pros and the cons as we see them.
Our decision is, of course, based upon general grounds; I add,
however, that it has particular pertinence in the economic and
financial circumstances which we find confronting us at present.
The Commonwealth has therefore closely examined
what appears to be the sole remaining possibility, namely
that of giving the States access to the field of pay-roll tax.
We recognise that, from some viewpoints, this may not in
itself be regarded as an ideal tax although we also believe
that a good many of the arguments commonly brought against it
are not well-founded. In particular, the argument that it
adds to costs can, broadly speaking, be applied to all taxes.
However, it is broadly based, grows almost directly in line
with the economy, would be relatively simple to administer I,
( partly because employers already draw up returns on a State
basis) and certainly offers some prospect for raising
additional revenue should States wish to use it for that
purpose. We have therefore, after full and thorough
examination, decided that if the States would like to have
access to this additional taxation field, the Commonwealth
would be prepared to withdraw from the field completely ( apart
from levying a similar tax within our own Territories). In
doing so, arrangements would be made to ensure, at the
Commonwealth's expense, continuation of the export incentive
scheme based on the present pay-roll tax rate of 2' per cent. 
In withdrawing from the field of pay-roll tax, the
Commcnwealth could not of course contemplate the loss of
revenue involved and we would therefore propose to offset
that loss, subject to some qualifications which I shall come
to in a moment, by commensurate reductions in the financial
assistance grants.
In considering the amount of those reductions, we
would be prepared to take into account three points:
The additional cost to the States in
administering the new tax, which would, of
course, be minor.
The fact that, since revenues from pay-roll
tax at constant rates would probably grow
slightly more slowly than the financial
assistance grants the States would be losing
would have done, the reduction in the grants
" base" for 1972-73 and subsequent years would
need to be adjusted accordingly. ( There would
be no effect of this kind in 1971-72 and the
grants arrangements as a vrhole are, of course,
subject to review in four years' time.); and
Having in mind the state of the finances of
some local authorities, the States might well
feel that, once the pay-roll tax became a State
tax, they would find it difficult to continue
levying it upon the non-business activities of
local authorities. If so, there would of course 
be some loss of revenue involved, and in that
case the Commonwealth would regard it as doing
the fair thing if it were to share as to half
in that loss.
On this approach what the Commonwealth would, in
effect, be doing is to hand over to the States the pay-roll
tax on the basis that, while levying the tax at the present
rate, they would be unaffected financially by the transfer except
in so far of course as they join us in relieving local
authorities from payment of the tax in respect of their
non-business activities. The States would of course stand to
benefit from the scope for raising additional revenue that the
new tax, once in their own hands, would give them.
That, Gentlemen, is at this stage the sum and
substance of the Commonwealth's offer in this matter. The
question to which I think we need an answer is whether the
States would wish to take advantage of this offer. In order
to assist you and your officers in your consideration of
that question, we are now circulating a document in which
fuller details of a scheme along the lines I have suggested
are set out. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 71/ 1970
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
The Government began its pre-Budget series of
economic consultations in Canberra today.
In the morning, Ministers had separate diiscussions
with representatives of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council, the Export Development Council and the Australian Council
z3f Trade Urnors. In the afternoon, Ministers conferred with national
organisations in two separate groups primary industry and
manufacturing industry. The discussions will continue tomorrow when
Ministers will meet representatives of national organisations in the
field of commerce. These economic consultations are valuable in
providing Ministers at first hand with the views of those directly
engaged in commerce and industry, and the discussions today and
tomorrow will be of considerable assistance to the Government in its
consideration of the forthcoming Budget.
CANBERRA, 2 July 1970
Note Attached is a list of participating national
organisations and their representatives. V 4 
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED
AT ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
2 3 JULY 1970
Primarn Industry Group
Australian Farmers' Federation
Australian Wool Growers' and
Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers'
Federation
Australian Mining Industry
Council
Manufacturing_ Industry Group
The Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation
Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries Senior Vice-President Mr F. J. McAvoy, CBE
President President Mr B. A. Wright
Mr R. V. Sewell, OBE
President Mr L. V, Price
Senior Vice-President Mr J. B. Massy-Greene
President President Vice-President Mr D. L. Elix
Mr R. S. Prentice
Mr N. W. Lawrance
Commercial Group
Associated Chambers of Commerce
of Australia Deputy President
Australian Bankers' Association Chairman
Australian Council of Retailers President Mr Mr Mr W. H. Lambert
T. B. C. Bell
T. Luxton, DSO, MBE 



OPEN4ING OF NORVJICH UNION HO[ USE
SYDNEY N. S. W. 2 JULY 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Ramsay, Distinguished Guests from Overseas, Ladies and Gv-, ntlemen:
I am glad to be here this afternoon to croak out a blessing on this
new building. It is particularly appropriate, I think, considering the way I feel this
afternoon, because if I feel the same way tomorrow afternoon, Sir, you are likely
to get a new policy-holder. They call it Asian flu. I think it is probably a bit of a
reflection on Asia. But whatever it is, you have had it and I have got it.
As you say, Sir, I do seem to be having quite a run of Openings this
week. Tullamarine airport one day I hope you will continue to call it Tullamarine,
and today one new building pointing to the skies and adding significantly to what
is already an exciting skyline in Sydney.
I think that both these occasions remind us of the expansion going on all
around us in Australia today which will, I am sure, continue unabated through the
decade that lies ahead of us.
Now, it is quite right, Mr. Ramsay, that in Melbourne one indicated
that the enterprise one was opening would continue to work for twenty-four hours
a day. And I am not going to take your advice as to Norwich Union employees,
because unless i miss my guess they are so widespread throughout the Mo rld that there
is not one hour of the day whenr some Norwich Union employee is not working
somewhere to write some policy for t: ae betterment Gf hurnariity in general.
Sir, this Company has had an active association with Australia, going
back for more thar. one hundred years and I am happy in the presence of your
London Principals, to acknowledge your company's established place in our highly
competitive insurance industry, to acknowledge its service to its policy-holders,
and to acknowledge its contribution through investment to our national development.
It is a mutual society. It is a society where the profits do not get siphoned off,
but whev~ e those who are policy-holders share in the growth of the enterprise, and
where the country in which it is established shares in the growth of the enterprise,
because as I am sure youi know, Sir, some thirty per cent of investments of funds
made by insurance companies are required by law which some people think is
wrong, but I think is at least convenient, to invest thirty per cenPt of their funds
in what I will call developmental activities so that it can help the building of schools
and roads and hospitals and all the other matters which both State and Commonwealth
Governments seek to bring to the people of this country. ./ 2 
So it is not just something which is a busineas, although of course it is
a business, but is something which helps the community in wA~ i. Jch it is established
and &amp; tiSti, r , is saying something of some magnitude because the rapid expansion
of the insurance business in Australia is a very clear reflection of the health and
growth of Australia and is of no small magnitude. I understa:-A that life insurance
investment in Australia now exceeds 000 million arid is increasing at more than
per cent a year and we are delighted that this should be so, we are delighted
that you should be building up your own enterprise in this way, not seeking as
happened some time ago, to take over an Australian life company in the process. I
quote those figures because of the importance which I do attach, and which we do
attach, to insurance funds in Australia because of what I have already spoken of
as the great contributionit makes to investment, to Australia's progress.
Now I do have some statistics here which -may be interesting because I
am told that we are cane of the world's most insurance-minded countries, and that
taking the ratio of premiums to national income as a guide, we rank second with
Canada in all the countries of the world, with America being the leader, and if you
take dollars per head spent on premiums, then we rank, fourth after America, Canada
and Switzerland. For tho) se who are interested in precise figures, which I imagine,
Sir, insurance people are, the exact figures in United States dollars spent per head
are: United States $ 277, Canada $ 150, Switzerland $ 134 and Australia $ 115. As
we grow, as we will in the decade in front of us, I have no doubt that we will be
rated second and that will be good for you and for your policy holders and for us.
I think that the establishment of this building by the Norwich Union shows
the confidence that company has in the future of this nation of Australia. I am certain
that confidence is not misplaced. I am positive that in the decade ahead we will grow,
and grow more rapidly with each passing year. That we will have our problems, as
we do now have our problems, is obvious. We have our problems with our rural
industries caught in a cost-price squeeze, the price being uii-ab: le to be decided by the
producer or by this government. We have diff iculties which are inherent in the
growth of big cities, the rapid growth of great cities, and we have a requirement to
give our young people going out to marry a capacity to buy laild and houses not
without effort because these things have always required effort and always should, but
at least without undue effort, and this is also a problem that is with us now.
But there has never been a country at any stage in the woxk which has
not had problems. We have got them. But the opportunities we have got so far
outweigh them that we will, I believe, in the next decade, be almost a transformed
nation and will., have fully justified Norwich Union's own faith in our future as
exemplified by this building which I now take pleasure in officially declaring open. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 72/ 1970
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS.: FURTHER. GRANTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Approval has been given for the final series of grants recommended by the
Australian Council for the Arts from its budget for 1969/ 70. The grants, which tptal
$ 319, 523, will assist a wide variety of special theatre projects, music activities,
festival productions, Aboriginal arts programmes, and film-and film-making ventures.
From the Special Projects Fund further assistance for experimental
theatre productions has been provided. A special season of new Australian plays, a
multi-media artists' workshop, and an actors' workshop will also receive support.
Many grants provide the services of professional directors, technicians, tutors,
actors and adjudicators for amateur and professional activities, while support will be
given for special school. performances and demonstrations by the Australian Opera
in raost capital cities.
Within the Aboriginal arts programme sums of 000 and 00
respectively will train an Aboriginal art conservationist and provide advice on
developing and maintaining authenticity and high standards 0g work among Aboriginal
artists. Other grants will assist Aboriginal performances and displays of traditional
work. Among music grants, 620 to the International Society of Contemporary
Music will assist an extensive concert programme of conternoorary music, including
many new Australian works. Other grants assist special concerts including a performance
by the Australian Youth Orchestra prior to its appearantce at Expo ' 70. Several
grants will assist summer music schools and workshops in country centres including
a school for band leaders. A grant of 055 will enable the A: dela ide Woodwind
Quintet ' which recently returned from a highly successfCul international tour) to perform
in North Queensland and the Northern Territory; 530 to Opera-in-a-Nutshell
S. will bring high quality performances to the country and to schools. A
further music grant of 003 will provide orchestral services for the Western
Australian Opera Company.
Among recommended grants for festival activities, 000 will provide
theatre and music programmes within the Waratah Festival i: New South Wales, and
000 will assist a youth festival at Williamstown, Victoria.
Many loans and grants totalling approximately $ 100, 000 have been
approved to Australian film makers for experimental workc in f1ilm and television.
Other grants will provide financial suppoort for Australian film festivals and to assist
the use of Australian films in these festivals. A grant is give-I-to the Australian
Film Institute for the establishment of a distribution and exhibition service for films
and television programmes made with help from the Experime-ntal Film and
Television Fund. $ 10, 000 has been allocated for an educational programme among
children and young people to develop the understanding and critical appreciation of
film and television. I am pleased at the breadth and variety of these projects and hope that
they will provide opportunities for Australian creative artists and enrich the
experience and enjoyment of Australian audiences.
CA NBERRA
S July !-970 



NEW GUINEA TOUR 1970
NEW STEPS TOWARDS SELF -GOVERNrMENTr IN PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
peech y the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
at Papua Hotel, Port Moresby
S6 JULY 1970
"~ 4fYo onour, Members of the Administrator's Executive Council,
Distinguishd guests, Ladies and Gentlemen.
I think that the Territory of Papua and New Guinea and the other islan 1i
which at the moment make up the whole, faces a most difficult period in its evolution
towards: self-government in the future and towards independence. We have reacael
a stage of political development inside the Territory at which there are vocal dem'nds
for progress, or at least demands for changes in various fields. But such changes
are probably more difficult in this Territory than in . ay other area of which I can
think. We have here in Papua and New Guinea and then across areas of sea
other islands which, as I said, at the moment make ui a whole, We have ' 7erritory
composed of what are virtually different races, with different languages, with
different district loyalties and we have aTerritory in which some areas are
clamouring for quicker advancement towards self-government and ind-ependence and
other areas are fearful that the advance is already too swift. And we have a
Territory, and I look to the future, which of its very nature is liable to be suoLwct
to the dangers of fragmentation.
Those dangers stem partly from different languages, partly from different
outlook, partly from different stages of development. They can be reinforced by
fallacious argument that if some part of Territory is fortunate enough to discover,
for example, a copper mine then it would be better off by itself. And if this
fallacious argument, and I believe it is a fallacious argument, is accepted thien at
some stage there would be that fragmentation. If oil were discovered in Pap la
there could be a danger of fragmentation there, and so it would go on ultimately,
I am sure, to the detriment of all the people of the Territory which we would like
to see advance as a unit towards nationhood. Talking of advancing as a unit
towards nationhood there have been, sir, as you have said I think, great advances
made economically and politically in the Territory since the Second World War.
I think the time has come for further advances to be made alona tr at
road. I do not speak of self-government in 1972 or in any calendar year that you
may care to mention, because you are on a road towards sell-government. You
have started on it. There will necessarily be progress along it step by step and
anyone who seeks to say that at a given month at a given year a period will have
been reached when that can be achieved is, I think, dangerously simplifying the
problem and is acting to the detriment of the people for the future. / 2 
But there are further steps now short of self-government but towards
self-government which I feel should be made and these I wish to outline to you
tonight. We believe that the time has come when less should be referred to
Canberra for decision and more should be retained for decision by the Administrator's
Executive Council and by the Ministerial Members who for the most part make up
that Council. What we suggest is this that there should be negotiated between the
Australian Government and the Government here, a sum of money for recurrent
expenses and for minor works inside the Territory. And, speaking for the Australian
Government, we would expect that there would be more effort on the part of the
local peoples to raise revenue inside this Territory, as years go by for the purpose
of this recurrent expenditure and these minor works. But once this sum of money
had been negotiated, made up partly by local revenue, partly by what we will call a
grant-in-aid for these purposes from the Commonwealth, then that sum of money,
we believe, should be divided by the Administrator's Executive Council among the
various Ministries up here which will put in claims in the way Ministers put in
claims to the Cabinet in Canberra.
So there will be a claim from the Minister of Education, there will be a
claim from the Minister of Health, there will be a claim from the Minister of
Public Works, and the Administrator's Executive Coun~ cil within the sum of money
available to it will apportion to these various Ministers the Sums that they can
spend. When that has been done, when a Minister, let us say, of Education, has
received a sum within the total limits then we believe that he should have authority
as to how that money should be spenit in the Territory, should be able to make
decisions here which now require reference to Canberra before they can be made.
If h&amp; has a new programme, he will need to get the agreement of the
Administrator's Executive Council. If, as is not unknown inpuclitical circles in
Canberra, he wishes to get more money in the course of the year for his own
portfolio at the expense of somebody else's portfolio and that is the only way he
will get it, he won't get -i* t by additional grant from Australia then the
Administrator s &amp; ecutive Council car, listen to the pleas of th-e two Ministers
concerned and, as a council, can decide what should be done.
This, I think, will be a great transference, not so much of power, but
of administrative power to the elected Members who are Ministerial ! rnzbers in
this Teiritory and to the Administrator's Executive Council. As there is to be this
transference of power and in future, no doubt, other transf,-erences of power, so
concomitant with it will there need to be an assumption of res-ponsib ility by the
Ministerial Members and the House of Assembly in Papua and New Guinea. If
there is a requirement for more money to be provided than has been provided by
the existing level of local taxes, and vwhat the Australian Government is prepared
to provide by a grant-in-aid, then that's fine. It can be provided if the House of
Assembly up here is prepared to impose the taxes required to raise it in the same
way as the Government of Australia has to impose the taxes required to provide
what it wants to do. I hope you won't read into what I have just said any suggestion
that Australian aid will cease for Papua and New Guinea. Of course it won't,
but I hope you will read into it a realisation that as power is transferred so also
must responsibility be transferred and these two things go hand in hand.
That is the first proposition we will make. We will have in the
Australian B udget a negotiated a mount of money for the Territory called a / 3 
" tgrant-in-aid" added to the sum of money raised by the decision of the local House
in tL~ e number of taxes they propose to impose, and the rate off taxes they propose
to impose, and that will be left to division among the Ministries by the Administrator's
Executive Council and for spending by the Ministerial Members concerned.
We will have also in the Australian Budget a development grant. That
development grant for the general development of Papua and New Guinea Territories
will remain with, and be negotited, of course, by the Australian Government and
the Government up here, but its expenditure, since it will be provided entirely by
the Australian taxpayer, virtually entirely, will remain the responsibility of the
Australian Government. In other words, we will want to see that a general
development grant is expended on those projects for which it is voted, and we
will want to overseee that it is properly expended on those projects.
We propose, this is just a mater I suppose of presentation too, that
in future we would have on our Australian Budget an item which is to pay all the
overseas allowances of expatriate and overseas officers so that everyone can see
that this comes from the Australian taxpayer and from what Is provided inside
Australia, and not from what is provided in the Territory. The base rates of
jiublic oervants from the Territory and from Australia can of course be the same,
but I think it is essential that people should know that the additional allowances paid
do come from the Australian taxpayer, are shown in the Australian Budget and
are paid to expatriate officers.
We have had it brought to our attention that there Is fear in the
Territory amongst responsible people that key public servants may be lost to the
future service of this Territory because, if they are expatriate officers, they have
an insecurity of tenure. A man of 40 or 45 may reach a point where he has a
family to educate, responsibilities to take on, and where he says to himself
" Should I remain in the Service of the Territory, either as a Member of the
New Guiuea/ Papua service or as a contract oficer? Should I continue in this or
should 1, because I do not know what the future holds for me in case self-government
or independence comes, should I at this stage begin to carve some new career for
myself". And it has been put to us that a number of key public servants, I mean
d istrict officers, professional officers, sub-professional oYfficers and technical
officers, either have resigned or may in the future resign because they do not
know what would happen to them when self-government or independence comes.
It has been put to us that this poses a danger to the future development
of Papua and New Guinea. because these people and their accumulated experience
are going to be required when self-government comes or independence comes.
And so we have decided to do this. In order to encourage selected key overseas
officers to remain in the service of Papua and New Guinea for the present and
future good of the Territory, we propose that those who are permanent officers
of the Papua and New Guinea Public Service, some of those who are permanent
officers of the Papua and New Guinea Public Service, and some of those who are
contract officers, will be offered enlistment in a new Australian-based service.
Offers of engagements in this new service ( and it will be a selective serv ice),
offers of engagement now and in the future will be made to the selected key
Administrative officers of whom I have spoken, but acceptance of such an offer
will be entirely woluntary on the part of any such officers and offers of selection
will be decided by the Administration. 4 / 4 
4.
At the moment we believe the ceiling of this new Commonwealth based
service should be approximately 1, 000. It will be additional to the existing
arrange~ aents under which officers serve in the permanent service here or in
which they serve as contract officers. That is to say permanent officers who
are riot appointed to the new service will continue as they are at present, losing
nothing of what they have achieved. Contract officers who are not offered
appointment will continue on their existing contracts. But appointments to the
new Service will carry a guarantee by the Australian Government that a memier
appointed will be assured of continued employment in the Public Service of Papua
and New Guinea or in the event that he is transferred from that, or displaced from
that, in the future, there will be a guarantee that the Commonwealth Government
will place him in permanent employment in a like field on a comparable salary.
This, we hope, will enable many officers to resolve the dilemmna in which perhaps
they are at present placed, and will enable them to decide to make their accumulated
experience available to the Government of the Territory of Papua and New Guinea
while at the same time retaining full confidence in their ownM future and in their
own future employment. Before the details of this approach are settled, overseas
officers themselves will be consulted throughout the Territory, as will the Public
Service Association. But that is another step which we propose to make which we
think will be of assistance to the development of this country i the future and
which so many people in this Territory have urged us in one way or another to do.
We propose that the Administrator's Executive Council, as a result
of the new responsibilities which it assumes, will have a spokesman for that
Council appointed in the House of Assembly to answer questions as to what the
Administrator's Executive Council has done and why it has done it. And we also
propose that the Parliament of Australia will not exercise its veto power in
relation to ordinances if those ordinances affect the actual res-, onsibilities handed
over to Ministerial Members,
Now let me indicate to you the kinds of areas in which we feel
responsibility shotild be taken by Ministerial Members here and the kinds of areas
in which we feel the Commonwealth of Australia should continue to exercise its
present authority. There will be delivered later by my colleague, the Minister
for Eaernal Territories, in more detail but for the moment the subjects on which
we thin-k that authority to take decisions should reside in the Ministerial Members
or the Administrator's Executive Council are educatio; r. l primary, secondary,
technical, but not tertiary public health, tourism, co-operatives, business
advisory services, workers' compensation, industrial training, posts and
telegraphs, Territory revenue including taxation ( for inherent in what I have
said is the need foc the House of Assembly to take greater responsibility in the
levying of revenue in this Territory), price control, coastal shipping, civil defence,
corrective institutions ( that's prisons in case anybody's wondering), registration
of customary land, land use, leasing of land and town planning and urban
development. The areas in which we wish and must at this stage retain final authority
are the judiciary, the enfor cement of law and order, internal security, external
affairs, external trade and large scale development projects in agriculture, in
transport, forestry, in those things in the five-year development plan which we
are now some half-way through and which will for the most part be financed by the
Australian taxpayer and therefore overseen by the representatives of the Australian
taxpayer rather than the representatives of the Territory. 
I may say that other matters such as civil aviation and defence will,
as they are at present, be paid forand controlled directly by the Commonwealth
Departments concerned.
In the Adiitao's Executive Council, when, decision~ s are being
arrived at as to proposals put forward by Ministerial Members for authority to
spend on this or that, the official Members will sit in the Administrator's Council,
as they sit at present, and they will offer advice to that Council and they will offer
their experience to that Council. They will not take part in any vote that Council
may have as to what it finally does. I suggest that these are very significant steps
fo ' rward along the road to transferring power to the representative Members of the
Territory and to transferring responsibility to the representative Members of
the Territory. But I emphasise again that the total sum available fIor recurrent and
minor works will be a total sum, only able to be added to, if thre House of Assembly
wishes. to find some new avenue of expenditure, by imposing taxation to raise the
revenue for that new expenditure because as a Territory progress es towards the
ability to exercise greater power, so it must accept the greater responsibility for
financing the decisions which it make..
Even when in the future self-government comes or independence comes,
there will be continuing Australian assistance for this Territory, but the amount of
recurrent assistance provided will, to a great extent, depend on the amount of
self-help which the Territory is prepared to impose upon itself. The developmental
sums made available for development here will continue., but if, as I hope, the
Territory develops and has an increased taxabla~ capacity because of such things as
the Bougainville copper mining or oil, which may be found in Papua or elsewhere,
the industrial development if that happens, then we would expect greater responsibility
still to be accepted by the people of Papua and New Guinea, because when you boil
it all down I believe that this is the position as far as the Australian people are
concerned. We feel we have an obligation and a responsibility. I don't talk about a
technical obligation at the moment under the trusteeship council feel we have an
obligation and responsibility to help the development of this country to a stage where
it could not only govern itself politically but govern itself economically, and we
will accept that responsibility and this may go on for years.
But I don't think we would want to accept the position where in years to
come people from the Territory came to us and said " These are our needs, these
are our requirements, we don't want to accept the responsibility for taxing to meet
them you tax, you provide them'". At some stage the Australians would say:
" Sorry"'. But if we continue to provide the assistance we are providing and intend
to provide in the future, then at some stage there would be no need for the people
of the Territory to come to us because, by a joint efi~ ort, we would have been able
to raise the economic capacity of this country to a stage where the companies that
have come in would be taxed, where wealth that flows to individuals would be taxed,
where developments that have already taken place would lead to developments still
in the future, and where the Territory of Papua and New Guinea could probably
look after itself. / 6 
6.
But for the present and in the foreseeable future vie intend to provide
that assistance at least which we provide now. And for the present we propose
tais new step forward towards self-government and responsibility, which I know
in Fome areas of the Territory will be thought to be going too far, which I know
in other areas of the Territory will be thought to be going not far enough, but which
looked at from either end are, I think, necessary steps towards a future which must,
at some time, hold full internal self-government and full inde-pendence.
This is as far as we feel we should now go, arnd I finish as I began by
saying that I believe it against all logic and all sense to put a timetable on this.
We don't want to remain in the Territory one week against the wishes cf the
majority of its people. We don't think we ought to get out of the Territory against
the wish of the majority of its people. We don't want to rule any peoples without
their consent. We don't think it proper to move out and possibly help a vocal
minority rule a majority without that majority's consent, and one can't put a
timetable on this but one..: can say these are steps towards the time when this
Territory; will be self-governing and when its people will express their views.
And we will take account of those views instead of imposing our views on them as
to a date for self-government and independence.
Your Honour and Members of the Administrator'S. Executive Council,
I hope you will agree that these are significant steps and I hope with all my heart
that the people of the Territory and the Members of the House of Assembly and
the Members of the Administrator's Executive Council will make the fullest
possible use of the opportunities now~ offered for the advancement of this
Territory and the assumption of the responsibilities which must go with them.
Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW GUINEA 1970
LAE LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton 9 JULY 1970
Opening remarks not recorded....... and one part of the Territory can
help another. As roads go inland from a town like Lae, the town is helped by that
road and the country opened up by that road is also helped. It is mutual assistance.
So I hope the Territory will progress as a unit the coastal areas, the highlands
and the islands. Clearly this Territory is on the road to self-government and at the end
of the road which it is now travelling, self-government will be attained. Thereis
no turning back on this road. It must be progressed step by step, but at the same
time it is not for the Australian Government to dictate to the people of the
Territory the speed at which they must travel along that road,
So I think it quite wrong to say that at a given year 1972 or 3 or 4 or
any given year, the Australian Government will impose on the people of the Territory
self-government whether they want it or whether they don't. And as long as I am
Prime Minister, we will not seek to impose our will on the people of the Territory
in that way. But at the same time, if and when the time comes, as ultimately it will,
when the people of the Territory themselves, the majority of the people say they
wish complete ' nternal self-government, then at that time they will get it because
we do not wish to help to administer and govern a country against the wishes of
the majority of its people. And we wouldn't do it, ary more than we would get
out and stop helping to govern a country against the wishes of the majority of the
people in it. Having said that, I now want to refer to the new steps which have been
taken along the road which I have described steps which were announced in
Port Moresby a few days ago. There is going to be a transfer of power for decisionmaking
from Canberra to the Administrator's Executive Council and with this
transfer, the House of Assembly will achieve powers additional to those it now has.
In future, money for the recurrent expenses of the services in the Territory and
money for minor works will be negotited as to amounts between the Australian
Government and the Administ ration in the Territory So there will be available
for these purposes, the sums raised inside the Territory fo: which the House of
Assembly will decide the taxation rates, the amounts raised inside the Territory
together with that amount negotiated as a recurrent grant from Australia. It will
then be for the Administrator's Executive Council to apportion between the
Departments the sums of money to be spent for those purposes. And in carrying
out this work, in carrying out this apportionment, the official members of the
Administrator's Council will be present, will give their advice, will give the
benefit of their experience, but will not vote on the decisions made by the rest of
the Administrator's Executive Council.
And in those fields which are handed over to this area of decision by
Ministerial Members, the Australian Government will not exercise its power of
veto over ordinances passed by the House of Assembly provided they fall
within this area. / 2 
I think this represents a quite significant transfer of authority to the
Ministerial Members and to the House of Assembly, and I believe it is essential
that the House of Assembly, the Ministerial Members and the people of the
Territory fully realise that as authority is transferred, so is responsibility
transferred, and as authority is increased so does the need for self help and
provision to carry out programmes from internal sources.
This does not mean that there will be a cessation in any way of Australian
aid. I believe that in the future of this Territory for a long time ahead, there is
going to be a need for that Australian advice, that Australian experience, that
AustraLian help which has brought the Territory so far in the last twenty years.
There will also be a need for Australian capital which will enable the Territory
to develop as it has in that time.
And so to finish because I would like to give some time for questions
and for discussion to sum it up the Territory is the road to selfgovernment.
It will be best for all parts of the Territory if that road were travelled
as a unit. Australian help in that travelling will continue, bt there will be from
time to time additional authority provided for the people of the Territory, yet noone
can say at what particular date complete self-goverrnment should come, because
it should only come if the majority of the people in the Territory wish it.
There is very much to do for the future of this country and I express the
strong hope that that will be done by a partnership of the coastal people, of the
highlanders and the people from the islands, of people whether they come from
New Guinea or Papua or from Australia, and that working in harmony to build and
to achieve, we will be able to give this country the economic base which must be
there for full political stability and that we can avoid any divisions which will
hamper the task which together can be so well done.
That is all except for a wish I have to congratulate the Members of the
Local Councils upon the work which they are doing which is so significant to the
people of this Territory and to wish them well in the future. Thank you.
In answer to a question about investment, Mr. Gorton said:-
We think the Papua/ New Guinea Territory r-eeds investment for development
just as Australia needs investment for development. WVe would like to see as
much of the equity in the new development held by the local people, if it is possible.
At this stage it seems quite unlikely that a significant amount of such
investment could be bought from the savings of the local people and that is one of
the reasons why we are setting up a-n investment corporat:. io which can buy equity
in new enterprises or expanding enterprises and retain that equity for the good of
the people of the Territory until the time comes when it can be sold to the
individual people of the Territory.
So we believe investment is needed. We believe the Australian Government
should retain control over the size and form of overseas investment because the
country can be subjugated economically if we don't, but we impose it under that
control and we would wish to see as much of it as possible either immediately,
which is unlikely, or in future retained for ownership of the New Guinea people, the
Territory people. I think that is about all I have to say on that subject but, as you
know, 20 per cent of the new development in Bougainville was bought by the
Administration for the good of the New Guinea people. 



1 SV30ISJIUTL 1970TO NEW GUINEA 1.970
~ a~ aY RABAUL ( AIRPORT ARRWAL)
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
in r ely to Mi. John Kauti 9 JULY 1970
Tolai, I come before you today at a time which should make us all sad and
sorrowful for in this country, on this Peninsula, Tolai is divided against Tolai and
brother's hand is raised against brother. And so people have been hurting each other
instead o' sitting down together to try and reach agreement with each other by discussion,
to try and find out what it is that most of the people want. Surely it would be better
for all the Tolai if that were done rather than that people should be spoken badly of and
should hurt each other. Would not that be better.... as it was?
For myself, I can say this. And, Tolai, do you not want to hear.... For
myself and for my Government I can say this. There has been disagreement on the
question of a Multi-Racial Council. All we wish to do is to discover what it is that
most of the Tolai want, and if most of the Tolai do not want a Multi-Racial Council,
then there will not be one. But if most of the Tolai do want a Multi-Racial Council,
then in the name of that democracy of which Mr. Kaputin spoke, there ought to be a
Multi-Racial Council. I have said in Canberra, I have offered to Mr. Kaputin when
he came to see me in Canberra..... " Let us discover what the people want. Let us
have a referendum so we can see what their will is, and we will then follow their will
as so expressed." Would it not be better for the Tolai to decide peacefully and amongst
themselves, in a democratic way, what sort of council they want so that can be the sort
of council they can have.
The other thing which has been spoken of is self-government now, selfgovernment
for New Britain, because the Tolai are not the only people on New Britain,
self-government for the Tolai if most of the Tolai don't wan. t it is that what is
suggested? Would it not be well for each man to sit down in his own home and think
what it is he really wants and what advantages he can get from being a part of the
Territory which just recently has moved a great way toward self-government.
I am sure that the people of the Gazelle Peninsula would wish to share in the
wealth coming from other parts of the Territory, would wish to get the benefits from
the copper being discovered in Bougainville, would wish to get the benefits should oil
be discovered in Papua, would wish to have the added economic advantage which being
part of a unit means and which, as Mr. Kaputin said, is the essential basis for real
political advancement. I believe the Tolai would want that. I ask each individual
Tolai to sit down in his house and think whether that is not better for him.
I know that these are problems which are worrying many Tolai. I know that
there are land problems too which are worrying Tolai. I have asked the leaders of
the Mataungan Association to meet me today and ta discuss these problems but they
have refused to do so. Why? / 2 
2.
So that there can be continued economic progress, continued political
advancement, I ask the Tolai members of the Mataungan Association to ask their
leaders to discuss these things with us, so that the Tolai themselves can resolve
their problems and so that the problems between the Tolai and the rest of the
Territory can also be solved peacefully by discussion and with Australia's
blessing. Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW GUINEA 1970
RABAUL QUEEN ELIZABETH PARK
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton 9 JULY 1970
There is division amongst the Tolai people.... brother's hand is raised
against brother, and instead of people sitting down to try and reach friendly agreement
by discussion, people are hurting and beating those who disagree with them.
Peace is better than that kind of fighting, agreement by discussion is better
than name-calling and hurting each other, and yet this happens today inthe Peninsula.
And why? There has been some disagreement over whether there should or should not
be a Multi-Racial Council or a Local Council. We have said and I have said on behalf
of the Australian Government that we wish to discover what it is that most of the people
in this Peninsula want by way of a Council.
If most of the Tolai people on the Peninsula wish not to have a Multi-Racial
Council, then we would be prepared not to have a Multi-Racial Council. If most of the
Tolai people on the Peninsula want a Multi-Racial Council, then we would be prepared
to have that. But we need to know what it is that most of the people want.
I said that some months ago to one of the leaders of the Mataungan
Association, Mr. Kaputin. I said " Let us have a referendum. Let the people vote.
Let them say what they want." And I repeat that offer to all the people of this
Peninsula today. But such a vcte would need to be a secret one because when people already
are beating each other some may be frightened to come out openly and say what they
think for fear of being hurt. So the best way is a secret vote, and is this not handing
over to the Tolai people the solution of this problem? I think it is.
So I would speak not only to the people gathered here but to all those through
the length and breadth of this Peninsula. And I would say to each one of them: Sit
down in your own house, talk to your neighbours quietly. Ask yourself Would it not
be better to have unity than division? Would it not be better to have discussion than
fighting? Would ic not be better to find out what most want and then agree with what
most want?" I ask all those living here to do that.
I have been told by some I think a minority-but by some, that what is wanted
here is self-government now, but self-government for what? For New Britain? Because
New Britain has many other races than the Tolai. And if not for New Britain, then for
what? For the Gazelle Peninsula only? Is that asked for?
If it means self-government for the Gazelle Peninsula, what will the results
be for the people who live here? They will have left the Territory. They will no
longer be one unit of what is to be a nation. They will not have the right to share
in riches discovered in copper in Bougainville, or riches which may be discovered 
in oil in Papua or in the industrial development of all the rest of the Territory. They
would have no right because they would be gone. Do they want that?
Is it not true that there ar.-many Tolai ncin who go to Papua, or to New
Guine-a or to other parts of the Territory and who wiork to high positions in the
Administration or in the Police Force or in industry. Surely Tolais would want
that opportunity to continue, would not want to break off from) what should be a
united nation. There have already. beens very great steps towards transferring more
power to the people of the Territory, announced less than a week ago, and ultimately
there will undoubtedly be self-government for all. But those who tell you that
the Gazelle Peninsula or the Tolai people would be better se-parate are telling you
untruly and would damage your opportunity for work and would damage your
opportunity to shai-e in the wealth of the whole natior.
And I would like all the people in the Peninsula quietly, in their own
houses, talking to their relatives and their friends, again to consider on this
matter whether what I tell you is riot true. And if you come to the conclusion
that it is true, that it is to your advantage and] to the in.-teres-, t of all the Tolai
people, then let that voice be known by casting votes for those who agree with
you in the House of Assembly, by letting the wishes oZ the people be known to
Councillors and tD others who will be influenced by what you say.
So I have spoken to you of the Multi-Racial Council, I have spoken
of why I think it would be bad for the people here to have self-government now,
if indeed that meant anything for an area of this size, and I know that these are
problems and that there are other problems to do with land tenure in the
Peninsula. I have asked the leaders ol the Mataungan Society to come to see me, to
talk about these problems, to try to solve them, to see if we can reach agreement.
But they have refused to do this. They have refused to exchange ideas. I would
like those Tolai who live on this Peninsula to let it be known that most of the people
want these things to be discussed in a friendly way, want them to be resolved,
want there to be a stop to beatings, to hurtful na me-call ings, to spitefulness and
to divisions. Do not think that there would be any support from Australia fox those who
have caused divisions in this country. I know another politician came here some
time ago and indicated that there might be such support. This is the Leader of
the Opposition. He is not in the Government he can do nothing. And this
should be known to all the people in this Territory.
And for the last things I Shall say to you, I say this. We must, while
we are here, see that the law is observed for the protection of all people here.
/ 3 
3.
We want to stay and help in the Administration and the Government and the
provision of funds to the Territory including the Gazelle Peninsula, for as long as
we are wante... and we will do that. When most people wish us to go, which I
think would not be until we have helped to build up the inductries, to build up the
economic capacity of this Peninsula and of all tne rest of the Territory, if people
then wish us to go, we would be haT; pp: y to go. For we have no wish to administer
or govern one minute after most of the people in the Territory want us to leave.
And for the rest, I hope and I believe that the people here and in the
rest of the Territory will for the years ahead want that kind of partnership Vhich
has Shvwn such progress in twenty years, will want to have more and more say in
the running of their government, as they will. And that when the Tolai can heal
the division within themselves, then we c~ an all shak&amp;% e bands as brothers and
tackle the task of construction instead of destruction which lies in front of us and
which we want to do together.
Thank you for listening, both townspeople who are here and the Tolai
who are here. I1h ope that my words, and my suggestions and requests for
peaceful co-operation, will be heard far beyond the confines of this meeting and
will help for the future prosperity o! the Gazelle Peninsula if the majority of people
here agree that what I have said is the best path for us all to follow.
Thank you. 



JUL 1970 VJSIT TO NEW GUINEA 1970
KIETA, BOUGAINVILLE LOCAL GCVERNMENT COUNCILS
Speech by the Prime Minister, I/ r. J ohn Gorton JULY 1970
I would like to thank the Me mber, Mr. Paul Lapun, for the kind things
which he has said about what Australia has done in general and about the small part
which I was able to play in the time of the troubles, so that between us we were able
to overcome those troubles.
I really cannot give an answer on whether a road to a particular locality
will be built yes or no I cannot do that at this stage. All .1 can say is if the
suggestions for this road, and possibly for otherroads, isputtorheAdministration-ard
I am sure you would be the man to put them to the A--ministration then they can
be fully considered along with other development proposals which would have to be
decided on the basis of economics a.-d developing priorities.
On the second question which you raised, that of trying to see that local
businessmen would have their own businesses in the town of Arawa, I understand
that it has already been agreed by the Administration that the Development Bank
will make loans to local people for businesses in that town subject only to a decision
as to whether they are likely to be a good businessman. That, of course, applies
to whoever loans are made, but we want to see as many local businessmen as
possible with their own businesses in this new town which is being properly planned
and properly built.
Also we want to ensure that the greatest possible equity is held by local
people in developments at Arawa. I have seen a list of a number of projects in
which the Administration want to see at least 49 per cent equity owned by the local
people, whether it is a garage, an hotel a variety of businesses of that kind
where we will certainly offer and seek to provide at least a 49 per cent equity.
I know that there are some people how many I don't know but there are
sume people who wish to secede from the Territory of Papua and New Guinea. I
think that it would be bad for the people of Bougainville if this should now happen.
I think that as a part of a much bigger unit, the future of the people of Bougainville
will be oetter. There will be bigger markets for the produce of Bougainville, there
will be the advantages that the people of Bougainville can go to other parts of the
Territory and get work there, join the Administration there, There are all the
advantages which a large unit gives to the people as distinct from a smaller unit.
Also as the industry of the other part of the Territory grovw and develops, as
perhaps oil is discovered on the mainland, then while Bougainville remains in the
Territory, she will share in all those advantages. And that means her individual
people will share in those advantages.
Australia itself is a Federation of six different states, and Australia
is strong and each state is the stronger because it is a part cf that Federation.
If the State were out by itself, it would be weak in all ways, or weaker in all ways, / 2
L 
and it would be to the detriment of the people of that state in Australia. And I think
the people of Bougainville should think of this and see whether it does not apply to
the people of Bougainville as well.
In any case, I suggest that it is much too early to try and reach any
decision on this subject now. I think there should be much more thought given to it
by the people of Bougainville, much more discussion, meditation on the advantages
of secession, recognition of the disadvantages of secession, talk amongst the older
men and the younger people. And that should go on for some long time. Time
enough to make significant decisions on something of this kind when thetime of
independence of the Territory comes. In the meantime, let there be proper
discusbion among the people of Bougainville.
Meanwhile, Members elected to the House of Assembly from Bougainville
will now have much more opportunity to influence decisions, and the Ministerial
Members and Assistant Ministerial Members will have much more ooportunity to
influence decisions. And they can get up when they are elected by their people here,
they can get up in the House of Assembly and speak for the people here and they
can say " We want this road" or " We want that harbour" or " We want that wharf",
and they can put the views of their people in the same way as Members of Parliament
from the different States do in Australia.
That does not mean, of course, that every time one of these requests
is raised, it will be met. But it does mean that the wishes of the people of
Bougainville will be able to be known all throughout the Territory. I know the
Members you have elected and they are pretty good Members and they speak out
strongly for the people of Bougainville.
So I think it is too soon yet to talk about referendums for secession.
I think, as I said before, there should be much more time for discussion amongst
the people here. And I say this and you know it is true. It is nothing to me if
Bougainville is independent. It is nothing to Australia if Bougainville is independent.
I don't say what I say because it is of some advantage to me or to Australia but
because I believe it is of advantage to the people of Bougainville, and I want them to
have a lot more time to make up their own minds about it.
I think that is all I have to say on those subjects except to express
the hope that now that much more authority has been given to Ministerial Members,
the Administrator's Executive Council and to the House of Assembly, and decisions
that were formerly made in Canberra will now be made in the Territory, that this
will help to develop the capacity for running the Territory amongst all the peoples
of the Territory and that they will all go forward together, helping each other, and
with Australia giving help as long as it's wanted, to build up a better life, a
better economic life for all the people. 



VISIT TO PAPUA / NEW GUINEA-: FAREWELL BROADCAST
The Prime Minister, Mr._ John2Gorton_
s peaking over ABC Radio, Port Moretsby XLLY1970
Today I leave the Territory. My visit has, of necessity, been all too
short. But it has included major announcements of new policy, and I have seen
many different places, talked to many different people, and been able to come to
some cc.. nclusions. The major policy changes announced are, of course, that there would be
a significant transfer of power, power to make decisions, from Canberra to elected
representatives of Territory people.
The Administrator's Executive Council will n.-ow have authority to
allocate nioney for recurrent expenses in many fields aiA for minor works and the
House of Assembly will have to be asked to appropriate such monies in the way
recommended. These proposals, which were announced in some detail last Monday, are
significant steps along the road to ultimate self-government.
I also re-emphasised that the Australian Government bdieves the
Territory is on the road which leads to full self-government. There can be no
turning back from that road. It must be travelled to the end. Buz it is not for the
Australian Government to dictate the speed at which the ultimate goal is reached.
It is not for us to set an arbitrary date and say that on that date we will
force full self-government on the people of the Territory whether they want it or not.
Instead our attitude is that the majority of the people of the Territory should decide
when they wish full self-government and when they do this they will get what they
want. In the meantime the possibility of different regional responsibilities for
regions at different ievels of development could well be examined.
It will come as no surprise to the people of the Territory that I found
the Highland people, almost to a man, violently opposed to self-government in
1972 or on any fixed date. They do not want this before they feel they are ready
for it and of course, the Highlanders make up the majority of the whole population.
In the coastal areas, Wewak, Lae, Madang, opinion was more
divided but there was a strong majority opinion expressed at all the meetings
which I attended, that the people did not want full self -government until a time of
their own choosing. And in these areas there was for the most part, tolerance
ar~ d a working together to build a strong edifice zan the economic foundations which
have been so well laid. // 2 
In Bougainville where there has been talk in some quarters of a desire
to secede from the Territory I formed the strong impression that the people Nvished
for much more time and thought and discussion on that suggestion before they came
to any conclusion. In the Gazelle Peninsula the sadly divided state of the people was evident.
I asked for discussion between the two groups for a cessation of the violence used
by the Mautaungans, and for an attempt to arrive at solutions of problems by
majority opinion with discussion and without hate and anger. I renewed the offer of
a referendum on the multi-racial council and asked the Mautaungans to discuss their
problems with me but they refused. I can only hope that the call for reasonable
discussion will bear fruit but, in the meantime, the law must be enforced.
[ t is impossible for example, to permit land, which has been bought by
the Administration for distribution to Tolais, to be illegally occupied by squatters.
This illegal squatting is taking place at the very time when the Land Board is
considering, from Tolai and Bainings people, applications for the 350 blocks
available. If permitted to continue it will retard the chances of orderly economic
development in the Gazelle Peninsula, and, indeed, if squatting is permitted on
Administration Land bought for distribution to Tolai, what will prevent squatting
on land already held by Tolai. This matter is too important to be left
undetermined, Illegal occupation of land must and will be stopped.
The future of the Territory as a whole is, at this stage, certain in sorre
way, uncertain in others. It is certain that it will eventually attain self-government
and independence. I hope it will remain unfragmented and that different parts of it
will not secede. For if it is fragmented then each separate part will be economically
and politically less strong than the whole.
And I believe the people in every part, if secession were to take place,
would be worse off. But this question is one that will, no doubt, be settled by the
local people themselves, perhaps at the time of independence, and the answer to
this is not certain. In the meantime as new roads are built from the Highlands to the Coast,
as new districts are opened up, as more schools are built and staffed, as better
agriculture is taught and new crops are tested, as mineral wealth is exploited and
as industries arise, I think the Territory will, at an accellerated pace, go forward
to that strong independent economic position, which alo. ie can ensure continued
economic progress and continued political stability.
There must and will be more local participation in, and ownership of,
businesses and industries and there should be a continuing partnership between those
who live in the Territory and Australians.
I leave with great hope for the future of all the people of this land, and I
leave with a feeling that we all owe a great debt of gratitude to those Australians who
have selflessly taught in the missions, have selflessly brought law and order and
honest administration to what was but yesterday a primitive country and I think we
all owe, too, an equal debt of gratitude to those local people in all regions who have
helped in this task are still helping in it and are taking more and more
responsibility to continue it, for in them lies the hope of the future of the Territory. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 73/ 1970
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE TO QUEENSLAND
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Commonwealth has agreed to the contin. uation of drought relief
assistance to Queensland in 1970-71 on the same basis as assistance provided
in 1969-The Commonwealth will accordingly share with the State, on a
dollar-for-dollar basis, the cost of agreed drought relief measures up to
$ 4 million andwill meet the full cost in excess of $ 4 m-ilion.
In 1969-70, the Commonwealth provided assistance totalling
nearly $ 14 million and it is estimated that the Commornwealth's share of
expenditure on drought relief measures in Queensland i-1970-71 could amount
to over $ 11 million.
The decision to continue substantial drought relief assistance
reflects the Commonwealth's concern for those farmers who are still suffering
from the effects of the prolonged drought in Queensland.
Total Commonwealth drought relief assistance to Queensland since
1965-66 has amounted to more than $ 30 million so that the Commonwealth has
made, and will be continuing to make during 1970-71, a major contribution
towards alleviaLing the effects of the drought coulitioris.  f
CANBERRA 14 July 1970 



EMBARGO 30 p. m. Friday _ L7 Luly 1970
NEWS INPrERVIEW CN CHANNEL Z7 NETWORK
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JC NKG1Oj RTON 17 JULY 1970
Interviewer John Boland
Q. Prime Minister, will police troops be used to clear the 1, 000 Tolai
Mataungan Association squatters from the Kerevat area twenty-five miles from
Rabaul?
P M I hadn't heard that there were 1, 000 squatters there-, but I don't think the
actual number matters very much. It fluctuated, I thought, between 100 and 400.
And the actual use of police to clear the area would be a decision taken by the
man on the spot, the Administrator. But I have little doubt at all that if this is
the only way in which to clear people who are illegally occupying lands, then the
police will be used to clear them from those lands. You must remember, this is
land which was bought by the Administration for subdivision and allocation to
Tolai through a Lands Board Tolai and Bainings, the local people and it is
being illegally moved into by squatters. ShoLld this become necessary, this use
of police, then we would certainly back up the Administrator in whatever was
necessary to see that the land is allocated to the peo-ple for whom it was bought.
Q. I underst", nd the reports this morning say that 700 additional Tolai moved
in there there were 300 there. Now, that was a repot......
PM: Well, however many it is they will have to get off.
Q. Who ordered the 1, 000 police into Rabaul? Report.-are that Mr. Barnes
said he received advice from the New Guinea Executive Council and reports are
that the Executive Council of New Guinea says that they did not advise the sending
in of extra police.
PM: I think this is a misunderstanding that stems from your proper use of the
word " reports". All the information I have is that Mr. Barnes said that he had had
two meetings with the Administrator's Executive Council and at both those*
meetings, the Administrator's Executive Council had strongly urged that law and
order saould be supported. Well, that got transmuted and translated by certain
journalists into the Administrator's Executive Council ask.-ed that police should be
sent which was quite a different matter more definite matter than saying
we want law and order supported. And that having been re73orted, then some
Members of the Administrator's Executive Council said, " Wiell, we didn't
specifically ask for police to be sent in" and that is quite right to the best of my
knowledge. What they said was " We want law and order maintained". / 2 
Q. But there are about 1,000 police there?
PM: Oh yes, but a lot went there before I arrived because I don't think the
Mataungan leaders make any secret of their willingness to resort to force, and
there were fears of clashes between the Mataungan Tolai and the anti-
Mataungan Tolai.
Q. Prime Minister, we are looking forward to having you and talking to you
in depth about your tour of New Guinea, on Channel 7' s current affairs
prog-amme, " This Week", on Sunday night.
BACKGROUND: The interview with the Prime Minister about New Guinea will be
telecast by HSV 7 Melbourne at 9. 50 p. m. on Sunday, and by C. T. C. 7 in
Canberra at 10. 30 the same evening.
Copies of the transcript, embargoed until 9. 50, will be issued in the
Gallery on Sunday afternoon. 



EMBARGO 9. 50 m. Sunday 19 July
CHANNEL 7 NETWORK CURRENT AFFAIRS 0 Jutt
PROGRAMME, " THIS WEEK"
TV INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINSTER,
MR JOHN GORTON
Interviewer John Boland
Recorded on Friday, 17 July for screenin on Sunday, 19 July
Q. Prime Minister, what were your overall imjressions of your tour of
Papua/ New Guinea?
PM: I think the deepest imprescion 1, ne gets is of the great difficulty in advancing
a country such as the Territory to full self-governmet. This is because
there are different races, different languages, different levels of development in
different regions, different aspirations in different regions and whatever one does
would be interpreted by some regions as going too fast towards self-government and
in other regions as going too slow. And there are jealousies between the various
regions as well. This makes it an extremely difficult exercise. It is one that
has got to be carried out gradually but with some regard for the wishes of all
the region and for the different levels of development in them and for the growing
what shall I say? elite as distinct from those who have not yet had full
chances of education.
Q. I would like to be a little more specific on some of those particular
divisions which you have spoken of. One of the immediate impressions one gets
here in Australia is how long can Australia continue as a colonial power in
New Guinea?
PM: Well, first of all I reject the concept of Australia being a colonial power.
I don't believe she is a colonial power, but we can -ut that to one side for the
moment. And the only answer I can give you is the answer I gave in New Guinea,
and that is that we shculd continue theTe as long as most o the people want us
to continue there and feel they want our help and they want our skills. As an
illustration of that I don't know of any section up there, for example, that
doesn't want to try and ensure that Australian administrators and technical
officers and agricultural officers and surveyors and key people will stay and help
even after self-government comes. So the only answer I can give you is I
believe we should stay there as long as we are wanted to stay there and no longer.
Q. Now do you think that say, the more advanced people on the coastal
fringes.... how long can they wait until the people from the highlands catch up
with them? 
PM: I would say that you have -put your finger on the difficulty which I pointed
out at the beginning of this interview. It is a matter surely for arrangement up
there. It is not for the Australian Government, I think, to say " You have got to
wait this long" or haven't got to wait that long, and indeed even in the coastal
areas, there is by no means a unanimity as to what stage they vould like the
Australians to go. The Pangu Party, for example, is keen on very quick selfgovernment,
but the Pangu Party, as far as one can judge, has not got a very large
following. In the highlands, I believe, opinion is unanimous against any early
self-government, and the highlands have the majority of the population of the
Territory of Papua/ New Guinea.
Q. Have you got a sort of twenty-year vacuum here, though, between say, the
Tolais who we seem to feel are more educated than the remainder of the indigenous
people of New Guinea.... now is there a sort of a twenty-year vacuum here where
they have had the advantages of say the Germans when they occupied New Guinea,
and then the Australian Administration since it has been their area to look after,
and the highlands people where there hasn't been a lot of penetration from the
white man, have had this sort of twienty-year period: that they have to catch
ulp?
PM: Oh, it is more than twenty years in that sense in that the coastal areas
have been subject to European influence for, what, seventy or eighty years, and
the highlands for say, twenty, but on the other hand, that doesn't mean that the
highland people can't catch up quite quickly. And, indeed, I believe they are
catching up quite quickly through the povision of primary schools and secondary
schools and technical training, teacher training colleges at Goroka and things of
that kind. But they are still..., they believe they still need Australian participation
and they need Australian ministrat ion. Now, so do a lot of the coastal people,
so do the people around the Sepik and so do, I believe, a lot of the coastal Papuans.
But around Moresby and say \ Uewja] or Madang, there are groups of people vh o
are more eager to move more quickl~ y. And it is a m atter of th, 3 most delicate
balance to try and see that one doesn't go too quiclkly and one doesn't go too
slowly, but that all the time one seeks to leave it finally, at any time, to the
decision of the people generally. Now it is not eas'y to decide how to arrive at
that decision. People have said to me, " Well will you come out in favour * of a
referendum?" I wouldn't be prepared to come out in favour for or against a
referendum on thait at this time, because that is a possible way of arriving at
what they want to do. So is sitting down and arriving at a consensus of opinion
by discussion.... that I s, all areas, perhaps through thellHouse of Assembly.
So are expressions of views of the House of Assembly. There are a variety of
ways in which I feel this feeling could be discovered. I ana not prepared to come
out now and say this is the way in which it will be done.
Q. I gather from your visit, now that you have seen it and you have had a
pretty good look at it, that one again had to gather the impression that perhaps
you went there to what have a loolk at the problems which perhaps had been
created with the white planters through Mr. Whitlam's visit. Now mould this
be a fairly reasonable assessment? ./ 3 
PM: No, I went there because since, well February or before,......
Q. And what he said, incidentally, and what Mr. Whitlam said, if I car add
thct to
PM: Yes, but you asked me why I went there?
Q. Yes, fair enough.
PM: I went there because we had been conducting discussions with the
Admiistrator's Executive Council and with the Constitutio:. al Review Committee
on the next steps towards self-government, on trying to ensure that less had to be
referred back to Canberra, on trying to ensure that the Australian administrative
officers of whom I spoke would stay there and be given some security of tei ure
nov, all these matters which they had raised with us. And I went there to
announce, as a result of these discussions, very large steps towards selfgovernment,
a great deal more powver of administration an-d decision being handed
over to the Administrator's Executive Council and to the House of Assemnbly.
Q. Do you tend to echo the sentiments of the white planters and were you
worried about what Mr. Whitlam said, and they are reported to have been very
concerned?
PM: I think Mr. Whitlam caused a great deal of uncertainty in the whole area.
I think he upset large numbers of people by putting a firm date on when Australia
would get out whether the people wanted it or not. I wvould:-' t by any means say
this was confined to the white planters, because it was quite evident it was an
uncertainty and discomfort and fear felt by the highlanders and by many of the
coastal people as well. But that is not the reason why I went there.
Q. Now that you have seen it, and had a pretty good look at it, could Papua/
New Guinea be self-governing by 1972? This is what Mr. Vhitlam said. Now, I
don't want to go into imponderables here, but if for instance, you lost the Senate
election and next year there was a douhle dissolution and LMr. Whitlam became the
Prime Minister, he would have a pretty difficult job in froit of him with about
twelve months up his sleeve to give Papua / New Guinea selU-government, but
from where you sic now, do you see any feasibility of them governing themselves
by 1972?
PM: I imagine any area can be self-governing if the people who have the
responsibility to help it and to advance it move out and say, " Well you are on
your own", well, presumably, it has to be self-governing. But I think the things
that could flow from that action would be quite dangerous. I think it not putting
it too high to say that if one were not careful, something even like a Biafran
situation could develop if we just moved out and said, " Right you are on your
own. We wash our hands of you." 1 believe it possible. / 4 
Q. This is very interesting because actually you have niot really set a date
at all. And this is very difficult to try and pin you down oit. Mr. Whitlam says,
" Right, 1972". You don't say the mid-seventies. You do-i-t say the early
eighties. Have you got, though, at the back of your mind, Come idea of when
they could govern themselves?
PM: No, because I think the prerequisite for when they could govern themselves
is a general wish in all the regions that they should from ti-at time govern themselves,
and I think as soon as they reach that point, then they should govern
themselves, with, of course, continuing Australian assistance in the administration
and c-her matters.
Q. Ycu don't see this in a matter of years, though, or time at all, keeping
in mind this
PM: I'm sorry, I just think it quite impossible with any responsibility to say a
particular date. It can't be too long delayed. I don't myself think it will be too
long delayed, because I think1 the situation will arise, certainly not by 1972 and
certainly not by 1973 or 4. 1 am inot going to put on any data at all. All I am
going to say is I believe a situatio-n will eventually arise whiien the people generally
there will say, now, we would likce to have self -government, and then they should
have it.
Q. The way you speak there, it sounds very much as thaough you see that
though as a possibility in the seveInties, in this decade?
PM: I see it as a possibility at some stage. In fact, I do-n't see it as a
possibility at some stage, I see it as a certainty at some s-tage.
Q. In the seventies?
PM: A cextainty at some stage. I am sorry, you are not going to pin n-e down
to any date.
Q. No, well, why I put this to you is it has been suggestd.. all-right, you
haven't really got anything in mind for the early eighties, you haven't really got
anything in mind for the seventies. Mr. Whitlam has come out and said 1972.
Now, we can be critical of him for saying that, but also, can we not be critical
of you for saying, " Well, I don't it will be at some stage?"
PM: Yes you can, if you wish to, but I can only repeat ' rfiat I said to the people
up there, that I think it is highly wrong for the Australianls to say, " You will have
self-government in 1972 or 1973 or 1974 or any date, and we will decide when
you are going to do it, and you will have it whether you wan-t it or not". I think it
is much better to say: " You will have it as soon as you wan.-t it". 
Q. When you arrived at Rabaul, and you had these 13, 030 Tolais of the
Mataungan Association there chewing betel nuts and drinking hot beer in a sort
of an angry mood, were you surprised? Were you surprised to see this sort of
a reaction?
PM: Oh, no, naz. a bit because for quite a long time the leaders of the Mataungan
movement had made it clear that they were going to stretch every nerve to get as
many of their supporters in there as they could and put on this kind of reception.
I expected it.
Q. Are you concerned about the Mataungan Association? How so you see them
as an organisation?
PM: Well it is very difficult to say. I think that they have now reached a stage
where their leaders at any rate are adopting the attitude " We are not interested
in any laws of any kind. We, in fact, are the Government. We are going to do
what we want about everything. I think that their illegal movement into land is
dangerous. I think that the tactics they have adopted of beating up those Tolai
who disagree with them is also dangerous......
Q. You have pretty good evidence of that?
PM: Oh yes. And I don't believe they are genuinely interested in settlements of
what they claim to be grievances. Now, I say that for this reason. Long ago,
months and months ago when the question of the Multi -Racial Council came up,
I spoke, in Canberra, to Mr. Kaputin, who is one of their leaders, and I said to
him then that if the Mataungans felt it was reasonable we could have a referendum
to see whether most of the Tolai on the Gazelle Peninsula wished a Multi-Racial
Council or not, but he refused to have one. He refused to have a secret
referendum. Hie again refused, when I was up there this time. And before I
went there this time, I asked that the Mataungan members should sit down and
discuss their worries. If they had land problems, they could discuss those.
If they had any problems of any kind, let us sit down and talk about them. And
they flatly refused to have any discussions whatsoever, any talks whatsoever.
So I don't really think they are interested in s ettling disputes so much as creating
t hem.
Q. I noticed you earlier referred to some of the things that perhaps could
be learned or perhaps could occur in New Guinea as had happened in some of the
emerging African nations, but do you feel that we have learned something from
the problems of the emerging African nations in dealing with New Guinea? 
PM: I don't think the problems are the same myself. L. spite of there being
some land difficulties, the Administration has in fact over the years taken great
care to try and ensure that the land remained in the ownership of the local people.
It has been one of the difficulties in fact of development that it has been very hard
to discover who did own land which was required for actual civic development as
distinct from private development. I think there is one problem it is not
the problem of advancing towards political self-government because that is
happening. It is not the problem of finding more and more local civil servants
because that is happening. It is not the problem of handing over internal
administration in greater degrees and so on, because that is happening. But
I thir.:; there is a difficulty of more indigenous participation in businesses... garages
and businesses generally, This is something which I believe must be fostered.
It is being specifically fostered at Bougainville, fcr example...
Q. That corporation....
PM: Yes, and in the development of the Arawa township, for example by the
Administration itself. Certain businesses are going to be financed by the
Development Bank for the indigenous people, if they have got any hope at all of
making a go of it. In other instances, we are going to seek 49 per cent at
least equity for the indigenous people, hut in other areas..... Moresby has sort
of grown up, rather.
Q. I would like to get down time is pressing with us one or
two other areas. I think last financial year, or the financial year just ending,
the Australian taxpayer gave New Guinea a grant of $ 96 million which,
incidentally, is 58 per cent of the Territory's total receipts. Now this must
increase as everything goes up. It never goes down these days. Now are
Australians happy being a colonial power at this price, do you believe?
PM: I don't think they are a colonial power.
Q. You don't like that word. I've used it twice now....
PM: I don't think this is a colony. A colony is an area of land... well it
always has been in my book.... an area of land which has been taken over and run
for the benefit of some colonising power, and I don't believe this is happening at
all. But we gave $ 96 million as a grant, part of it was for recurrent running
expenses and part of it for development. You say this must increase. I sought
to make it clear when I was up in the Territory that as political responsibility
is assumed by the people in the Territory themselves, so they must assume
more responsibility for raising their own revenue, And indeed what we propose
is that there should be two grants made by Australia, one for adding to the
revenue raised in the Territory for recurrent expenses of government and that
will be under the control of the Administrator's Executive Council. That will / 7 
be allocated and spent by them which is a big step -forward. But I would expect that
the grant from Australia over the years ahead I am riot talking about next year
in that component would reduce and the amount raised from the Territory would
increase. The second grant we would make would be for general development
purposes. That would be made under the control of Australia and as years go
by, as the Territory becomes more viable economically, as it gets a good
economic base, that too should be able to be reduced at some stage.
Q, I wonder if I could ask you these questions quickly, and get rather quick
answers from you without destroying them. How powerful do you believe
Mr. -iaputin of the Mataungan As sociationi to be?
PM: I think he has got quite a lot of power over about half the Tolal people and
nowhere else?
Q. What do you think of his New Guinea Development Corporation?
PM.: From what I know of it, if it is as is described, wiell, fine let him go
ahead and do it. Nobody is stopping him, anyway.
Q. The Multi-Racial Council, what is its future in the light of the
Mataungan opposition?
PM: It depends on whether most of the people in the area want to have a
Multi-Racial Council or not. We have sought to find that out. If most of them
don't, then there is nothing saying...
Q. They could win, you know they could win....
PM: Well, fiA* ne. I mean~, what does that matter? That at least settles the
question of what most people want. And hen you have an all native council.
It is very nearly an all-Tolai Council now. Very nearly. 1 have forgotten the
numbers. But there is only a very small fraction of European and Chinese on it.
Q. Turning now to the home front, Prime Minister, we have heard murmurings
in recent weeks about inflation, overheated economy and so on from the Federal
Treasurer, Mr. Bury. Now, how do you view the economy at the moment?
PM: I think the best thing I can do is to refer you to the last Treasury White
Paper which came out a short time ago which pointed out that actions taken by the
Government in its last Budget had reduced the prezssures on the labour market
and on the demand in the economy for the last two or three months of this
financial year and had damped downr what had previously been described as an
overheating economy. And this pap,, er also points out there are prospects for
very great growth in this coming finiancial year but that we need to be careful
to ensure that we don't allow demand to become so great that it would be followed
by inflation. 
Q. Well, now this is interesti-ng because you have been under some pressure
from the Federal Liberal Council and also from your State bodies to fulfil this
promise of yours during the elections for taxation relief -for middle and lower
income earners. Ncw do you see this as being a very real thing in the near
future?
PM: I see it as being a part of the Budget which I don't discuss before the
Budget comes out.
Q. I realise that and I don't intend to frame it in that context....
PM: But you can't frame it in any other context.
Q. You think you have got me on this one at this particular stage?
PM: No, I don't but I have just constantly refused to discuss what might be in
the Budget.
Q. But you do agree that there has been a little bit of pressure on you from
your own Party bodies to look at this promise and that you are conscious of it?
PM: I think that I would sooner discuss this whole matter with you perhaps
on August 19.'
Thank you very much Prime Minister. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 74/ 1970
CABINET MEETS TO CONSIDER GAZELLE SIT'UATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Federal Cabinet met today to consider a series of reports from the
Administrator of Papua and New Guinea.
The reports indicated that the Administrator faced a serious,
potentially dangerous situation on the Gazelle Peninzsula New Britain.
The situation has come about in the following way. The Administration
bought land on the Gazelle Peninsula in order to subdivide it and distribute it
among Tolai and Bainings indigenous people. A section the Tolai, called
Mataungans, had sent squatters onto this land and had stated that they were going
to occupy it and distribute it themselves and that they recognised no title and no
law but their own will.
The Mataungans had made it clear that they would resist any attempt
at removing their illegal squatters and had massed twelve to fifteen hundred persons
on the site to resist by violence any attempted removal.
The persons gathered were armed with spears, bows and arrows,
sling shots, rocks, bottles, bushlknives and axes.
It was clear that if the police carried out their duty and removed those
in illegal occupation of the land there was a strong risk of a major clash, of riot
and of extreme -violence.
After considering these reports, and bearing in mind the expressed
wish of the Administrator's Executive Council and of the Tolai opposed to the
Mataungans, that the law should be enforced, Cabinet decided that it was essential
that law and order should be maintained in the Territory.
Cabinet decided that the Government fully aa. eed with the Administrator
and would fully support the Administrator in carrying out -measures which the
Administrator had advised the Government he felt to be necessary ini the present
circumstances, to remove squatters.
The Administrator has been so informed. It is hoped the leaders of
the Mataungan section of th:-Tolais will not incite their followers to the violence
they have threatened; but if they do so the responsibility for any consequence
will rest upon them alone.
CANBERRA 19 July 1970 



3 0 JUL 1970 N
FOR PRESS: P. M. No 75,/ 1970
AUTHORITY TO CALL CUT TROOPS IN NEW GUINEA
In relation to the Gazelle situation, several -,' essmen have
been asking questions this afternoo,-about whethe--the Prime Minister had
give-i the Administrator of Papua lew Gainea authcrlty tc call on troops
should he find this necessary.
The Prime Minister has replied as follows:-
" The Government was advised by the Administration that it
would be prudent to arrange for troops of the P. I. R. to be available for use
in the Gazelle Peninsula in case a situation developed whici police on the
spot were not numerous enough to handle.
necessary " The Government accepted this advice and has taken the
steps to this end.
" The Administrator is empowered to call on the assistance of
the P. I. R. to protect lives and property should the situation require it. It
is not believed that this will be necessary but it is believed that if it should
prove to be necessary it should be done.
CANBERRA July 1970 



FGR PRESS: P. M. No 76/ 1970
DEATH OF MR. IAIN MACLEGD
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Go:-. ton
I am sorry to learn of the death of Mr. lain MacLeo. 3019
This is a sad loss to the new British Government.
Mr. MacLeod had a distinguished record in the British
Parliament, having been a Minister in Conservative Gover-.; ments over
a period of eleven years.
It is a matter of deep regret that he was not spared to serve
his country in his new appointment as Chancellor of the Exchequer.
I extend my sympathy to his colleagues and to his family.
CA1NBERRA 21 JULY 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 77/ 1970
PRIME MINISTER CONGRATULATES GAMEC' TEAM
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, today cent the following
telegram to the Manager of the Australian Commonwealth Games' Team
in Edinburgh:-" PLEASE EXTEND TO ALL MEMBERS OF OUR TEAM MY
WARMEST CONGRATULATIONS ON THEIR OUTSTANDING SUCCESS
AT EDINBURGH. THESE ARE YOUNG AUSTRALIANS OF WHOCM WE CAN ALL
BE PROUD. BY ALL ACCOUNT3, THEY WERE GCOD AM/ BASSADORS
FOR AUSTRALIA BOTH ON AND CFF THE FIELD CF SPCRT.
WELL DONE, AND THANK YOU. I WISH YOU ALL A
SAFE JOURNEY HOME."
CANBERRA 27 July 1970 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 7F/ 1970
DJATH. F. aF-fiW4i-i-K ENT HUGHS
Tribute. by. the F?-rime Minister,_ M. john Gorton
The death of Sir Wilfrid Kent Hughes has robbed Australia
of one cG its most distinguished citizens.
He had devoted his life to service to his country as a scholar,
soldier, politician and statesman. He also made a significant contribution to
Australian sport, b-ath as an Olympic Games representative in his own right
and in later years as President of the Victorian Olympic Council and Chairman
of the Organising Committee of the Melb( urne Olympic Games.
In 43 years as a Parlimentarian he served as a Minister in the
Victorian and Federal Parliaments, and was an outstanding soldier in both
world wars. His fortitude and qualities of leadership were further demonstrated
during the three-and-a-half years he spent in Japanese prisoner-of-war camps.
Sir Wilfrid Kent Hughes was a fine Australian. a man of integrity
and great strength of character. His death is a loss to me personally, to the
Liberal Party, tu the Federal Parliament and to the nation.
I extend my deepest sympathy tn his family.
CANBERRA 31 July 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 79/ 1970
CONSULTATIONS WITH BRITISH DEFENCE MINISTER
Statement issued followingtalks between
Lord Carrinton and the Prime Ministr
Following visits to Singapore and Malaysia, the British Secretary
of State for Defence, Lord Carrington, is visiting Australia for preliminary
consultations as part of the British Government'O, study of matters involved
in its decision to continue a British military preSence in Malaysia/ Singapore.
The Prime Minister and other Ministers met with Lord Carrington
this morning. The Prime Minister welcomed the British Government's
decision to continue to make a military contribution in the area. He explained
the Australian Government's position on the basis of his statement to Parliament
on 25 February 1969 and this position will be taken fully into account by
the British Government in reaching its decision.
At the conclusion of the meeting the Prime Minister and Lord
Carrington expressed themselves as well satisfied with the exchange of
views and affirmed the intention to maintain the closest consultation.
Lord Carrington will continue discussions wth the Minister for
Defence and the Minister for External Affairs this afterr. noon.
CANBERRA July i970 



FOR PRESS PM NO. 80 1970
STATE FUNERAL FOR SIR WILFRD KENT HUGHES
There will be a State Funeral for the late Sir
Wilfrid Kent Hughes in Melbourne on Monday.
Sir Wilfrid, who died today, was a former
Minister in the Commonwealth Parliament.
The Service will be held at St John's Anglican
Church, Toorak Road, Camberwell at 11 o'clock on Monday
morning, followed by cremation at the Springvale Crematorium.
Flags will be flown at : half mast on Commonwealth
buildings throughout Australia on the day of the funeral.
CANBERRA, 31 July 1970
Background Note
The Prime Minister will be attending the funeral 



OR PRESS: P. M. No 81/ 1970
BRAVERY AWARD3 TO TWO CANBERRA MEN
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Two Canberra men have received bravery awards for their part
in rescuing an elderly woman from a fire in the Canberra suburb of Narrabundah
earlier this year.
They are Mr. Arthur Joseph Parr of Toolambi Street, Narrabundah,
and Patrick Neil Mcllhaton, of the same address.
Her Majesty The Queen has awarded Mr. Parr the British Empire
Medal for Gallantry, while the Governor-General, under his delegated authority
from The Queent has approved the award of The Queen's Commendation for Brave
Conduct to Mr. Mclllhaton.
Citation At about I am on Friday, 13 February, Mr. Parr awakened to find
the house on the opposite side of Toolambi Street on fire. He woke the other
occupants of his home, one of whom was Mr. Mclllhato-, and asked his wife
to go to a neighbour's home to ring the fire brigade and the police.
The two men ran across to the burning house but were unable to
open the front door. They then went to the back door, which was open. O
hearing the weak voice of an elderly woman calling out to him, Mr. Parr went
inside but was forced back by the smoke and heat. He got a garden hose and
re-entered the house playing water on the seat of the -fire in the lounge room.
When he was again forced to leave the house by the density of tpe smoke
and the heat, Mr. Parr was relieved by Mr. Mclllhatorn who continued to fight
the fire. Mr. Parr obtained a torch and went into the burning lounge room.
With Mr. Mclllhaton's aid, he moved the woman from the house across the road
to his own home before the fire brigade, ambulance and police arrived.
The elderly woman died fifteen days later a, a result of the
very severe burns she had suffered.
Messrs Parr and McIllhaton, untraled fire Cghters, displayed
considerable courage and disregard for their own safety in rescuing the
woman from her burning home.
CANBERRA I August 1970 



WORLD CONFERENCE OF ORGANISATIONS OF
THE TEACHING PRC?' ESSCN
SYDNEY 4 AUGUST 1970
speech by the 2rime Minister, Mr. Joohi Gorton
Mr. President, Distinguished Guests and Ladies and Gentlemen:
By way of a preface to what I have to say to you, may I say two things.
One is that I have learnt by experience that I am always so pleased to have the ordeal
of making a speech over that I almost always forget to open whatever it is the speech
is designed to open. And therefore in case this should happen tonight and to be on
the safe side I want at the beginning to make it quite clear that this is the opening
of thi, conference, even if I forget to zcy so at the end'
The other thing which struck me was something you referred to, Sir, in
your speech about a remark made by my colleague, the Commonwealth Minister for
Education, that nobody visits Australia by accident. I always agree with my colleagues,
and I am sure that in the present day, this is en-tirely correct. And yet in this
Bicentenary Year, my mind goes back to a gentleman who probably didn't visit
Australia entirely by design. His name was Captai-n-Cook:
Sir, this is the first international conference of teachers' organisations
ever held in Australia, and it falls in the year designated by the United Nations General
Assembly as " International Education Year". And on behalf of the Australian
Government and people, I welcome you to our country a-: d assure you we are glad
to have you with us as individuals and that we are proud indeed to be the host country
for this international conference.
The conference theme of course is " The Cualities of a Teacher" a
discussion I take it of what qualities are needed to male a good teacher and by
selecting this as the theme, I believe that the organisers of the conference have gone
right to the heart and soul of any education system for physical requirements for
education -buildings, classrooms, libraries, language laboratories and so on, and the
external aids to education such as radio, television, the projector necessary as
they are are no substitute for a good teacher. A3 aids to a good teacher they are
admirable but as a substitute for a good teacher they are abominable. So I add
congratulations to the conference on its choice of a theme,
Now I spend a good deal of my time being told by teachers what to do, and
what not to do and I expect that this will continue ( and I hope it does), so I propose
to seize this opportunity, with all the apprehension proer when a layman speaks
to experts, to put this layman's view of what the aims cf education ought to be, of
how we may best achieve these aims, and of the qualities a teacher needs to play his
full part in this achievement. 
Well, what should the aims of education be? It is no good talking of those
aims in phrases such as " modern education for a modern world" or " education geared
to the social needs of the modern community", because I am afraid that on examination
such phrases too often turn out to be only plausible lullabies designed as lullabies to
put the enquiring mind to sleep.
I would suggest that the proper, and primary, and overriding goal of
education is the creation of a community of human beings who are as nearly perfect as
human nature, and the individual variations of talent and personality will allow. This,
you will agree, is quite a goal. Yet I believe it is the ultimate goal and that it is
better for education to fail in the attempt to make a perfect human being than to
succeed in making only a fully competent technician. It is better to try to develop
perfect himan beings through education than to confine ourselves to the subsidiary
goal easier and perhaps more practicable though that may be of trying to turn
our only good scientists, or good engineers, or lawyers, or technicians or teachers.
In the words of Sir Richard Livingstone:-
" May not the desire to make first rate human beings and a
first rate society be a master whom all would serve. To see the vision of
excellence as far as our limitations allow; to get at least a glimpse of
the unchanging values of the eternal and good an: d to ma: e our infinitesimal
contributions towards a society which will embody these values is not that,
in itself, a sufficient motive for life.
I think it is and that is more than you can say for studies confined to electricity,
or the workings of computers, or medicine. Not that these studies are not good and
necessary for they are but they are subsidiary and not an end in themselves.
The good teacher indeed has many such subsidiary tasks widening the
mind and enlarging its interest, training the intelligence, teaching the multitudinous
techniques on which our civilisation is somewhat precariously based but I believe
we could successfully carry through all these subsidiary tasks and still never attain
the true goal of education as I have defined it.
For what raises man above the savage is not his inventions or his science,
his economies or his technology it is the practice of goodness and kindness towards
other men, it is the appreciation of the love of beauty a:. d truth and the application of
reason. And so whatever a child is going to be, whatever speciality he may wish
to study, or need to study in order to make a living, and: however well he may be
taught that speciality, failure to inculcate those qualities means, I suggest that
education has failed to achieve its true goal.
Well, what part do the schools of various kinds play in helping this
achievement and the teachers in those schools for I suggest that each type of school
has its definite function in achieving this aim. / 3 
I suggest that it is the primary and overriding responsibility of the
primary school to teach reading, writing, elementary mathematics, and english
grammar, for those are the tools with which knowledge is mined and unless the child
is adequately provided with such tools, the secondary school and tertiary education
can do little. Nor, I believe, can such skills be taught in an " easy" way. They should
be taught in such a way that in learning them the child automatically learns to sit down
and concentrate, to gain the habit of work, and above all, to develop, as he will under
a good teacher, the faculty of reasoning for himself. All other activities of the
primary school are secondary to these. Good spelling is useful but not essential, as
Shakespeare dramatically showed. The development cf creative work is important
but can t-ke place cut of school as well as in it. The amount of history which can be
taught to a child before the age of eleven is usually meaningless, and almost always
inaccurate and so on.
I do not say the primary school should ignore these activities. Not at all,
but I do say that the good primary school teacher will keep them in their proper
perspective and that is subordinate to the tas: k of turn_. g our a child who can write
legibly, express simple thoughts clearly and unambiguously by the use of good grammar,
read with ease, solve simple mathematical problems and reason out from data which
he knows to be true, why something else which he does not know must in fact be
true. And so what qualities does a primary school teacher need to do this? It
is claimed that one essential is a university degree and additional years of teacher
training. With some trepidation I challenge this. Such qualifications, of course, are
useful and helpful, but I doubt whether they are essential, in the sense that no one
can be a good primary school teacher without them, and I am sure that such qualifications
in themselves or of themselves, and them alone do not automatically make a good
teacher. The qualities needed for a really good primary school teacher are
dedication the feeling that one is following a calling, a vocation, which alone can
give full satisfaction in work; a genuine love of children which accepts the undoubted
fact that they can on occasion be absolute little horrors; a warm feeling of achievement
and adventure when at last, after many attempts to explain something which has not
been understood, the light of understanding suddenly lights the eye of the child being
taught. Such teachers must have the capacity to take each child and break the new
and puzzling situat ion which it is facing into simpler bits. They must discover what
the child does know, as a starting point, and lead its mind in the right order from one
bit to the next until finally the whole is understood. But what those simpler bits are,
and what is the right order, varies with each child and no-one can know it ahead of
time. That is why teaching is an art. / 4 
There are, I think, other requisites for a good primary school teacher.
Firstly, I think he should not be swayed by the tides of fashion in educational theory,
for fashions in educational theory change more slowly but just as surely as do fashions
in skirts. So he should never be swayed to the belief that, even in primary schools,
discipline and hard, repetitive, monotonous work is no longer necessary. It is
necessary where it is essential and it is very often essential.
In any branch of study some facts must be : ingrained on the mind so they
can be brought out at a second's notice and some techniques have to be followed
smoothly, quickly and automatically without conscious thought. So the teacher should
explain why such hard, monotonous work is necessary, He should tell the child the
purpose of learning some particular, repetitive, task so that even if the child doesn't
fully understand that purpose he does at least know that there is one and therefore the
task itself becomes that much less meaningless and arbitrary.
But there are occasions when what I shall call good, old fashioned drill
is necessary and a good teacher should not excuse the pupil from it, for after all,
the task of the teacher is not so much to make learning easy, as to make it an
understandable, a reasonable, a logical and an exciting thing to do.
Secondly, such a teacher should not be so carried away by his belief that
all children should be equal in ability as to shut his eyes to the demonstrable fact
that they are not.
Ruskin wrote
" Two children go to school hand in hand and spell for
half an hour o'er the same page. Through all their
lives never shall they spell from the same page more
one is presently a page ahead.... two pages.... ten
pages and evermore though each toils equally, the
interval enlarges".
The good teacher must accept that. He must encourage that ability not
fight against it, for he cannot destroy ability even in the name of equality but he can
cramp it or maim it. And he will do this just as surely by preventing a child from
developing at his natural pace as he will by trying to force it to develop faster than
it naturally would. I have so far spoken of the qualities necessary for the primary school
teacher. The secondary school teacher of quality needs all these and a greater
specialised knowledge for it is in the secondary school that the mining of knowledge
really begins. It is here that the tools provided by the primary schools are tested.
It is here that the process of specialization starts. All I shall say of this is that
whatever specialization is selected, the centre of studies should be as I said
at the beginning the study of human striving, and hurna:: greatness in action in the
past, and the study of various human ideas of how to build that ideal society, which
gives the greatest possible freedom to each individual, and avoids the licence which
follows if that individual interferes with others' rights. 
And also each pupil ought to study at least one subject on the curriculum
so thoroughly, and in such depth, that he begins to know what true knowledge really
is and how much industry, thoroughness, precision, and persistence it requires if
he is to have even a distant sight of it. And so the teacher here needs not only the
qualities of being able to impart knowledge, of being able to make learning an exciting
experience, but also, a much greater knowledge of that subject or subjects which
he teaches. The numbers receiving education in Australia are growing so dramatically,
the numbers of pupils remaining at school to the final year of secondary education
are increasing so greatly, that I doubt if there are enough young Australians possessed
of what I have described as the qualities needed by an ideal teacher.
But it is no bad thing to set out an ideal even if it cannot at once be
attained. And indeed I think that is the object of the thene chosen by this conference.
Sir, I have shown temerity tonight as a layman in speaking to experts,
and I have, I expect, been slightly pompous I hope only slightly, but may I in
conclusion close by saying something on my own behalf which demonstrates that
I have more than a passing interest in this subject.
I was placed in charge of Commonwealth Government activities in
education some seven years ago, and was the first Comrnmonwealth Minister of
Education. At that time the Commonwealth Governmen-t was spending $ 67.5 million
a year. Today it is spending $ 312 million a year some five times as much. I
put into operation a scheme of supplying science laboratories, properly planned and
equipped, to all secondary schools in Australia. I had adopted a scheme to provide
libraries not just repositories for books but modern libraries complete with
teaching aids, in all secondary schools in Australia. I inaugurated a scheme designed
to revolutionise and re-equip all secondary technical schools in Australia. I brought
in a scheme to provide eight now ten million dollars a year for building
teachers colleges. I inaugurated a scheme for providing colleges of advanced
education as alternatives to universities in tertiary education.
I rejected the previous concept that the state should penalise children
whose parents send them to non-government schools by refusing such schools any
assistance from the taxpayers' funds, even though the ; parents of such children
contributed to those funds. I still reject that concept and I am proud to do so, for it
is educationally illiterate and economically absurd.
I put into operation a scheme for providing scholarships for the last two
years of secondary school, and in technical schools.
Sir, I have been interested. And if the ideal physical requirements for
education have not been attained and of course they have not at least we have taken
steps towards such attainment, as you are seeking to tak e steps towards the attainment
of an ideal teacher. Because of that interest that is one reason I have been
emboldened to speak to you tonight. Another is because you all bear such responsibility
for moulding the citizens of the world of tomorrow, and yet another is because you
asked me. I thank you for it and I have done, and this conference is open. 



N. S. W. CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES ANNUAL Dli'INER
SYDNEY, NSW -AUGUST 1970
õ ! ech by the Prime Minister, Mr. 12ohn Gorton
Mr. President and Gentlemen:
Sir, the Budget will be presented in less than two wee.' s, and so I think it
would be as well for me to start this address with a disclaimer. Because anything a
Minister or a Prime Minister says at such a time is liable to analysis and dissection
and distortion by the gentlemen of the Press: I wish to make it clear right now that
this will not be a profitable exercise because anything I say to you tonight in general
terms is not to be translated into specifics by way of guessing at what the Budget might
contain. And those gentlemen whose speculation is sometimes inclined to be high, wide
and handsome, would do better to wait patiently a few more days when they can have the
satisfaction of commenting on facts instead of on suppositions. And that is the disclaimer
I want to make right at the start.
It is a difficult thing to talk to you tonight so close to the Budget because it IS
so close to the Budget.
Sir, having said that, I thank you tor your welcome here tonight, and I am
glad to be here because it gives me the opportunity to express my respect and I do
have that respect for the manufacturing industry which employs some 28% of the
Australian work force directly and a further 20% 7 of the Australian work force indirectly
in servicing the needs of manufacturing industry. Those industriec which have raised
the value of the output from factories in Australia from about 030 million just
before the Second World War, to $ 17, 000 million today a very signif icant increase
as you will agree. Industries which have raised their contribution to our export income from
$ 198 million or 11% of total exports ten years ago to $ 782 million or 19. 7% of total
exports today again a very significant contribution, showing that manufacturing
industry along with minerals and rural industry has become one of the big three
contributing to Australia's growth and wealth. This is something, I think, of which
you can all, looking back on the sixties, looking back on the plans you have made,
now looking at the fruition of those plans, be proud. But that is in the past.
As we look ahead, what do we see? We see great problems to be overcome
in our rural industries, many of which are beset by falling world prices and harassed
at the moment by the ravages of drought, yet industries which ha ve managed in the
year just past to increase export earnings by some $ 200 million over the year before.
But on other fronts, we see great opportunities for new growth and for
greater economic strength. Our overseas balances are healthy and they should become
even healthier as the output of minerals increases, as it undoubtedly will, and as the
value of that output for export is further increased by the processing within Australia
which will take place so that we will be exporting ingots instead o! earth. 
And our balances will im prove further as import replacement grows, as it
will, for example, in oil ( which I was delighted to see the " Financial Review" agreed
was going to be sold in Australia at a price at least as good as it could be bought from
abroad and possibly better. Now this again will increase our surplus of exports
over imports. Other contributions will be the application of new and vigorous management
techniques which is up to you gentlemen in secondary industry, by the extension
of the amount industry spends on research, which is up to you gentlemen in secondary
industry, because the Government in Australia provides a greater proportion of the
amount spent on research in industry than does the government inI any other country;
by the increased use of automation these will all increase the value of output per
man hour. Added to that the measures already taken by the Government will, I believe,
retain in Australian ownership a greater proportion of that expanding industry and
therefore retain inside Australia a greater degree of the profits ofL that expanding
industry. So the barometer of future progress and of future economic growth stands
really at " set fair"', subject to what I now have to say. Because wihat I have said only
means that great growth and great progress can be made,, it does riot necessarily
mean it will be made. It can be slowed, or even halted should we find inflation growin g
faster than that of the countries with which we trade and to which we must sell at
world prices. And in particular the significant growth and contribuition of secondary
industry to cur exports could be badly affected if this happened.
Sir, in Australia governments can take action on thiS front, but in Australia
decisions of the Arbitration Court have an enormous effect on the economny generally,
no matter what a government does. If wages are increased without regard to increased
overall production, then there will be benefit for none, and ultimately detriment for all.
We could be priced out of the export markets we have won. The demands of the
community for more sclools, more hospitals, more roads, more defence and more
public development may not be met. And the increased wages to the individual will
not in the end buy more to take home. They will indeed be fool's gold.
And as a by-product, the rural industries and the fixed income-earners will
be the greatest sufferers in the community, and the threat of that happening is the
only zhreat which I can see to our achieving that growth and that progress of which I spoke
and which is within our grasp.
Now if we are to achieve the destiny which is ours to attain, there is a heavy
responsibility not only on government, but also on trade union leaders and on the
Arbitration Court to see that industry is not called upon to pay in wages sums which
represent more than the value of what industry can produce. AnLd, conversely, if the
overall growth of industries, which is possible, occurs, if the value of production per
man-hour increases, as it can under good management, there will be a corresponding
responsibility then on trade union leaders, on the Arbitration Court, and on
employers to see that that overall increase results in increased rewards for the labour
force in Australia. / 3 
We are, as a government, aware of both these facts, and because we are
aware of th-em, we propose to intervene in the oil industry case shortly to come before
the Arbitration Court. And there we propose to argue that it would be disastrous for
Australia if the principles previously accepted were reversed, and if it was thQught
that an tndustry which was profitable or a company which was profitable should, because
it was profitable, be called upon to pay more than industry generally could pay to
those who worked for it.
For if this were to be accepted in the case of those industries which are,
for one reason or another, fully profitable, then what would happen to those industries
such as the railways, the electricity supplies, the industries run by governments which
almost by definition are not profitable, or the industries run by some sections of
private enterprise which are sometimes not as profitable'
There would be no incentive for labour to serve in theSe industries, and
either they would be starved of labour or the community as a whole would have to make
up to an unprofitable industry wage standards which a proffitable industry alone could
meet and that in turn would lead to the inflation which is the only threat I see to the
progress of this country.
Sir, if we can achieve in this nation, with good faith and with commonsense
on all sides, an agreement that only when productivity increases can wages be increased,
then there is a real prospect of increasing prosperity for the individual and for
manufacturing industry. And there will be an increasing capacity for governments to
provide those public services and amenities which the nation requires and which
governments can only supply if industry provides the wealth for governments to tax
in order to supply those services:
I am sure that this can best be attained by and through the arbitration
and conciliation system as we have it today. I believe we should reject 1 0se talk of
finding something better than that system which we have had for so long, of going into
collective bargaining, of picking off one industry after another, or one section of
industry after another by industrial blackmail. And I believe, too, that nothing in the
long run would be more damaging to the cause of organised labour and to the stability
of industry and commerce in Australia than to reject or replace an arbitration system
which, if it Is to be fully effective, must have the ultimate capacity to apply teeth in its
judgments. An Arbitration Court, acting impartially, seen to be independent in its
judgments, seen to be uninfluenced by either trade union leaders or: employers'
representatives, and acting only on what it sees to be the merits of a case after that
case has been presented in the Court, is niot perfect, but it is the bast method of
ensuring fairness that has yet been devised. And provided it act.-on all those criteria
I have set out, it is the best method of attaining the confidence both of employers and
of labour. Sir, by the end of this year, the Liberal,/ Country Party Coalition will have
beet, in office twenty-one years, and in any other audience but this, at that stage there
would have been a call of " too long": They have been years of solid progress in / 4 
government, in government enter i-rises and in private enterprises, and much of what I
said at the beginning of this speech of the achievements of industry in Australia, has
been made possible by the climate created in that time by those governments.
Our population in that time has passed from 8 million to 13 million.. Our
labour force is fully employed. Our economic base has been broadening tremendously.
Our export trade is expanding. Our living standards, including our care for the aged,
the ill and the needy, have been improved. We. grow stronger in defence, and we have
honoured our international obligations in three conflicts KLorea, Malaya and Vietnam.
We have a new understanding of our regional involvement through our M4ole Australian
community. We see our destiny as being shaped by the course of events in South-East
Asia and the Pacific, and we are actively sharing in many activities kh ich will determine
how straight and true that course will be and where it will lead us as an ultimate goal.
All this you have achieved we have achieved. And in all this we are still
concerned, as jointly we make our way through these exciting 1970' s, and all this in
a sense depends on government action. But in turn that governme-nt action depends on
the wealth pi1oduced by all the enterprises in Australia. The main elements of growth,
the numbers in the work force and what they produce are strong, thianks to immigration
and to improving technology and other factors. And this has giver:. us, in the non-farm
factor, and average growth in the area in, which you are concerned, gentlemen, an
average growth of more than 6 per cent at constant prices in recent years.
I think our immigration programme has been a great success. I think
without it we would be a poorer country, very hard pressed for labour, limited in our
expansion and inhibited in our planning. We have to reme-mber that while that programme
is costly arid initially inflationary because the new immigrant calls for more from the
community, narticularly if he has a family, than he can initially -provide to the
community, yet that increasing work force is made up of people who have not been reared
and educated at our expense, but at the expense of the countries from which they come.
And that is an off setting value to us of millions of dollars for a start.
We have recently decided, as you know, to have a comprehensive review
made of all aspects of our immigration programme to see how best it will fit our
changing needs in terms of economic growth and social and cultural diversification. But
I want to say to you tonight that is not in any way to question the n~ eed for continuing
immigration. We must continue to have a high intake in the seventies, no matter what
bank brings out a statement querying the value of it.
But I think it is sensible to take a loo~ k in depth at the progress and the
results of the scheme since it began soon after the end of World V'a r 11, to learn
whether and how we can improve the contribution which migrants make, to learn
whether and how vie can retain in this country a greater number of the migrants who
come here, and to learn whether and how we can reduce the initial inflationary costs
as the migrants come. And this is the sole objective of this examination. 0 
In the years ahead, we face great changes, arid some them indeed will be
of considerable magnitude to this nation if Britain, for example, goes into the Common
Market. But we can take up a continuing challenge to become increasingly strong
industrially, to extend the extraction of the raw wealth from our coil into integrated
industries which embrace processing and manufacturing, and to reconstruct some of
those industries on an econompic basis which, at the moment may riot be fully economically
viable. We must manufacture more of the things we now imrn. t. We must export
more of the things we now make in Australia. I do appeal to you not to rest upon your
laurels, not to say because in the last year we have increased our exports of manufactured
products so much, not to say because we are now contributing nearly 20 per cent of
exports, tb-erefore we should do no more. Thbis is not so. For every individual in this
room, there is an opportunity to improve and increase the exports from manufacturing
industries we now have. To do it either directly, or by joint ventures in other countries,
so that raw materials go from Australia, manufacturing is done abroad, but Australians
are part of the manufacturing done abroad and draw their profits from it, for that is
export too. This is something you must do in this decade of the seventies, and I believe
you are headed that way, but I believe that this and progress inside our own country
can only occur if we keep the free enterprise system Intact and if vie maim am the climate
that has led to the growth in the last twenty years. For the upward trend is twenty years
old, and the concept of government working with industry, of the -public sector and the
private sector living together, and of one not trying to destroy the other has, I think,
been the foundation of the progress we have made and cari be the orly foundation if we
are to makL-e progress in the future.
There are a r~ umber of pitfalls about one I mentioned. But another is the
concept described as socialism. What is socialism? It is. not social action by a government
because if it were, then it would be wrong for a government to provide toads or
dams or irrigation services or electricity services or any of the multitudinous things
governments provide without question. It is not governmental partnership with private
enteiprise because if it was then it would be wrong for the governnlent to have provided
the millions of dollars that it has provided to help private enterprise develop and
secondary industry develop.
But what it is and where it is wrong is when it seeks to say, as it did years
ago to some people " You must not engage in banking. You must not engage in some
field of enterprise because the Government will not allow you to do so. That is
clearly wrong. It is wrong, I think, when it seeks to place limitations on proper
rewards for hard work or new inventions or the proper running of an industry, and price
control that great panacea of socialism is in fact, when you boil it down, seeking to
provide profit control no matter whether the person making the profits is making a
cheaper good and selling it cheaper, but making profits as a result of it. That is wrong. / 6 
And its intrusion into planning is also wrong.
Treasury Bulletin called " The Australian Economy 1970",
in this paper says this. It speaks of the chances we have,
some of the difficulties we face, and it says I have here before me a
and the very last sentence
the opportunities we have,
" This is a problem for Government policy, but within
the framework of such policy, the outcome will be
determined by judgments formed, decisions made and
initiatives taken at innumerable points throughout
the economy."
And that is private enterprise, and that is what we must retain the chance for
judgments to be made, for decisions to be made, for initiatives to be taken Mi thout
instructions or control from governments on those who have to take those decisions.
That is a definition of private enterprise. That we propose to defend. I believe that by
defending it you will have the greatest opportunities to advance the interests of this
nation and I am sure that you will take advantage of those opportunities and of the
climate we propose to provide in the future as you have in the past.
That is why I propose the toast
Australian Industry. 



QUEENSLAND YOUNG* LIBERALS
YOUTH DIDNN3MR
Brisbane, QId 6 AUGUST 1970
õ pqef~ bythePrime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Mention has been made of a generation gap, and that is a subject to which
I have been devoting some thought because we hear so much about it. And I find that
I have come to the conclusion that it doesn't exist. You would know better than i,
whether it does or not. I can only say that I don't feel that it exists.
Of course there are occasiorally difficulties in communication between an
older man and a younger one, but there are equally difficulties in communication
between an older man and another older one and a young man and a young one. It
is n~ t a -matter, 1. suggest, of age, but a matter of whether one talks the same language,
thinks the same way and can carry on a dialogue. And I think that in Australia today,
as far as I have experienced it, I have been able to carry on dialogues, discussions
with young people, including my own sons, who disagree with almost everything I dc-'
But that doesn't prevent a reasonable exchange of ideas which sometimes ends in
agreement to differ, and sometimes in agreement to concur.
I have some doubt as to whether the generation gap of which we hear so
much really does exist, but as I say, you would know better that 1.
We hear of a generation of dissent, and I doubt whether that is true Of
course, now as alwa'ys in the past, young peoplc question the values that have been
handed on to them, question the customs which have been handed on to them.. They
always have. I can remember, and I am sure that I am the same as everybody else,
at one stage thinking that my own father just simply didn't understand anything about
what was going on at all. But as I got a little older, I realised he had learnt a lot in
the last few years.
But this is natural questioning, proper questioning of young people when they
find themselves inheriting a world and responsibility for trying to see that it becomes
a better one. So I doubt whether what we hear about so much is as widespread as it
is claimed to be.
Vl1hat vias said about the effect of the media in spreading these views again
is, I think, true, and true because news s news. A dog bites a man, that's natural.
If a man bites a dog, it's news because it is unusual and abnormal. And if that is so,
then the concentration of media and television on people invading university rooms,
of people sitting down in roadways.. the very fact that that is concentrated on
indicates that it is unusual and that it is abnormal, and I believethat it is. ./ 2 
I believe that at any university, for exanmle, to which you may go, 90-95 percent Of
the students there are interested in their work, in their studies, in their sport, in
parties, in the normal things that make u-. p the life of young people.
And, of course, what goes on arid what is not recorded are the contributions
that youth makes to the community, the oositive contribution and I have taken
out some facts showing what the young people i n Queensland have done, which have
never made headlines, which have never been reported and which I think are more
typical of the young people of Australia than the things that do get before you.
Students of the Queensland University raised 000 for charity during their
commemoration week earlier this year. Students of the Queensland University raised
000 foi the aid of earthquake victim,--during World University Service week. Law
students at the u-niversity are providing a free legal aid scheme in co-operation with
a church's " life-line" activities. Studenits at this school, the Church of England Grammar
have raised $ 5,013 from their pocket-money this year to aid charity projects, and have
taken part in such activities as cleaniing up,: the beaches in Queensland. All these
things, I believe, are more typical of thle appro. ach of the youth of Australia than are
the things to which greater attention terifds to be given by the media.
But it is right and proper that questioning by youth should occur, questioning
of the world which has been handed on to them. And what sort of a world is it? dow
does youth see it' I naturally, do not k--now the answer to this, but I do know that the
world that is handed on to you is a much better one to live in than it used to be a
generation ago.
It is not so very long in Australia since there was immense industrial
injustice, so that people if they wished to earn their living on the wharves, would have
to go and stand in a bull ring and be Dicked out and hired for a day; perhaps chosen by
favouritism or chosen by a foremarn if they were prepared to pay part of the wages they
earned to that foreman. It is not so very long ago since that happened.
It is not so very long ago sice people feared unemployment and depression
and when a man would never know whether he could maintain his famii3: from one year,
to the next because unemployment and the fear of it hung over his head. And that, too,
led to industrial and economic injustice. it is not so very long ago sin ce the poverty
in this country vias so widespread that it is almost impossible for you, I think, to envisage
what it was like. And so there has beer: iimprovement in the world compared with what
it used to be. There have been great advances in combating poverty. There have been great
advai~ ces in giving economic security to mankind. There have been great advances in
the elimination injustice. And 3o, hovaever this present world may appear today
through the eyes of youth, it is much better than it was. And my generation can take
some credit, I t hink, for having built it into what it is today. / 3 
3.
But now or very soon the results of your present questioning have got to
come to fruition. Your thoughts and asp-Irations will have to be put into practice, How
then would you want to improve the world as it is today?
This is the first question youth should ask itself, I think. How they wish to
improve the world, because until they know how and where they want to go, until they
know the kind a! improvements they wiant to make, they have very little chance indeed
of affecting any improvements because they don't know the paths they wish to follow.
Perhaps you would say, " We wiould like to build a world where there is no
poverty at all as there is undoubtedly too much now. We would like to build a world
where we had more feeling of involvement and of fulfilment in our lives. Where sheer
material benefits were not held in as great esteem as they are now, but rather a
comrnunit,, to which we could contribute and fromr which and in w~ hich we could develop
our own personality and feel a satisfaction in living". Perhaps these are the things
that you would seek as improvements. I hope they are because they are the kind of
improvements that I feel we can -make and should make in the years ahead.
. Lh ere will be difficulties in the way. Firstly, it will be necessary,
essential, to maintain that political freedom under which we operate at present. There
has been no threat to it in the lifetime of moost of you, but there have been threats of
that political freedom being overthrown in the past and there may be dangers of it
being attached from outside in the future.
But perhaps more significantly that freedom could be lost inside without
invasion. We see now tolerance carried to too great a length because although tolerance
is one of the essentials for a proper commrunity, yet there are some things which
cannot be tolerated. For example, you cannot safely tolerate intolerance, and we see
examples of intolerance in the name of dissent and in the name of civic rights. And
it will be necessary for young peo. ple to make their minds up as to where the line is drawn
when tolerance cannot be extended any further, and at what point it is necessary to
defend the civic rights of the vast majority against attack in the name of civic rights of
a minority. These will, I think, be difficulties, not great difficulties, not great but
nevertheless onies which will exist and do exist i this country.
But it will not be enough mnerely to maintain political freedom. It is essential
that it be properly used, I mean. by that that it is essential that if people are to
contribute to a country, then the contrasting and conflicting ideas whicn are advanced
by political parties ought to be critically examined by each individual, ought to be
analysed by each individual. And if faith is to be kept with those who have fought
for political freedom, then not by slogants, but by applied intelligence, should each
individual decide what ideas they wish to accept. 6 / 4 
4.
Side by side with that political freedom, I hope that you will be able to
advance still further towards the economic freedom which some time ago we did not have
at all, which now we have in large measure, but which we can have in even greater
measure if we take the opportunity that this Australia gives us today.
This won't be easy. It won't be easy to abolish poverty unless enough wealth
is produced to enable that to happen. There is no easy way to run a country or to live
in it. It is essential in every sphere of life that there should be hard work, that there
should be the application of intelligence, that there should be a training of the mind,
that there should be a willingness to contribute to the community.
I think the youth of Australia today have those qualities in greater measure
than did we. I have the utmost hope for the future of this country because of that belief.
At any rcLe, the whole thing shortly will be in your hands. The fact that you are here
tonight irdicates a willingness to participate, a desire to participate, and if that is true,
then you have another weapon we did not have you have greater opportunities for
education to enable that cont ribution to be the better applied.
There are some eternal values, and those I think are these. We must have in
a proper community, kindness the one towards the other; tolerance within the limits of
which I have spo: en; sacrifice and work. Because I think you have these qualities and
because I know the opportunities for their use are in Australia more than they are in
any other country in the world, then I feel that you will meet the challenges before you.
I hope that at some time in twenty, or thirty years, one of you perhaps will stand where
I am standing today and talk to those who then will be young and you won't be because
youth is the stuff that does not endure and that vou will be able to say to the young to
whom you talk and my generation i:. herited a world that was not bad but by our
efforts we have made it so much better." ( And the young to whom you are talking will
probably look at you and think, " VWell you haven't done much about it, really, and it is
up to us to make it better still in the future. But if you can stand here and say that
and know that you are speaking the truth, then I think you will have contributed to the
building of a great nation, to the building of a great society and 1: 0o the development of
your own individual capacity which is quite possibly the most important thing of all.
And that I think is all I have to say to you. I did not want to talk on politics
tonight. I did riot want to talk orn issues of the hour, for they are ephemeral, they go,
but the results of applying one's mind and heart and spirit to trying to better the
society in which one is living are not ephemeral...... and this is an c, bjective I hope
will remain with you for the whole of your lives. Indeed, I think it will because I
finish as I began by saying I do not thirnk this is a generation of dissent or disenchantment.
I believe that for the vast majority of youth it is a generation which offers opportunities
unknown before and that the vast majority of youth are prepared to accept and use those
opportunities, and I hope I am right in that. But I am putting before you things as an
older man sees them. You will make up your own mind whether what I have said is
true or not. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 62/ 1970
NATIONAL MARITIME MUSEUM
Statement, by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Government will preserve the Sydney Customs House as
a National Maritime Museum.
The Premier of New South Wales, who, along with many
other interested persons and organisations, has supported this
course of action, has been informed.
I am sure that this decision in principle will be welcomed,
but the Customs House will be required for its present purpose
for many years and it is not possible to cay when it will be
vacated by the Department of Customs and Excise.
The Customs House was built in 1887 and was the work
of the colonial architect, James Barnet, who was responsible
for a number of important buildings in Sydney.
CANBERRA 9 August 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 83/ 1970
MEMBERSHIP OF THE ADVISORY BOARD FOR
COMMNWEALTH ASSISTANCE TO AUSTRALIANCOMPOSERS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Chairman ( Sir Bernard Heinze) and the Members ( Professor
F. A. Callaway, 0. B. and Mr. J. R. Hopkins, 0. B. E. have been re-appointed for
further terms to the Advisory Board, Commonwealth Assistance to Australian Composers.
Also, an additional member, Mr. Ernest Llewellyn, C. B. has been
appointed to the Board.
CANBERRA 12 August 1970
BIOGRAPHICAL DETAILS
Sir Bernard Heinze: Director, N. S. W. Con. servatorium of Music, Sydney, 1956-66;
Ormond Professor of Music, University Melbourne 1925-56; founded Melbourne String
Quartette; Conductor, University Symphony Orchestra 1924-32, Vic. Symphony
Orchestra 1933-56 and Melbourne Philharmonic Society 1928; Director General
Music A. B. C. 1929-32.
Professor Frank Adams Callaway, 0. B. E. Dean of Faculty of Arts, University of W. A.,
1960-62; Professor of Music, University of W. A. since 1959; World-President,
International Society for Music Education since 1968; Member A. B. C. Federal Mici
Advisory Committee since 1957; Chairman, Australian U. N. E. S. C. 0. Committee for
Music since 1968; President, Australian Society for Music Education since 1966;
Conductor, University Choral Orchestral Societies W. A. 1953-62; Member, Australian
Music Exams Board since 1955.
Mr. John Raymond Hopkins, 0. B. Director of Music, A. B. N. S. since 1963;
Assistant Conductor, B. B. C. Scottish Orchestra and Conductor Scottish Singers Glasgow
1949-52; Conductor, B. B. C. Nrthern Orchestra, Manchester 1952-57, National
Orchestra N. Z. B. C. Wellington 1957-63; Mulsical Director, N. Z. Opera Co. 1957-61.
Mr. Ernest Victor Llewellyn, C. B. E. Director, Canberra School of Music since 1965;
Musical Director and Conductor, Canberra Symphony Orchestra Concert Series since
1966; Concert Master Sydney Symphony Orchestra 1949-65, Associate Conductor
1959-65; Celebrity Artist A. B. C. since 1936, Chief Study Teacher Melbourne
University Conservatorium and Sub-Leader Melbourne Symphony Orchestra 1940. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 84/ 1970
AUSTRALIAN FILM DEVELO2MENT CORPORATION
6tatement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I am pleased to announce the appointment of the Australian Film Development
Corporation which has been established to encourage the production and distribution of
Australian films of high quality.
Five Australians have accepted the Government'o invitation to make up the
Corporation. They are:-
Mr. John Darling ( Chairman)
Mr. Ronald S. Elliott
Mr. Talbot S. Duckmarton
Mr. Denys E. Brown
Mr. Barry 0. Jones
I expect that each by virtue of his background and experience will make an
important contribution to the Corporation and the conduct o! its activities. None has
pecuniary interests in the business of making, distributing or exhibiting films.
I hope that the appointment of the staff o7 the Corporation will be proceeded
with as quickly as possible so that it will get underway with a minimum of delay.
The Corporation begins with an initial capital of one million dollars.
CANBERRA I August 1970
BACKGROUND NOTES:
MR. J. DARLING.
Chairman, Darling and Co. Ltd. and Member, Australian National University Council.
MR. R. S. ELLIOTT
General Manager, Commonwealth Development Bank.
MR. T. S. DUCKMANTON
General Manager, Australian Broadcasting Commission.
MR. D. E. BROWN, M. B. E.
Producer-in-Chief, Film Division, Australian News and hformation Bureau and
Member, Australian National Film Board.
MR. B. O. JONES
Barrister and Solicitor, and Lecturer in History; Member, Australian Council for
the Arts. A Governor of the Australian Film Institute. 



SWEDISH GIFT TO MARK BI-CENTENARY YEAR
Presentation by His Excellency, Mr Per Anger,
the Swedish Ambassador, at Parliament House,
Canberra, A. C. T. 21 AUGUST 1970
~ pech~ y hePrime Minister. Mr john Gorton
Your Excellency, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Tis with pleasure that I accept, on behalf of the
Australian Gove:: -nment, this gift from Sweden, and I would ask
you, Sir, to convey . xur appreciation and thanks to your Government
and people. We are delighted that a nation which had associations
with our beginninigs 200 years ago should be honouring our Bi-Centenary
in this way. Today's ceremony is well timed. It is 200 years
ago tomorrow 22 August 1770 that Captain Cook landed on
Possession Island and made claim to what was later called New
South Wales. The engravings on this crystal plinth remind us
of the botanical and zoological discoveries of that great Swedish
botanist, Daniel Solander, who was with Cook on his historical
voyage of discovery along Australia's Eastern coastline.
Even at that time, of course, Sweden was already
a highly civilised country and had laid the foundations for that
craftsmanship for which it is renowned,
Most Members ind Senators are familiar with the
Orrefors vase which was presented to this Parliament by the
Swedish Chamber of Commerce to commemorate the opening of
Parliament Hou!: 2 in 1927. This plinth makes a splendid companion
piece. / 2
tN r 
-2-
And it is a mark of our developing interest, Sir,
that in a week or two an Australian Trade Fair will open in
Stockholm, you: x capital city. I hope this Fair will help to
stimulate Sweden's interest in Australia, just as this ceremony
today will help : o stimulate our interest in Sweden.
We are glad that you are sharing our history
with us in this way and with such an elegant gift. We thank you,
Sir, and we tharnk your Government. 



TENTH F. A. O. REGIONAL CONFERENCE
FOR ASIA AND THE FAR EAST
Canberra, ACT 27 AUGUST 1970
Speech b the Prime Ministers Mr John Gorton
Mr. Wells, Mr. Anthony, Ministerial Colleagues, Federal and State,
Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is not my function today to open this Conference, because that is the
role of my colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry. But it is my function to
welcome you all here. It is my function and my pleasure to do so in the name of
the Australian Government and the Australian nation.
I think we are privileged to have you here in our national capital for
this Tenth Regional Conference which is the first such Regional Corfere-. ce to be
held in Australia but not I hope, and I am sure the last. And from nherever
you have travelled to be here today, you and we have one objective in common, one
thing in mind which we hope we may advance towards as a result of thic Conference,
and that is the eventual elimination of hunger amongst mankind, and therefore the
improvement of the health and the wellbeing of mankind throughout the world.
My own country is proud to be associated with the work of the Food and
Agriculture Organisation and it gives me today an opportunity to pay tribute to the
contribution made by the FAO over the past quarter of a century. I know you
already have a planned programme covering the next fifteen years and we wish
you well in this vital and humane task.
It is a matter of some pride with us, if you will forgive a little national
sentiment on an international occasion, that one of our earlier Prime Ministers,
the late Lord Bruce, in other capacities, was closely associated with the foundation
days of FAO. Way back in the " Hungry Thirties", at the old League of Nations in
Geneva, in 1935, Lord Bruce made the plea: " Let the nations of the world
collaborate to provide sufficient food to avoid hunger". That was the challenge
which, at a later date, and in another forum, was taken up, and so FAG was born
with Lord Bruce as the first Chairman of its Advisory Committee the World
Food Council. That same continuing challenge brings us all here today and my nation
today has that same approach as Lord Bruce had when he was our Prime Minister
so long ago. I believe that communication, partnership and participation amongst
nations are the key factors in trying to meet this very great challenge. We have
got to communicate across the distances that separate us. There is no room for
isolationism of thinking in this field in the world today or, indeed, in any field. / 2 
2.
And so we must share our knowledge and learn from each other's experiences, and
learn from each other's adv nces and learn from each other's mistakes. And
how better can we do it than by constant contact between officials of our Governments
and by meetings such as this today.
For our part, partnership is a first principle in many fields bilaterally,
within regional and special bodies like ECAFE and FAO, and globally through the
United Nations community Pi. d many trading, commodity and other arrangements
of one kind or another.
And in the Asian region which is still predominantly agricultural,
we in Australia see ourselves as joined with you in a partnership which will be
directly involved with the rest of the world in the forthcoming Second Development
Deca: e promoted by the United Nations. What we have already tried to do in this
region, what we are now trying to do despite the difficulties which hamper us and
you and they are considerable may, I hope, offer lessons for other regions
and for the world at large, for co-operation as the decade unfolds, to attack the
great problems which face mankind.
But we have to remember that in this region we have the most diverse
assembly of peoples, cultures, resources and standards of living in the world,
the most diverse. And the world itself is caught up with a population explosion
cf gigantic proportions. There is much to be done. There is a daunting task
facing this conference and those of us who are interested. The gap between the
hungry and the satisfied is still very wide and that, Mr. President, brings me
to participation. This, of course, is what gives meaning to a partnership. Ln simple
terms, it means to use an Australian colloquialism " let's be in it", and the
fact that we are all here today is evidence enough, I think, that we are all'In it".
Perhaps, I might mention indeed most of you would know that just
before this conference we had here in Canberra the Third Far East Regional
Conference of the Freedom From Hunger Campaign. This campaign gets
eno mous support in Australia because everybody can be in it. Australians as
individuals give generously in this extra effort to tackle the world's food
problems. And I like to feel that we here have some direct understanding of the
problems of the developing countries in our region because of our own responsibilities
not only in tl he. gion, not specifically to developing countries in the region who are
away from us, but particularly because of our close partnership with the
Territories of Papua and New Guinea. / 3 
I like to feel that here, too, in that area we are communicating with
the people, under difficulties there are always difficulties when peoples seek
to communicate but we are communicating, we are trying to be in partnership
and participating in the development of their nationhood and of their capacity to
help in this great task of providing food for the hungry millions of the world.
Now, Sir, I feel that the time has come for me to finish, but in doing
so, I would just like to add this. There is taking place in Asia now what we all
know as a " green revolution". The earth is yielding more for its people in
response to planned programmes and applied skills but success has also brought
its problems. The world prices of basic foods are falling. Export markets
are shrinking. There are new exportable surpluses in some countries and there
is ar unsatisfied demand for fertilisers and for other assistance to growing food
and this while millions still go hungry. And so we have surpluses of rice stored
in Japan enough for perhaps two years' consumption for its people; surpluses
of wheat being raised in Australia, surpluses in other countries, while so many
still go hungry. So the task is to secure a proper balance for our agricultural
economies in the region. I think we should perhaps place more emphasi" on
industrial crops, on the development of forest products, for example, and to
encourage industries linked to agriculture to provide work for the people and
new products to export. This, I think, would go hand in hand, perhaps, with
the correction of the imbalance between export surpluses of food and the lack of
capacity of so many people to have food.
Aid side by side with this, there must be that participation, that
partnership, that sharing of knowledge of which I have already spoken.
If this can come about and I believe it can not without e-ffort, not
without thought, not without time, not without difficulty, but if it can come about,
then the world will be a happier and a richer place for us all. And those who give
their time and effort to this task and to discussions with their colleagues -such
as take place here today, will have played a real part in making the world a
happier and richer place for us all.
So I repeat my welcome A very warm welcome to you all, and I
wish you in which I include us every success in our deliberations. 


PM No 85/1970
The membership of the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board has been increased with the appointment of Mr. Clifford Last. As a distinguished modern sculptor, it is expected that Mr. Last will make a most valuable contribution to the work of the Board.
The Members of the Commonwealth Advisory Board now are:
Sir William Dargie (Chairman)Sir Daryl LindsaySir Russell DrysdaleMr. Robert CampbellMr. Douglas PrattMr. Clifford Last
CANBERRA3 September 1970
Biographical DetailsMr. Clifford Last
Age 52, one of the leading sculptors in Victoria, formerly staff art teacher at Mercer House Associated Teachers' Training College, Melbourne, now full time sculptor. He is represented in most State Galleries and the National Collection and in the National Art Gallery of Malaysia.



L I TRAINING SEMINAi. ON DRUGS
CANB: RRA, A. C. T 7 SEPTEMBER 1970
-Seec by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Minister, Your Excellencies, Commonwealth and , tate Ministers,
Officers of the Crown, Federal and State, and our Vi itors from Overseas:
Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the introduction. This Seminar, in one
way, is a function that one can scarcely be pleased to oa-en, because it is not
pleasing that there should be a need for a Seminar to . revent the abuse of drugs.
Yet, in another way, because there is that need, and because it is paramount, it
is pleasing indeed to see the effort that is being made, of which this Seminar
is a part, to combat one of the greatest menaces of our time.
I welcome experts from the United Statec3 Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs who will assist with the technical lectures, and I welcome the
representatives of the Overseas Narcotics Bureau in South East Asia. To that
I add a very warm welcome to the students on the course that is the drug
enforcement officers from within and from without Australia.
The task before us all is a truly international one. Our object is to impede
and, where we can, to eliminate illicit drug traffic and drug abuse. I believe
this Seminar will be a major cortribution to that end. It is the first centralised
course of its kind in Australia and it is being presented by the Commonwealth
Bureau of Narcotics in conjunction with the Training Centre of the Department
of Customs and Excise.
In a very real sense, the task before all of you here is the task of
protection of protecting individual citizens from the madness and death which
they can inflict upon themselves by drug abuse, and of -protecting the community
against the crimes to which such addicts can be driven, should the supply of
their narcotics be cut off.
It is distressing to find that in Australia, where we have so much going for
us, the habit of drug-taking is increasing, as it is increasing amongst our
neighbours in South-East Asia. And it is distressing to find that the sources of
supply are so numerous.
It would be easy for us to say " This is a problem for the countries where
the drugs are produced. Let us stop the menace at its source." But it isn't
as simple as that. For one things, we don't control the activities of the
countries which are the sources of these narcotics. And though destruction at
the source of supply is the ideal and absolute way of killing this vice, if we
cannot do it, there are at least two other points at which successful attacks
can be launched. / 2 
There are the supply routes, which are world wide, and there are the
markets at the end of those supply routes, of which Australia is one. Because
the supply routes are spread throughout the world and more than one country
the markets at the end of those supply routes, it is because of that that this is
such an international problem and that is why this Seminar is so international
in character. How well you succeed in the objects you have that this Seminar is
designed to further will be, I believe, a factor i-n the standard of our societies
for generations to come. And what is happening in our own country, Australia,
today? The truth is that drug abuse is increasing. The smugglers are getting
more numerous and more cunning. There are more pushers at work and they are
fir. Jing more customers among our young people. This must be stopped and we
must marshal all the skills we have to stop it.
The warnings from other countries Wh ich have suffered the problem longer
are quite loud and clear. The drug trail is the downhill trail to crime, to despair,
to poverty, to madness and to death.
Not many years ago the worst drug evil we had in Australia was a bit of
opium-smoking and a few opium dens in the back streets of our big cities, and
this was a problem of quite manageable proportions. But now it's hashish,
marijuana, LSD harder narcotics and more and more young people are
" taking trips" and getting " hooked" and more and more " pads" are to be found in
areas of our cities. The doctors, the hospitals, the psychiatrists and the social
workers, all know what tne Customs and the police and the couts know that
this illicit traffic and these dangerous habits are gettingw orse, and that one of
the greatest tasks before us is to stop it all as soon and as completely as we can.
It isn't easy to quote actual figures on the grovwth of drug abuse, but in the
last eighteen months, seizures of illegal drugs have increased by 300 per cent
and in the last three months drugs to the value of a quarter of a million dollars
have been intercepted. They came from half a dozen countries in Asia, from the
United States and from South Africa.
In 1968, 152 young people between 14 a-id 19 years of age were charged
with drug offences and a further 139 between the ages of 20 and 34. Well, you
may say that isn't many, but there are many who do not get caught and there is
the unhappy fact that the numbers are growing with frightening speed.
For in 1969, not 152 but 284 youngsters between 14 and 19 were charged,
and not 139 between the ages of 20 and 34 were charged but 424 in that age
group, which is a two and a half fold increase in one year. / 3 
The drugs are coming through all sorts of channels from external sources;
some are smuggled into Australia in false compartments of suitcases and bags,
some in household appliances such as food mixers and ctereo speakers and bongo
drums and so on. But you know this better than I do. And yet others come by
mail or are thrown overboard from ships in our ports.
Well, we are developing our own responses to these practices and our
counter-measures are having some success. The strength cf our Narcotics
Squad has been trebled since it was first formed and it is proposed to increase the
numbers again in the near future.
But perhaps I can sum up our task by giving you five points to which the
Australian public should direct their minds.
First the drug traffic and drug abuse in Australia have grown at an alarming
rate of geometric progression in the past few years.
Second, there has been an alarming increase in the number of new addicts
in the younger age groups.
Third, there are about 5, 000 recorded narcotic offenders in Australia.
Marijuana is the most abused drug and in the last three years the quantity smuggled
has increased dramatically.
Fourth, most of the drug traffic is in the larger cities, though I understand
there is evidence that preparations are being made in the smaller Australian
cities to extend this traffic.
And, fifth, there is some production and manufacture of marijuana and LSD
going on in Australia.
These points give you some idea of the problem here. This course
beginning today will, I hope, be a powerful reinforcement for a continuing attack
on the problem. The course itself came into being because for some time
Commonwealth and State Ministers concerned with health and law enforcement
had been discussing the increase of drug abuse in Australia. They set up a
National Standing Control Committee and set it to work to study this problem.
That Committee recommended a specialised central training course for
officers engaged in the suppression of illicit drug traffic. The Ministers decided
to have that course, and my colleague, Mr. Chipp, offered the services cf his
Department to run it.
Those of you who are here to attend that course are directly involved in
the attack on the traffic. You can be assured that the Governments and people of
Australia are completely behind you in your work. / 4
I at. 
For in Australia it has been-continually emphasised that where there has
been a co-ordinated and co-operative effort by the various agencies here, and in
Asia, and elsewhere this has had a marked effect on the drug traffic. I think this
course will be a good example of the kind of co-operation which will lead to that
effect. It will be up to you to interrupt the sources of supply. It will be up to you to
apprehend the pushers and the addicts. It will be up to the courts to see that those
who peddle these powders of death receive proper sentences so that they, the
courts, can join in the protection which you are giving to the public of Australia.
Now one final point. We recognise that the problem extends beyond
individual countries. Nc one country can hope to combat the problem in isolation.
Th refore, the question of co-operation and liaison, with Asian countries in
particular, becomes essential to our growing efforts to cut down the illicit entry
of drugs. Some activity has already taken place with that object in view, but my
Government has now decided that it will take the initiative in setting up a more
formal international arrangement between the operational bodies responsible for
anti-narcotic control..... between ourselves, New Zealand, and our Asian friends.
The Government will begin discussions on this matter with Governments
in the South-East Asian area as soon as practicable. Preliminary talks have
already taken place on this matter between the Minister for Customs and Exicse
and Ministers in other countries and these talks indicate that there will be a
large measure of support for this co-operative finternatonal action.
And Ministers agree that irrespective of a country's borders, the
operational bodies must work together to cut off supply routes, and if possible,
the sources of supply and to pass on information through an international network
so that against an international conspiracy, there can be an international defence.
Given this more formal arrangement, and given the enthusiasm which I
believe you will bring to this work, I think that we will have taken another big stride
forward in really getting to grips with this dangerous and growing problem.
Now, Mr. Minister, I declare this Seminar open. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 86/ 1970
COMMONWEALTH TO LEGISLATE OIN
GENERAL INSURANCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, _ Mr. Joh-i Gorton
The Government has given close consideration, ' in the light of recent
developments in the insurance industry, to the broad question of supervision of the
affairs of general ( non-life) insurance companies. I have received letters on the
subject fram the Premier of New South VWales and Sir Arthur Rylah when Acting
Premier of Victoria and we have also~ had the benefit o views conveyed to the
Government by a number of organisations in the insurance field.
We have reached the conclusion that there is a need for better supervision oi
general insurance companies coniducting business in Australia. At present, Qujeensland
is the only State which exercises a comprehensive form of supervision, and
existing Commonwealth legislation the Insurance Act 1932-1966 is very limited in
scope. While the deposit requirements of the Linsurance Act have served a useful
purpose over the years, recent devehbpments have sho-, mn that deposit requirements
on their own do not provide adequate protection a; T the interests of policy-owners.
They need to be supplemented by a system of stripervision under which companies are
required to meet specified standards before they are authlorised to begin carrying
on general insurance business and in the conduct of their affairs thereafter.
The Government has given careful thought to the question whether supervision
should be a Commonwealth responsibility or whether it is best regarded as a matter
for the States. For various reasons, it seems to us that Commonwealth legislation
is the preferable co3urse.
The fact that the Commonwealth has powers in respect of insurance under the
Constitution is itself a very relevant consideration. The Commonwealth has already
legislated for supervision of life insurance ai~ d since its, enactment in 1945 that
legislation has been successful in ensuring sound and stable conduct of life insurance
business in Australia. As in the case of life offices, many general insurance companies
operate in a number of States and in the interests of the smooth running of their
businesses it seems desirable that they should deal with one supervisory authority.
In the representations they have made the main insurance organisations in Australia
have all accepted the need for greater supervision of general insurance and have
expressed a strong belief that it should be conducted by the Commonwealth. 
At the same time, we recognise that the State Governments have a close and
practical interest in irsurance in a number of ways. Queensland is involved in
general insurance over the whole field, both irn an overall regulatory capacity and
through the operations of its State insurance off-Lce. Most of the other States are
engaged in insurance business through their government insurance offices and they
all have statutory provisions covering the licenSing of insurers for workers'
compensation and compulsory third party insurance pur-poses.
In these circumstances vie feel it would be most helpful if, before proceeding
further, we could have the benefit of the views of State Governments as to the kind
of provisions they think it would be desirable for Commonwealth legislation to
contain. Accordingly, I have written to the Premiers o~ f all the States inviting
their -idvice and comments and indicating that, if they so desire, we would be
happy to have discussions with representatives of State Governments.
The Government regards the subject as one of urgency and we will press
ahead with it with all possible speed. I should perhaps say, however, that the
preparation of a comprehensive legislative scheme will be a large and complex
operation, and I am unable at this stage to indicate a lilhely timetable for the
introduction of legislation.
CA NBERRA
0 Oeptember 1970 



Ht
FOR PRES: P. M. No 87/ 1I970
EXPO CONGRATULAT IONS
The Prime Minister has sent the following
message to Rear Admiral Morrison, Australia's Commissioner-
General at EXPO, to mark the closing this weekend of the
world exposition at Osaka
" AS EXPO CLOSES, PLEASE ACCEPT AND
CONVEY TO ALL THE MEMBERS OF OUR EXPO
STAFF MY CONGRATULATIONS FOR A JOB
WELL DONE. OUR PARTICIPATION IN EXPO
HAS BEEN A GREAT SUCCESS. THIS IS DUE IN
LARGE MEASURE TO THE DEVOTION AND SKCILL
WITH WHICH YOU HAVE ALL APPROACHED YOUR
TASK. AS THE TEAM DISBANDS TO GO THEIR SEPARATE
WAYS, I EXTEND MY THAN-\ KS AND GOOD WISHES FOR
THE FUTURE. JOHN GORTON."
CANBERRA 13 September 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 20/ 1970
PRIME MINISTER HAi MINOR OPERATION
The Prime Minister has had to cancel his planned meeting ir.
the Chisholm By-Election in Melbourne tomorrow ( Monday) night.
Mr. Gorton returned to Canberra today after undergoing a
minor operation at the Mercy Hospital in Melbourne last week.
Arrangements had been made for him to enter the hospital during the
week's Parliamentary recess and the operation for a fistula was
performed successfully last Wednesday.
As it was only a minor operation, he had intended going ahead
with his speaking engagement for tomorrow night. However, his
doctor has advised that it would be preferable for Mr. Gorton to
take it quietly for a few more days.
CANbERRA .3 September, ! 970 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
MOVES TO PREVENT OVERSEAS TAKEOVER OF
NORTHERN TERRITORY URANIUM DEPOSITS
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 17 September 19701
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)-
by leave-On 16th September 1969
1 made a statement in this House concerning
the Government's policy on overseas
investment in Australia. In the course of
that statement I said:
In the past the Government has acted to preserve
Australian ownership and control of enterprises
which for special reasons of national interest
or importance could not be permitted to pass
into foreign hands.
And I went on to say:
We reserve the right to do all in our power to
prevent particular takeovers when, in the circumstances
of the case, we would consider it to be
bad in the national interest.
There has recently been a discovery of
uranium deposits by a company called
Queensland Mines Ltd, in the Northern
Territory at Nabarlek. The estimates made
by the Chairman of the Company are that
the ore body is so large, and the grade of
ore so rich that it would be possible to
supply the free world's requirements of
uranium at a price considerably be-low that
now ruling.
The Government does not know that
this claim is accurate and it in no way
vouches for its accuracy. But it has been
made by Mr E. Hudson, the Managing
Director of Queensland Mines Ltd. Should
the claim be accurate then there could be
a clear temptation to overseas interests to
22917170 gain control of the Australian companies
which at present own these assets. Queensland
Mines Ltd is one company concerned
and the other is Kathleen Investments
( Australia) Ltd which owns 50 per cent of
the shares in Queensland Mines. It is
therefore clear that control of Kathleen
Investments would in fact lead to control
of Queensland Mines Ltd. It is a matter of
record that in recent days there has been a
heavy -turnover in the shares of both companies,
and although there is no indication
that this heavy turnover is as a result of
overseas ' buying, nevertheless the Government
would not wish a situation to arise
where it could be discovered that control
of these companies had passed out of Australian
hands. The deposits held by the
companies were discovered by Australians,
and exploration work was financed with
Australian capital. The deposits can be
exploited by Australian personnel using
Australian technical knowledge and knowhow
and can be sold on the world market
by Australia.
The Government feels that if Australia
is to reap the full benefit of these discoveries,
full control of this development exploration
should remain in the hands of Australian
companies for the benefit of
Australian shareholders and Australia
generally. We have therefore decided that it 
would not be in the national interest for
control of these uranium deposits to pass
into other than Australian hands. We
intend . to guard against control of either of
these companies being gained -through purchases
of shares by overseas investors.
Both companies are incorporated in the
Australian Capital Territory. We therefore
intend to legislate in order:
to limit to 15 per cent of the issued
share capital the total number of
shares able to be held in either company
by persons not ordinarily resident
in Australia or by foreign corporations.
Foreign corporations will
be defined in general similarly to the
definition in the Companies ( Life
Insurance Holding Companies)
Ordinance 1968.
to limit the number of shares held
in either company by any one person
not ordinarily resident in Australia
or held by any one foreign corporation, -to not more than 5 per
cent of the issued share capital.
This means that a total of 15 per cent of
the issued share capital can be held abroad
but that no one holder can hold more than
5 per cent of the issued share capital in
either companyto require any nominee holding, in
total, shares in excess of 5 per cent
of the issued capital in either company
to disclose the beneficial
ownership of those shares.
This action is not to be interpreted as anything
other than an attempt to preserve in
Australian hands and under Australian management
assets which have been discovered
by purely Australian endeavours and which
may be of very significant benefit to Australia.
It is an instance of -the working out
of that policy announced on 16 September
last year, which I reiterated at the beginning
of this statement.
Printed by Authority by the Government Printer of the Commonwealth of Australia 



EMBARGO 7.30p. m. 18-9-70
" THIS DAY TONIGHrT"
TELEVI SION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER ON ABC TELEVISION NETWORK
Interviewer Philip Koch 113 SEPTEMBER 1970
Q. Prime Minister, your decision. last night has been roundly applauded
but there is criticism that while you have protected an Australian company from
any possible foreign takeover, you have not laid down a policy to embrace all
minerals and developments. How do you answer this?
P. M. Well, I would first of all repeat what I said in the statement of
Government policy on the 16 September last year that's a year ago if I
can quote our objectives:
" As we see it, the central aim of policy must be to provide
on terms which are fair, as between overseas investors and
the Australian people, the conditions under which investment
will be attracted here. But we do not believe that we can or
should seek to legislate in such a complex field."
Now you have suggested one might lay down policy to apply to all minerals and
all developments. I don't think anybody could lay down such a p-olicy. don't
think they should, and I think if they tried to, they would find so much variety,
so many different circumstances that they would be seeking to apply a completely
inflexible policy to a whole series of problems all of which vary the one from
the other.
Q. Could I ask you about one circumstance that could arise in that it
could have been just as easy for a foreigner, an overseas compay to have found
this particular uranium strike, reportedly the richest in the world. Now if
that had happened, what would you have done?
P. M. Well, we would have not in any way have interfered with the company
which had such a discovery any more than we interfered with ESSO-BHP when
they discovered oil. Because we think that if overseas investors -risk their
capital here preferably in conjunction with Australians but if they risk it,
then they are entitled to the rewards for the risks that they have taken. B-t
this is quite a different concept you are approaching here. We are not seeking
to protect this particular discovery in order to prevent profits going out of
Australia, or something of that kind. After all, we get half of the profitc from
any discovery. But this is not the point. The point is that if this field is, as
it is claimed to be, the richest in the world, and so much richer taQn aliy other
field, then overseas people, theoretically, havbig uranium interests ailroad,
could buy up shares and control this field and not put it into operation 2 
because by putting it into operation and by selling it at the price at which it could
be sold, they could damage their own overseas investments. Now this is
clearly quite a possibility. Also if it is as rich as it is claimed to be, then
consumer countries seeking uranium might well be tempted to seek to buy shares
to control the company and sell to themselves at a very low price the uranium
which can be produced here at such a low price. So it is really designed to see
that this is used for the greatest benefit of Australia that we have taken this
action. But I do want to say one thing. I don't endorse the claims for the
richness of this field. But claims have been made and I think we need to take
notice of them.
Q. But you would agree, Prime Minister, that it is very fortunate that it
has been found by an Australian company?
P. M. Very fortunate.
Q. Could I ask you why there are differences in the amounts of foreign
holdings allowed in Australian companies following your announcement last
night. Now, in the case of uranium depositr, you propose to legislate for
a maximum 15 per cent holding. Now under the M. L. C. legislation, the
maximum foreign holding was set at 40 per cent, and under the BroadcaDting
and Television Act, foreign shareholding was limited to 20 per cent. Now
why are there these gradings?
P. M. Well, I can't tell you why the Broadcasting Control Act which was
brought in in 1942 or something of that kind was set at 20 per ce:. t. It must
have been considered at the time that 20 per cent wasn't a controlling
interest, I suppose. But I don't know. It's a long time ago. In the case o the
M. L. it was set, as you say, at 40 per cent, and 21 per cent in the hands
of any one individual owner. Now this was set because at the time at which
we acted, that was the shareholding which overseas interests had acquired, and
it didn't seem right or proper to move in an divest them of shares which they
had bought in good faith. So we took the level at which it existed and said that
level cannot be increased, and indeed, if in the future a foreign shareholder
sells shares to another foreign shareholder, those shares will lose their voting
right. That was why it was set at 40 per cent because that was the holdings
which overseas people had bought in good faith. We have now moved to
per cent in line with the guidelines for company takeovers which I
announced in the House last year, a year ago, in which we said, amongst a
number of other things, about first-come-first-served offers and so on, that
control would be regarded as 15 per cent of a company's shares rather than
the 33-1 3 per cent which had previously been considered to be control. That
was announced a year ago. 3 
Q. Prime Minister, just one other point or, the uranium find. You were
able to act quicdy to protect the uranium deposits from possible . oreign
control because the two companies involved are registered in the Australian
Capital Territory, and of course come under Commonwealth ordinance-. Now
would you agree you could not have given this protection had the compa: iez been
registered in one of the States?
P. M. I believe that is so. I am not prepared to give a legal opinion that that
is certainly so. But this is generally believed to be true and for the pur__ oses
of this discussion, let us say it is true. Certainly, the fact that they were
incorporated not registered incorporated in the A. C. T. was a fact vi-ich
enabled us to take swift and immediate action. And had they been incorporated
in the States, I don't think we could have taken such swift and immediate action.
Q. Well this brings up the point that if the need arose of a company in one
of the States, would you expect that the State would follow your guidelines and
would in the national interest, do the same thing? Would you have any
guarantee of that'i
P. M. No, we are a Federal system and the States are sovereign States. They
did agree at the Attorneys-General level last year to legislate under the
Uniform Company Act for takeover codes for companies so that
nominees owning more than 10 per cent had to disclose the beneficial interest,
so that there must be a period of time between takeover offers and acceptance
by shareholders, so that 15 per cent would be regarded as a controlling iterest
in the company, and a number of other matters. They have not yet legislated
along these lines. For that matter, neither have we because we have beelwaiting
and hoping for uniform legislation, but we may have to move without
it. But I can't guarantee what a State would do. I imagine that, if they were
sensible, they would do what we do.
Prime Minister, thank you very much. 



ANNUAL CONVENTION OF THE NSW DIVIION
OF THE LIBERAL PAR'iY OF AUiMTI
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 19 SEPTEMER 1970
Spech by the Prime Minister, MrJohn Gorton
Mr. Attwell, Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen
It is not my intention to speak to you for very long because I hope that tonight,
having spoken to you for a short time, we will be able to spend a much longer time
in a question and answer session, in which those of you who are here and who are the
backbone of the Liberal Party will have the opportunity to raise those matter--which
are on your minds, and to give me the opportunity to try to answer the querieO and
the questions and the criticisms you may have. I feel that that perhaps is the way in
which 1; 2 can get the greatest value from this meeting, and I hope that when the time
comes you will be not at all backward in raising those matters which are foremost in
your mind3. But before that time does come, there are some things I would like to say.
Mr President, we have been in office, as a government in Australia, for twenity-one
years or a little more. They were twenty-one years in which there have been three
wars first Korea, then the Malayan emergency and now Vietnam. And they were
twenty-one years in which there was great national development and un-precendented
industrial progress. There has been a greater increase in the population of
Australia than any other country has had, except Asian countries, in a similar
period of time. It has been a period of greatly expanded trade, a period in which
our exports, particularly our secondary exports, have been greatly expanded, and
a period of growing involvement with that area of Asia to which we finid ourselves
contiguous and which will be so important for future generations of Australians.
It has been, too, a period of improvement of the living standards Of all
Australians and of improvement for the population generally. It has been a period of
greatly expanded social services and of greatly expanded opportunity for the
individual to express himself to the top of his bent. I think we have all helped to
bring this about over this period of time, because of s~ ome basic philoso'phies.
When we came into off ice, we stood for the right of the individual to engage
in the occupation of his choice, and to so conduct himself in that occupation as he
believed best. We stood against the concept that the individual ought to be told by
the state how he could conduct his enterprise or whether he could conduct his
enterprise, because at that time, as now, our opponents held to the idea that there
should be limitations on the individual in conducting his enterprise, that there should
be some fields in which he could not enter that government knew better than an
individual what is good for that individual. We stood against that. 0 0 0 0 / 2 
We stood for the concept that -aie Government shou~ ld create a climate
where individual enterprise was encouraged. We didn't stand for laissez-faire,
and we don't stand for It now. But we stood for a concept that we could create a
climate where individual enterprise was encouraged and where the planning of
enterprise and its expansion was a matter for the myriad individuals engaged in
the myriad enterprises which make up Australian life. And we stood against the
concept that all planning in all fields should be undertaken by a government or
governments and forced upon the citizens of this country.
We stood for a political system where elected representatives of a
party should themselves decide the policies to be followed by that party, and v,, ie
stood against the system which made elected representatives subject to direction
and ins truction from unelected persons from outside. And that we were righit in
these attitudes is, I believe, evident from the results of this past twenty or nearly
twent" t-one years.
And those things that we stood for then, we stand for now. The things
we stood against we still stand against and our opponents still stand for the planning
by governments of all enterprise, for, in cases, the prohibition of individuals
entering an enterprise, and until just recently for the direction of elected
representatives by persons who are non-elected from outside. I say " until just
recently" t because there is an admission from our opponents that in at least ole
State that of Victoria this was what applied. And personally, I do not believe
that they will change this but time alone will tell.
Sir, in the last few years in the last three years many new problems
have appeared for Australia. We have found ourselves in a situation where the
United Kingdom, under whose protection we have, as a nation, lived, is withdrawing
from Malaysia and Singapore, the countries to our North. And although that has
been slightly altered by a change of Government in the United Kingdom, still there
is only a token force left behind compared to the responsibility previously
assumed by the United Kingdom Government.
And we have found ourselves in a situation where the United States o!
America is questioning its approach to, and its involvement in, the problems of
Asia. These two things alone have vastly changed the world in which Australia
lives. And so our defence has necessarily had to occupy our attention in a way
which has not been necessary in the past years of our history.
We have found ourselves in a situation where our involvement with the
countries of Asia, our political involvement and our economic assistance, has
necessarily had to grow because we are contiguous to, and in a sense a part Of this
region, and what happens there will ultimately and inevitably affect us.
We have also found ourselves in a situation where the markets overseas
for our rural products, which had fluctuated in the past,, but had been taken, for
granted as markets in which we could profitably sell for most of the time, are now
threatened by a possible entry of the United Kingdom into the European Economic
Community. / 3 
And we have tound-our selves, too, in Australia In some strange new
situation dt politics. Because for the first time, we have nwny people in our
community who challenge the verdict of the ballot box, who challenge the worl-ings
of democracy to elect a government, who urge that people should take to the streets
if they are unhappy with what a government, democratically elected, does.
And we have an Opposition an alternative government supporting, to a
great extent, those who are taking these new approaches to politics. And this must
not be underrated. I know that our opponents pretend that they do not altogether
support the overthrow of authority as has been urged by Dr Cairns, one ofl the front
bench supporters of the Opposition. I know that they attempt hesitantly to
disengage from those who wish to make the streets the arbiter of political decisions.
But I believe that anyone who looks at what they are doing must come to
the cunclvt'son that they are frightened to come out and condemn what ought to be
condemned. It is all very well for the Premier of South Australia to dissociate
himself irom a moratorium movement which seeks to sit at city inter Cection but
having done that, he then seeks to instruct the head of his police not to prevent
people sitting at city intersections. It is all very well for the Leader of the
Opposition to make soothing noises as to what is going on, but just yesterday wie
saw him speaking to a crowd an orderly crowd but a crowd that had Vietcong
flags flying above them, and above his head as he spoke to them.
And the people of this country, I believe, need, not as a political
gimmick, but as something that goes to the very heart of politics, to make u-.
their minds as to whether they believe the verdict of the ballot box should be
accepted or whether they think it ought to be challenged in the streets. This i~ s a
great new issue between ourselves and our opponents. Let me develo-) it a little.
Some attempts have been made to suggest that we do not believe in a right
of dissent and this is completely and utterly untrue. I believe that we would be
those who, harder than anybody else, would fight to retain the right of dissent, would
fight to retain the right of criticism of a government, to fight to retain the right
of those who disagree to express that disagreement in all reasonable forms. ' Re
do not object to rather do we pledge ourselves to protect~-the right to din en. t.
But equally do we believe t hat there are civil rights of a majority OY^
Australians, that the majority of Australians have rights to use the streets ifI they
wish to without being impeded, that they have the right to use public buildings,
without having those buildings invaded and stink bombs let off as has happenied in
post offices throughout Australia.
We believe that there is a right and a need to protect the individual against
intimidation by those who disagree with what the Government is doing threats
and intimidation. And perhaps if I can encapsulate it in this way, I would say this
we would agree with Voltaire completely when he said " I1d isagree with what you
say, but I would fight to the death for your right to say it". This is our credo too.
0 * 1 4 
But we would not go on, as thc'qe who would seek to take over the streets
would go on, to change that statement to saying " I disagree with what you do, but
I will fight to the death for your right to do it" because there is no rignt to interfere
with the civil rights of the majority of the Australian people. And this will be a
matter engaging the attention of our Government very, very soon, and of the
State Governments, I know.
Sir, there has been this year discussion on the question of the financial
management of this country of Australia and of the Budget for the year in front of
us, and I would like to say some words on that.
We approached the planning the financial planning for this year within
certain fixed parameters. We had already decided, in conjunction with the
Premiers, that there should be, as far as was economically responsible, greater
sums of money available to State Governments than in the past, to enable them to
tackk. those problems of education, of health, of communications, the myriad
problems with which they are initially concerned. And so, at the Premiers'
Conference, we had made a new deal which greatly increased the amount of finance
available to State Governments this year and for the ensuing years over what would
have been available had the old system and the old agreement prevailed-son-ie 12 per
cent increase in the amounts available for expenditure. And this was one parameter
which we had to regard as we approached our planning for this year.
Secondly, we had a need, an obvious need, to ensure, as far as we
could ensure, that the rate of inflation was slowed, and not allowed to continue in
the way in which it corntinued in the last quarter of last financial year. Up until the
last quarter of the last financial year, the rate had been not unreasonable 3 -) er
cent or 3 point something per cent but in the last quarter it had gone to 5, over
per cent. This has got to be stopped. We had to ensure that it was stopped for
if it were not, then the results would have been that increased wages were nothing
but fool's gold, that those in the rural industries in Australia would have been hit
and unable to pass on the cost increases that they would have had to bear; that all
those on fixed incomes all superannuants, all pensio-ners, would have had this
bleeding sore of inflation withdrawing from them their capacity to buy the thi"-gs
they needed to live. And this was another essential element we had to bear in mird.
Then, too, we had said and I think properly said that one of our
objectives would be to reduce the rate of direct taxation on people throughout
Australia. This, indeed, had been recommended to us as the most importa; t thing
to be done in the Budget by the Liberal Party organisations throughout Australia
speaking through their Federal delegates coming to Cainberra. And this, too, we
felt we ought to do, and I felt I ought to do because I had promised to do it. And
this was another necessity we had to meet. 11. 
And so in the result we did this. We increased Indirect taxation and this
has caused some criticism but after all, in all other countrtes of the world that I
know of, significant countries, civilised countries economically speaking there has
been a swing from direct to indirect taxation. And surely that swing must be in line
with general liberal thinking, because there is no need for a person to buy more
cigarettes unless he makes a choice to do it, or to drink more wine unless he makes
a choice to do it, or to use more petrol unless he makes a choice to do so. What
we have done is to reduce the direct tax on the individual and if he then chooses to
buy things which are not essential, that is his choice and we, as Liberals, have
always stood for the right of choice. If he doesn't do that, he has more opportunity
to save, or more opportunity to buy the necessities for his family.
I believe that by the end of this financial year, this Budget will have been
seen to be one of the great Budgets of Australia, provided that that which we have done
to contain inflation is not damaged by organisations we do not control, increasing
wages throughout Australia without paying regard to the productivity increase
which alone can thoroughly justify an increase in wages and make an increase in
wages really valid and really essential.
May I in conclusion before we reach this question time, deal with two
other subjects and forgive me if I may seem self-centred in this, but I would like
to refresh your memory of some of the things which have been done in the last two
and three quarter years, because a great deal in fact has been done.
We have brought in a new oil pricing policy as a result of the discovery
of oil in Bass Strait, subject to great criticism at the time, but which now is
admitted to be working out to the benefit of the Australian consumer in that the price
arranged for Australian oil is now less than would be required to import oil, and
to the benefit of those seeking for oil throughout Australia, for we must find more.
We have taken steps again subject to criticism at first at the times they
were taken to preserve as much as possible for Australians the equity in the new
developments and the new mineral discoveries taking place throughout Australia.
We have not sought to legislate for this in any way because if we did if we sought
to lay down a distinct policy on it, it would be inflexible and it would be inapplicable
to an area where there are so many problems and so many different circumstances.
But we have let it be knovmwn abroad, that as a government we wish to see that
Australians are offered equity participation In the development of this country and
this has had a significant and measurable effect on the offerings that have been
made to Australia. We have laid down the guidelines in which overseas comoanies
can borrow in Australia so that there is more incentive to give equity to Australians,
because the more equity that is given to Australians the more borrowing is allowed
inside Australia. We have brought in convertible notes and we have, on a couple of
occasions you will remember one just last week protected where we thought it
was in the national interest to protect Australian companies. ./ 6 
6.
We hav'e-. ineazsed-soc ial servi~ es in this country to a degree to which they
have never-beeni increased over a comparable time as much as we have done. This
tends to be obscured because in this last Budget there was just a ' hold the line'
pension increase, but fif you go back to 1968 and if you see the rise in the pensions
since that time and compare it with the rise in the coot of living, you will see that
in that 9perlod of time the actual benefits to pensioners of all kinds ha.-very greatly
increased indeed. And there is much more to be done, I know, but let us as Liberals
not think that we have dropped behind when in fact we have, in real terms, increased
these benefits. We have taken away the fear of long-term illness in hospitalS. We still
have to deal with the problem of long-term illness in nursing homes. VWe still have
things to do to help low income families with many children. This was partof our
policy at the last election. This will be carried out during our period ofZ gover-nment.
This I Rm sure you would, as Liberals, wish to see us carry out and indeed we will.
Sir, I have in fact here about six pages of the things that we have done. I
won't read them out for it would take too long. But were it not for this Government,
I do not believe there would be a chance for the development of an alumninium !-ndustry
in Queensland, which could be the greatest development that that State has known in
the Ncrth of Brisbane; if it were not for this Governiment, there would be no
Institute of Marine Science which could make Australia the outstanding country in
the world in relation to marine biology; if it were not f or this Governmflent, there
would be no scheme for the provision of libraries in all secondary schools. I will
stop. But there are many things I think we can be please6d about and you caIn too
For the future, we will carry cut the programme that we put before you.
I do not think we have broken one promise yet and I car, assure you that before the
term of this Goverrment is finished, every promise made at the last election V/ ill
be fulfilled. But these are finite things, these are definite things. What is eve.-, m-, ore
important than that for us is to bear this in mind. At the beginning of my tall' to
you I said what we stood for twenty years ago and what we stand for now, what we were
againt twenty years ago and what we are against now. And I do ask ycu to study
our opponents because they have not changed one whit from the policies they held
twenty years ago. They still believe in nationalisation and it is still in their platform.
They are still swayed by unions affiliated through their conferences, many of them
communist dominated unions. They would still destroy our foreign and our dei~ ence
policy. They would still seek to interfere in the liveG of every single Australia n
in this country. e a s. 7 
There has not been one single bit of constructive criticism put forward
since we have been in government. Wide statements about the need, the very
definite need for-better cities,. statements about the need for more adequate
sewerage, statements about anything which is going to require large sums of money
to implement, and of course the needs are there because no country is perfect. But
there has been no indication of how these would be carried or of what burden.-would
be laid upon Australians to try and carry them out; burdens in the form of increased
taxes or inflation or control by bureaucrats from Canberra. Their objectives-are
still the same, their controllers are still the same. If they come into government,
the results of what they would do would be the same as those results which led
them to be thrown out of government twenty odd years ago.
There is no -alteration there. There is a great attempt to pretend there
is an alteration, to pretend that the nationalisation programme has been~ drorned,
to preand that they are not influenced still by outside bodies and by extreme leftwing
bodies. Look at their actions in the moratorium and I believe you would
agree with me that what they are pretending to be is not what they are. They are
seeking to hide their weapons. They are trying to pretend they are not controlled
from the areas from which they are controlled and trying to come before the
Australian people in disguise. It is up to us to strip that disguise and 1t is up to us
to go forward so that in the next twenty-one years as much progress can be mnade as
has been made in the last twenty-one. Indeed, more, because the opportunities
are there as the result of the last twenty-one. And I think that Liberal Parties
throughout Australia will see that this is done and I know that if they see that this
is done they will be rendering a signal service to their nation.
Q. Mr Prime Minister do you think that a rather over-zealous law and order
campaign along American models could lose more votes than it could gairn, particularly
amongst young people? And if so, what steps would you be thinking of taking in
this direction?
PM I don't know what you mean by " an over-zealous American-tyue campaign
on law and order". I don't therefore know whether that would lose more votes than
it would gain. But as I said in the main body of my address, I believe that the civil
rights of Australians, the majority of Australians, must be protected against
disruption from a minority. And I don't believe that we can or should continue to
allow people to invade Commonwealth Government off ices, to intimidate peorple
working in those offices, to pour ox blood over records in those offices, to esiter
Commonwealth Ministers' rooms and lock them in the rooms and sit around and insult
them. I don't believe we should allow people to enter into such buildings as vie
control such as post offices and interfere with the rights of citizens using those
post offices. These things need to be stopped. Certa inly they need to be sto'; oed
by due process of law. I believe that the penalties that should be applied in these
instances should be such as to prevent people from continuing to do them. w
whether that would lose more votes than it would gain, I couldn't say. I believe 0 0 0 0 ** 8 
8.
that it would gain more votes than it woubi4osebut, more importantly than that, I
believe it to be the right and proper. thing to do and the proper ' way to govern a
country to see that this -was notallo-wed to continue-to happen. Because I thinklthat
all history shows that once a group takes to the streets to try and impose their
will which they can't impose through the sources open to them, then groups which
oppose that group will take to the streets too, to battle them and the streets wil become.
a battleground and this is not the way in which a democracy or a country oughat to be
run when there is a free vote available every so often to elect a government and
to decide these questions, and that's my answer. 



E MBAR GO 3 P. M. Sunday, 20 September 1973
FOR PRESS: P. M. i. 1o 89, 1970
RETIREMENT OF TUNKU ABDUL RAHMAN
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman, ste7s down from
office tomorrow after thirteen years during which he has left an indelible im; rint on
Malaysian history.
The Tunku was the political architect first of Malayan Independence in 1957
and subsequently of Malaysia in 1963. In the course of his period in office he has
guided tl a national destiny with courage and remarkable skill.
He has in his time seen communist revolutionary war, undeclared external
aggression and internal divisions within Malaysia itself, each and all of them
representing a deadly peril to the nation. The fact that Tunku Abdul Rahman is able
to hand over to his successor a stable and prosperous country that is rapidly
increasing its capability for self-defence, is at peace with its neighbours, and has
a government that is deeply committed to the honourable solution of its communal
problems, is a measure of the Tunku's achievement.
Tunku Abdul Rahman's personal qualities are well known not only in his own
country and to the Commonwealth, of which he has long been a deeply respected elder
statesman, but to the world at large. These are notably, a profound tolerance and
even-handedness, a concern for human values and a firm refusal to be diverted from
his long-term objectives by alarms and pressures that he has judged to be tra-sient.
The Tunku has always been a good friend to Australia, and his departure
will be noted with regret both by my Government and by myself personally. Nevertheless
this regret will be compounded withthe satisfaction we feel that his policies have
been so well implanted. We know that the Tunku's successor Tun Abdul Razak is a
statesman very much in the Tunku's mould and no less a good friend of this country.
We wish him the best of good fortune as he prepares to accept the heavy burden of
national responsibility. Finally let me formally offer to the Tunku the best wishes of the Australian
Government and people, and the hope that his years of retirement will bring him
peace and contentment in contemplation of a career of great political achievement.
CANBERRA September 1970
BACKGROUND: The Prime Minister has also sent the Tunku a personal message, expressing
similar sentiments to this public tribute. T. EGGLETON
PRESS SECRETARY 



FCR PRESS: 91 1970
INAUGURATION OF TOURIST DEVELOPMENT WEEEK
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorto-
I welcome the opportunity of inaugurating Australia's firot TouriLt
Development Week, and I congratulate the Tourist Ministers' Council oselecting
' Keep Australia Beautiful' as the theme for the first such weeck.
A concerted effort by all States and Territories to draw attenticn to
pollution, and the despoiling of our environment, is one of the most ; ractical
ways in whichTourist Ministers can protect and promote Australia's growing
touri t industry. No one, and least of all our overseas visitors, wants to see polluted
beaches and rivers or littered roadsides and parks. We promote Australia
abroad as a fresh open country of blue skies and clean beaches. These are
great natural advantages. The time to preserve them is now, when the cost,
though high, is manageable.
I hope that the range of activities planned for Tourist Development
Week will help to bring home to every citizen that keeping Australia beautiful
is a community responsibility. It a widespread and sustained commu-nity spirit
of this kind can be generated it will not only malke our towns and cities n-much
more pleasant places, but at the same time will do much to assist the development
of one of Australia's most important industries.
On the inauguration of this first Tourist Development Week, I want to
join with all the States and Territories in making a special appeal to all
Australians to involve themselves personally in the theme ' Keep Australia
Beautiful'. CANBERRA
ZO September 19/ 0 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 92-1970
CHISHOLM BY-ELECTION RESULT
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
My warmest congratulations to Mr. Tony Staley for his
remarkably good win in a by-election for a seat already held by the
G vernment. He has reversed the normal swing away from the GoverLnment
ii a by-election at this stage, has improved the Government', shar
of the vote compared with the General Election las: t year.
It is pleasing to see that the ALP has not increased its vote
in spite of this being a by-election.
Mr Staley has made an impressive start on what I am sure
will be a long and successful career in the Federal Parliament.
CANBERRA September 1970 



EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE 6 PM on 21 ,9/ 1970
FOR PRESS: P. M. No 90,1970
DOUBLE TAXATION AGREEMENT WITH GERMANY
Statemen t bjr te Acting Treasurer,
The Rj&amp; ht Honorablej._ G. Grton, M. P.
The Acting Treasurer, Mr. Gorton, said today that Australian
officials and officials of the Federal Republic of Germany negotiating in
Canberra have agreed on the text of a draft agreement for the avoidance OZ
double taxation between Australian and the Federal Republic of Germany.
These negotiations followed talks held in Bonn last year.
The draft agreement will now be submitted to the Governments of
the two countries for consideration.
Before it could come into operation the agreement would of course have
to be given the force of law by the Parliaments of the two countries.
CANBERRA 21 September 1970 



OPENING OF BHP.' ESSO LONG ISLAND POINT
FACILITIES, VICTORIA 21 SEPTEMBER 1970
S2! eechb~ t he Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Sir Ian, Councillor Mair, and Distinguished Guests:
You, I know, are extending a welcome to me here today to perform this
opening ceremony. And I in my turn would like to say what a privilege 1. feel it
to be to stand on this platform with the representatives of two great conipanies
one Australian, one American which have brought into being that which we see
around us here a-nd which have helped this nation to make another giant stride
forward towards its destiny.
We have Sir Ian McLennan, closely associated with this whole enterprise;
Sir Colin Syme, head of an Australian Company which, from the far Western
frontiers where iron is being mined, up to the North in Groote Eylandt where
manganese is being mined, and here where oil is being distributed throughout
the whole of Australia, is building those industrial muscles which we n~ eed and
will in the future need still more.
We have Mr Jamieson, the head of that partner company which I was
surprised to see or rather one of your companies, Sir, that you headed
was surprised to see was only the second largest company in the world an-. d
not the largest. I am sure you won't be satisfied with that for very long, but
since you provide the material which enables that which the largest company
makes to run that's General Motors perhaps you can take some credit for
building up the largest company.':
However that may be, we have here an example of co-operative
development between Australia and the United States which I think can serve
as a blueprint for what we want for our benefit and what the United States
can get for its benefit. We are opening in a place where only 170 years ago
Bass, in a small whaleboat, came through to discovery and which for years
years after that was an area where the whalers and the sealers and the muttonbird
hunters alone were known, we are opening here a fractionation plant. It's a
horrible word fractionation plant it could have been worse, I suppose. It
could have been fractionalisation but what it means, I think, is a Dlant that
breaks things down into fractions.) An-d we are opening it, and it is the last
link in the $ 400 million complex which is going to see flowing to Australian
industry and motorists, Australian oil and which is going to see new sources
of energy in gas flowing to our industries and to our homes. 0 2 
Great risks had to be taken in order to bring this to fruition. Great
amounts of capital had to be found with no certainty of return, indeed with probably
a less than 50 per cent chance of return. At any rate, without any certainty
whatever there would be a return. And this was done because, if it was successful,
great rewards could be won. The risks were equally shared between ap.
Australian and an Amercian company. The rewiards are not so equally shared.
Because close to 50 per cent of profits made, rewards gain~ ed, flow directly to
the Australian people in the form of company taxation or royalties or other
payments. That silent partner gets that at once. For the rest there is-an equal
distribution, which means that of the other half, 50 per cent flowis to Australia,
and our American partner takes, quite properly, anything which matches that.
And in the result we, as an Australian people, will receive what I have
spoken of, the Australian company will receive its share, Australian overseas
ha' ances will be greatly increased it is estimated by some $ 230 million next
year and reduced only by profits repatriated, w~ hich they have every right to
be. And all of this achieved without the Australian people being required to
pay an exorbitant price for their petrol or more than a fair price for their
petrol I speak with some feeling-on this because some time ago, Sir I n
McLennan, the representative of ESSO and myseli sat down to try to work out
what would be a fair price for the sale of Australian oil in Australia and
we worked it out. I was immediately subject to attack by the pun~ dits who said
that we had set the price far too high, that the world price was going to drop
much below what we had agreed it should be. And naturally, because I am a
man who always likes to pay attention to advice, I was disturbed by thisc. But
fortunately, it turned out to be entirely untrue and I think it reasonable to
say that the prize now arranged for the sale of Australian oil is a price which in
many cases would be below the present import parity price for overseas oil....
which I think shows great patriotism on the part of Sir Ian McLennan and
Mr. Jamieson: Well, so, Sir, we are getting all these benefits. We are not paying
for them in any exorbitant way. And I only hope that people throughout Australia
will realise thea risks that have been taken, will recognise the right to the
rewards that comes from those risks, will thoroughly understand the benefit
to this nation which will flow from this co-operative enterprise. I do hope that
there will be no repetition of calls for nationalisation of an enterprise such as
this, as there have been for other great enterprisoes merely because they have
been successful. And I hope and believe that the Australian people would turn
down such calls when they were made. a 0 0 12 
This Bass Strait project, and what will come from it, gives us a
degree of self-sufficiency in Australia for petroleum products, provider, a
new source of energy for our homes and our industries through natural gas, at
least in a part of Australia. But it is not enough. Bass Strait is our largest
known oil deposit. By the end of 1971, it should be producing 85 per cent of all
our locally produced oil.. and from this field and our other knMown fields
we should be drawing 65 to 75 per cent of our total crude oil requirements.
But that won't go on forever.
The Bass 3trait fields we know now should last some twenty years
no more so I am told. And remembering that our consumption of crude-oil
is increasing at about 6 per cent a year, our self-suff iciency from our k-now
fields would drop from the 65 or 75 per cent I have mentioned to 20 per cent
by the end of the decade should no more oil be discovered. So the need f. Lor
contir~ uing search and for new discoveries is very real. I would like to see a
new major oil discovery every two years... and it is necessary for those
who will take the risks in the future looking for such oil to know that if they are
successful they will get the rewards and to know that they will, in a free
enterprise country, subject only to the national good, be able to develop that
which they find and to get the profits from that which they produc.
This has been Australia's great weapon, great argumerxn in seeking
to attract capital from overseas. It must so continue to be if vwe are to continue
to attract that capital we need so much and the results of which are so evident
today in the opening of this plant here, the final step in this great enterprise.
And so, Sir, it does give me very great pleasure indeed to be able
to unveil this plaque and to declare the fractionation plant open. I gather it
has been working for some time, but no doubt it will work better after this
has been done:
Thank you very much. 


FOR PRESS: P. M. No 93/ 1970
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, has sent the following message to Tun Abdul Razak who today ( Tuesday) succeeded Tunku Abdul Rahman as Prime Minister of Malaysia
"On your assumption of the Prime Ministership of Malaysia, I offer my warmest congratulations and those of the Australian Government and people.
I am sure that you will fill your high office with distinction, and to the great benefit of the people of Malaysia. I am confident also that your Prime Ministership will see a continuation of the close relationship between our two countries.
I look forward to a long period of fruitful co-operation between us.
With warm personal regards,
JOHN GORTON"
CANBERRA22 September 1970


 P. M. No 94 / 1970
PM CONGRATULATES GRETELThe Prime Minister has sent the following cable to Sir Frank Packer for Jim Hardy and the Gretel Crew:-
" CONGRATULATIONS ON OUTSAILING " INTREPID" AND CROSSING THE FINISHING LINE FIRST IN SPITE OF ADVANTAGE " INTREPID" GAINED AT START. WITH ALL HOPE YOU NOW GO ON TO WIN FOUR IN A ROW.
JOHN GORTON" 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 19 7
EXECUTIVE CHA! RMAN OF AUSTRALIAN
INDUSTRY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Secretary of the Department of Trade and Industry, Sir Alan
Westerman, was tonight appointed by the Cabinet to the position of Executive
Chairman of the Australian Industry Development Corporation.
Following Sir Alan's appointment, eight part-time Directoro of
outstanding financial and commercial abilities will be chosen to sit on
the Board of the Corporation.
Also, one full-time Director will be appointed, chosen for his high
experience in financial matters.
Sir Alan will continue to carry on his normal duties as Secretary of
the Department of Trade and Industry, while attending to some of the routine
matters concerned with the Corporation, such as the procurement of prern. ces.
Sir Alan will take up his new appointment on a full-time basis on
1st February, 1971.
CANBERRA 23 September 1970 



TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE
PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON
FOR CHANNEL 7 NETWORK 24 SEPTEMBER 1970
Interviewer Peter Martin
Q. Prime Minister, why have you taken exception to Mr Whitlam's
remarks and advice to conscientious objectors?
PM Because Mr Whitlam as the Leader of the Opposition and the alternative
Prime Minister is actively urging a breach of the law, is actively urging
the destruction of the defence forces. He is quite unequivocally saying that
persons who enter the defence forces, who are called up for service, should
reidse to obey a legal and military order. I think on the occasion of the call
for mutiny in Vietnam by the Labor Conference in Victoria, I had this to say
" It is a really grave development in Australian politics for
any political party in Opposition to urge not that the law
should be changed, because that is all right, it is not bad for
them to put forward arguments as to why it should be altered
but to urge that it should be broken is a new and grave thing
in Australian political life"
and to have the Leader of the Opposition urging this is something that I think
could I don't believe it has happened anywhere in any reasonably
democratic country before.
Q. Can you see any disastrous effects arising from Mr Whitlam's statement,
really?
PM Yes, I can. Here is Mr Whitlam saying " I advise young men to accept
the registration for call-up, to go into the Army, but once in the Army to make
up their own minds as to where they will go and where they will not go" you
can't confine this to Vietnam. If they are urged to refuse to go to Vietnam,
and that is right, then it is all right for them to refuse to go to any place to
which the Army wishes to send them. And that would be quite destructive of the
Army generally. This is not the real matter. The real matter is here is
somebody who hopes to form an alternative government preaching a complete
breaking of the law. That is the philosophical matter. It is also stupid
because he is advising a young man to put himself into a position where he could
be seriously punished, whereas if he had any sense and somebody approached
him for advice and said, " I don't like Vietnam", he would say, I would think,
" Well, in that case join the CMF and you will have no risk whatever of being
called up and being sent to Vietnam and of being punished. That is the stupidity
of the advice. The really significant and important thing is that here is
somebody who hopes to be Prime Minister urging people to break the existing
laws. *' 2 
Q. Would that be your advice, then, to a young man who asked you in
similar circumstances?
PM If a young man came to me and said, " I am subject to be called up. I
haven't yet been called up, but I am liable to be called up, and I have grave
worries about going to Malaya or Vietnam or anywhere, and they really are
conscientious worries and I don't want to do it," my statement to him would
be " There is no-one in Australia in your situation who is liable to be forced
to go to Vietnam provided they will take the channels which the Government
has provided for them to join the CMF, in which case they are not called
up for regular service. Or alternatively, if they have got real conscientious
objections to war, and to fighting, then there is an opportunity for them to go
' efore a court and prove those. But this is ignoring that. This is saying
each individual who enters the armed service should have a right to say whether
he will go to a place or whether he won't go to a place, and he makes up his
own mind about that and refuses to obey a legal and proper order. 



MBARGO: 10 p. M. Sunday 27--pemberl197O
CHANNEL 7 NETWORK CURRENT AFFAIRS
" THIS WEEK" PROGRAMME_
TV ITERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR J1O H qG~ OLRT?
Interviewer: John Boland
Recorded on Saturday236 September for screening on Sunday 27 Sjptmr .1970
Q. Prime Minister, the last time that I spoke to you on " This Weec, Labor
looked to be a lot more formidable. You appear since then to have toughened ywur
own mind more away from a liberal ideologicai attitude which you were thought to
have in view of the Prime Ministers we have had in the past. Sir Robert Menzies
was more or less a hard-line Liberal and Mr Holt virtually followed on in the
same sort of pattern. But you cut defence spending and you gave Billy Wentworth
carte blanche on social services and things like this. But now all of a sudden, you
have really got down to hard politics almost as though, " Well, I'm Prime Minister
and I am going to get stuck into being Prime Minister and this is going to be hard
politics from here on in. Now I mention this because two big issues have
occurred within recent weeks :-The law and order legislation and of course the
very hard ine and the way in which you have grappled with Mr Whitlam this
week over his statement on the Vietnam issue, particularly in relation to
conscripts not wanting to go to Vietnam and what they should do about it.
PM You mean telling them to disobey orders?
Q. Yes. Now is this a pretty fair assessment df a change in John Grey
Gorton?
PM I don't think it is at all. In fact I can't see any evidence of moving
away from a liberal ( with a small attitude. Perhaps you would explain
why you think there was?
Q. Well, those two points alone.....
PM All right. Let's take those two points. One question you called law
and order. My approach to that is this, that people have a right to dissent,
people have a right to criticise, people have a right to object to what a governnrent
is doing and to try and change it or to make a government do something else and
they have a right to congregate for that purpose. There Is no question of that.
In fact I believe that that kind of right of dissent is the sort of right which
Liberals, more than anybody else, would want to sustain and wo uld fight to
sustain. There is no question of that. But we also believe that there are civil
rights for the majority of people in Australia, and that those civil rights should
not be infringed by demonstrators preventing the majority from using the
streets if they want to use them, or intimidating individuals amongst them-1, or
in any other way violating the civil rights. /' 2 
2.
Q. Is this law. and -order legisLitton that you have in mind, is it pretty
tough and a little undemocratic in certain areas?
PM
Q. Do we need this in Australia that's the point I'm getting at'!
PM Well let's examine whether we think we need it or not. First of all,
of course, the Commonwealth's writ in relation to the making and enforcement
of laws does not run in most of the areas tn the States. But we had a situation
arising where small numbers of people would go into a National Service Office
and tear up the records, pour ox blood on the floor, terrorise the public Servants
working there. We had a time when a group of people walked into Mr Snedden,)
office and lccked the door and sat there and abused him and played the camera
on him so that if he answered them at all, they could say that he was abu.-ing them.
We had instances of stink bombs being let off in post offices which people have
a right to use. I think we do need to have sufficient penalties for that kin~ d of action
to make that kind of action really punishable.
Q. Now you want this punishable under Com--monwealth law rather than
under State laws. Don't you feel that our laws which e xist at the moment are
strong enough?
PM No, I don't because I think you will find that people doing this k-ind of
thing could be had up perhaps for trespass, possibly for trespass, under
State law, possibly fined perhaps $ 2 or $ 3 for obstructing the footpath
or for invading somebody's house. I don't think that is suff icient. Now, of course,
we can only apply laws to our own Commonwealth property or in the A. C. T. or
the Northern Territory.
Q. Well fair enough. Now what do you think should be a more stringent
policy. Yoi are looking at bigger fines? Or do you feel they ought to be shoved
in clink for a couple of days for deing this sort of thing? or what"'
PM Well let's just say there should be, I believe, after conviction
accordingjto law, and only after conviction according to law, of course, there
_ Should be geater penalties for those kinds of actions which I have just
described.
Q. Now the other very intere. sting thing is the trapping of Mr Whitlam
this week into the mutiny by conscientious objectors to Vietnam. This is
something which has created a tremendous impact on the Australian scene. Labor
looked to be at perhaps its most formidable best, particularly after cleaning
up Victoria
PM Well. I'll discuss that separately with 
PM I enter a-cayeat-onithat:'
Q. The point I want to make here is just how mony votes do you thnk there
is in Vietnam now in Australia? What sort of an issue is. Vietnam, as far as
getting votes is concerned now?
PM I don't think I could make-an esti mate which would be worth very
much. Ilam sure that most people would wish that the war in Vietnam were
finished. Ther is no question of that. But I am also sure that very large numbers
of people feel that we were right to go there and we should stay until the
invaders have been beaten, that is, made to withdraw. But however much of an
issue that is, I don't know but this isn't really the issue that arose...
Q. No, the mutiny issue.....
PM Yes, the offering of advice to young men to go into the Army arid then
to refuse to obey orders. That's the issue that is really significant.
Q. Do you feel that this whole Vietnam question you've got
conscientious objectors, you yourself say, " Yes, Australia is a country which
should have the right to dissent". I think that most Australians would agree
with you on this mutiny aspect, but are there enough areas if someone doesn't
want to go and fight in Vietnam? Now the gaoling of Brian Ross has created a
tremendous impact on the Australian scene. Is that too harsh a thing',
PM No, look, there are these opportunities for people who either diSlike
bearing arms at all or dislike a particular theatre of war. Let's take the
people who dislike bearing arms, who have conscientious objections to going to
war at all in any circumstances. Now provision to is made for them to claim
these conscientious objections, to go before a court, to have them investigated
and if they are upheld, then those people are excused from all service arid their
conscientious beliefs are respected. Then you have another group of people
and these are the people Mr Whitlam is talkbngabout, who do not have
conscientious objections to bearing arms, who do not have conscientious objections
to war, but who are worried about going to in this case Vietnam. In another
case, it might be some other theatre. They are worried about going to some
particular theatre, they don't want to go there. Now they haven't got to do
that either because if they feel that that is likely to happen, then provision is
made for them to join the CMF, in which case, they are exempt from call-up.
And that is a proper and legal way for a young man who is prepared to bear arms
but doesn't want to go to a particular area to see that he dcesn't go to that
particular area. But when you go beyond that and say that in spite of the fact
that you have got this legal way of avoiding this service, I advise you to join
the Army and to refuse to obey an order to go to a particular place, that is
saying to a young man, " Although you have a legal redress, I advise you to take
an illegal method which will land you in a lot of trouble. 
-Q N x ñ, Vqssues look to me-like election issues, with a
Senato. eleS. tion. comlng up. Now November 29 has been nominated. Are you still
very keen S ould I say November 29 has been speculated upon.....
PM I rather think November 29 is a Sunday, but....
Q. Well it might be 28, Prime Minister,...... I think you might be right:
Anyhow, in that area. Are we pretty close to the mark here? You know, these
are two good big election issues and you have got to have a Senate election.
PM We have got to have a Senate election, yes.
Q. Well
PM Aad we will be having a Senate election this year.
Q. So it is in November some time?
PM Well you said that, I didn't.
Q. Well we are going to have one this year and that we know. Now this
raises anozher interesting thing because last week the Labor Party appeared to
clear up their problems in Victoria. In other words, they placed a 12-man
Executive and sacked the entire Labor organisation in Victoria. The DL?
said that if you can sack the Victorian Executive, in fact Senator McMarius, I
think it was, held out an olive branch and said " Well, we might be able to
talk turkey", and their State Aid policy became general once they had decided,
right, the Victorian Branch goes and they are replaced by this 12-man Executive
until such time as we fix the whole thing up, and State Aid is right, and this
Trade Union Defence Council is out. These are the two big DLP problems. Now
the DLP has sort of been like a monkey on your back because they have knocked
you around on this States Tax Receipts thing
PM I wouldn't say they've been like a monkey on our back. In many, many
fields we have precisely the same beliefs. We believe, both believe that ustralia
needs proper defence forces. The DLP goes further than we do. But we both are
in line on many foreign affairs and defence policies.
Q. But do you think there is an endeavour here would you like, for
instance, to have a straight-out fight with Labor in the Senate election, rather
than be worrying whether the DLP are going to win, because there is not a great
deal of difference now between their policies?
PM Between the DLP and the Labor Party policies?
Q. Well, if, o 0 4 
PM I draw youattention nu to my reriarks, I'm not going to speak
for the-DLU-. butto-some of the remarks that Senator Gair made yesterday,
for example,_ on this latest call for mutiny.
Q. Yes, I agree....
PM Mutiny, incidentally, mans two people or more, I understand. Let's
say the call for soldiers to disobey orders.
Q. But he won't play ball with you on you're in trouble on
this one, rren't you?
PM On?
Q. On collecting the Receipts Tax for the States?
PM Well we will have to see what happens, won't we?
Q. Do you think you can get them on side, or do you think if you call a
Senate election on these issues, that the DLP could lose eut because they are
not so far behind or they are not so far in front of Labor policy now in many
respects, except on defence as you just mentioned.
PM I think there is more similarity between Liberal policies and DLP
policies than there is between Labor policies. And after all, we are talking as
if the Labor Party branches were all cleaned up and they weren't af-fected, any
of them, in the way that the Victorian Executive was affected.. Now the
Victorian Labor Party Executive has been defended in the past by Mr Whtlam.
When we said it was run by faceless men, that it was undemocratic, we didn't
get agreement. But now he calls it something which has been an authoritarian
and undemocratic junta, as undoubtedly it has been. But we don't know what is
going to go in place of it yet. Certainly there is a 12-man committee that has been
put up to suggest new rules, but a number of those people en that Committee are
from the old undemocratic junta, so described, and I notice, for example, that
the man leading their Senate team, Senator Brown, was one of the strong Left-
Wing supporters of this undemocratic, authoritarian junta. Now let's wait and
see what does come up. I think, you will remember at the
Q. You sound almost as though you are pleased that Senator Brown is
leading the Victorian Labor Senate team.
PM Well, I think it is a pretty clear indication oi what is likely to be an
attempted facelift rather than a change. I don't know this field as well, for
example, as a suppoorter of the DLP, Mr Santamaria does, but I notice he came
out saying that all that happened was they had stcpped being Maoist communist
controlled in the Victorian Executive and are now controlled by Moscow
communists. This was an article in the " Herald". But I don't know the details
of this, the ins and outs of this, but after all, that came into my mind because
you were saying about the DLP and ,6 
Q. Well,. the reasonLhrng-thi up.. is you have now said, " Right the
Senate.-electun will be this year" and I am tipping November, and so are a lot
of other journalists. There is nothing unique in miy saying this. The situation
now arises that there are a lot of Labor voters I mean the Labor Deience
policy itself, other than Mr Whitlam' s recent statements which have become
quite a political thing looking at it in cold hard politics, the Goverimient
have trapped him beautifully, haven't they? Let's be political about this.
PM Look, we didn't set nut to trap him at all. We didn't lecad him to say
this. He just came out and said this was what he was doing for some reason
that I don't know. We found out, in fact, by accident the sort of advice he was
giving and the sort of approach he was taking. In one sense, yes this, i think,
must be very -politically damaging to him, and certainly it would prevent the use
of armed forces containing National Servicemen. Somebody could say, " I don't
want to go to Vietnam", somebody else could say, " I don't want to go to Malaysia"
and the whole thing breaks down. But nevertheless., believe it or not, I a-m rather
strry that it has happened because I think it is a very grave thing for a leader
of a political party of the size of the Labor Party to give this kind of advice and
to take this kind df an approach. I think it is something that I don't believe
could happen in any other democratic country.
Q. You would like to be out of Vietnam. I think the Americans would like
to be out of Vietnam. I think that goes without saying. Is there any chance
that before the Senate election, that you could announce further Australianr
troop withdrawals',,
OM The first battalion to come back that we have already announced is due
back some time in November, as I understand, but any future action would be
purely speculative and would depend upon the success of the Vietramisation
campaign.
Q. You are up to date with this. You know.. you are in conotant touch
with this, more so, probably than anyone else. Do you feel that the Vietriamisation
programme is going along sufficiently successfully enough-to~ announce again
this year, or to have the possibility of announcing again this year that we would
withdraw a further battalion of troops?
PM That is far too iffy and speculative, I a m afraid for me to comment
on that.
Q. Well, now, there is another thing that comes to mind. With these
two issues that you have got going now law and order and Mr Vthitlam's
dilemma on mutiny, would it be possible for' John Grey Gorton to say, " Niow
I may be able to hold a double dissolution on these two issues, and one or two
other issues". Is that a possibility? 0. 0 a / 7 
PM WelLthere-iala~ ys-a-pos ibhility, I suppose, but this again is far too
speculative a thing and I would think on the whole it was fairly unlikely that a
government with over two years to run would call a double dissolution unless it
was absolutely necessary. I would like to use my own phrasing again for what
you call law and order, because I think it is more accurate, . and that is what
we are out to do is to protect the civil rights of people against their being
interfered with by demonstrators. There again, there is a big difference
between us and the Labor Party.
Q. What else do you think could become an election issue for the Senate
election, other than these two matters that we have discussed pretty fully?
What else do you feel strongly about? I have got something in mind that I would
like to ask you but I would like to know whether you have the same idea before
I perhaps telegraph my punch here.
PM What do I feel strongly about that we should
Q. Yes, what do you feel should be another election issue'! I mean, you
are going to set the terms on this.
PM Yes, well, it depends. I mean, you can have an election issue where
you say; " We, the Government, believe this should happen, and this is the goal
we are working towards" and you can have the Opposition promising anything at
all and trying to make that an election issue. And indeed it is not altogether easy
to have real issues, significant, far-reaching issues at a Senate election because
we have just had an election at which a policy for three years was set out. But
I believe one of the most important things we have got to do is to contain
inflation, is to stop inflation growing. Now we have given clear evidence of eur
approach to this, of our concern with it. The promises, high, wide and handsome
and unlimited that have been made on behalf of the Opposition would undoubtedly
cause inflation and damage to all those on fixed incomes least able to look after
themselves and to those in the country who are in the rural industries having a
very, very hard time indeed.
Q. Now there is a point here and I think we should both acknowledge it. Ycu
mentioned hardship. The pensioners, their 50 cent raise from the Federal
Treasurer.... is them likely to be some sort of help to them before the next
Budget? Now, I just want to point this out. In Victoria, for instance, the
Hcusing Commission, for the pensioners, put up all the pensioners' rents by
cents and so the 50 cents the Government gave them went nowhere. It was
spent before they got it. You have been acknowledged as probably the most
social-service Liberal Prime Minister that we have ever had. This was quite a
shock this 50 cents. o n
/ U 
8.
PM I suppose It was and yet t,. ere has never been as much done in the
field of social services as has been done in the three Budgets that we have
brought in. This operation this year because of the inflation of which I have
spoken was a holding Budget as far as the pensioners were concerned; riot as
far as social services were concerned because the health scheme coming in this
year should, I believe, give great benefit to people. But merely looking at the
rate of pension for base pensioners in the last three Budgets, the rates have been
raised including the 50 cents far nD re than has the cost of living increased in
that time. There have been two big increases arid this small holding one. All I
can say is that we have not changed our approach towards social servicec. We
have giver full evidence of that in the tapered means test, in the whole variety
of smaller things, with assistance to handicapped children, with paying pension
at single rates to people who are separated, with the rates of the pension.
themselves, and ths is an approach we propose to continue.
Q. Prime Minister, I think time is running out on us now, unfortunately,
but do you think that it is possible to increase the pension before the n=~
Budget another 590 cents, a dollar or something like that?
PM You are asking me for Budget information kind of stuff
Q. Well I am asking something which could be pretty important with
the Senate election coming up.
PM I would not believe that bribery should enter into a Senate election,
and inherert in what you are saying since you hitch the two together, t hrt is
why I make that comment.
Q. But you do think that perhaps they could be helped soorner or later?
PM I think that we as a government will continue the same approaches
that we have had in the past and that the pensioners' lot will continue to get
better.
Q. We haven't got very far on that one: Thanks very much Prime Minister. 



EMBARGO: 7. 30p. mn. Mond ,_ 28_ September 1970
" THIS DAY TONIGHT"
Television interview given by the Prime
Minister, Mr. John Gorton on ABC TV Network 28 SEPTEMBER ! 970
Lnterviewer Gerald Stone
Q. Mr. Gorton, I'm sure you'll agree that there is considerable difference
between legitimate criticism of a political opponent and attempts to smear him
through exaggeration arid innuendo. In that light, I wonder how you would
describe your Government's recent attacks on Mr Whitlam?
PM Well I understand Mr Whitlam claims that he has been smeared, and if
that is ao, it is the first occasion on which I can ever remember when a man
has put out a statement in his own name and then claimed that that statement
srr ars him.
Q. We'll get back to that statement in a second. What was the purpoce of the
allegation that Mr Whitlam in addressing the September 19 Moratorium stood
under a Viet Cong flag7
PM He stood facing a crowd in which a number of flags were flying Viet
Cong flags, other flags associated with the Viet Cong, a defaced Australian flag
and Australian flags as well and that was seen, of course, by scores of people
from Parliament House. There can be no question but that that was in fact so.
Q. But you would agree there is an emotive difference at least between standi: g
somewhere in the proximity of a Viet Cong flag in a large group and standing u:-cer
a Viet Cong flag?
PM I think there is a difference between standing holding a banner or having it
directly over your head as you speak, but on the other hand, I don't think itmyoelf,
very different from addressing a mob, a crowd I don't use the word " mob" in a
derogatory way from addressing a crowd flying Viet Cong flags when one's own
troops are engaged in action against troops fighting under those flags.
Q. Well can I ask you was the purpose of making this statement " under a 21ag"
was it to identify Mr Whitlam with the most irresponsible elements in tie anti-
Vietnam campaign?
PM It was to make a perfectly straightforward statement that he was prepared
to go and talk to these people who were flying the flags of our enemies. But that
is not an issue of significance compared to the call for soldiers to disobey orders
which he has made in his statement that you were going to come back to. e ; 2 
Q. Right. Again we will come bac.,. to it, but just one last point on this. Is it
a fact that you requested the Australian News and Information Bureau to cover that
Moratorium Rally with the express purpose of trying to get a picture of Mr Whitlam
in relation to a Viet Gong flag?
PM No, I asked the Australian News and Information Bureau or sent a messae
to them to cover the Moratorium because after all there are a lot of pictures tak-en
from a lot of different sources at these kinds of gatherings and they tend to be
brought forward later as evidence of police brutality or something of that kind, and
I think it's not a bad thing to have official records of what in fact goes on. at thema.
Q. Well then you consider News and Information Bureau to be a fit source to be
taking this type of picture,'
PM Yes, certainly.
Q. Now, on this question of Mr Whitlam's statement about the Army. You have
said he has made a call to mutiny. Mr McEwen used the word " treachery" in
describing this action. If you really believe that, do you think Mr Whitla-i is a -fit
person to sit in Federal Parliament?
PM This is what makes it so significant, I think, so nationally significant that am
man with a responsibility, the responsible post of Leader of the Opposition, Should
call he doesn't like the word " mutiny" that he should advise young men to ' Cin
the Army and disobey the orders to go to Vietnam. He claims that's not mutiny,
He can argue that out with the dictionary, but I think a dictionary definition will
indicate that it could be covered by that. For myself, over the weekend, I am
quite happy if he doesn't like that word to just Cay that it is just as bad to
give advice to young men to join the Army and then to disobey orders.
Q. Would you agree there is a difference, though? You have been using the
word " call and urge young men to violate orders". Mr Whitlam insists he did not
say he urges anybody to violate orders. He simply says if they feel they must in
some way avoid service in Vietnam, the best way, if they don't qualify as
conscientious objectors is to join the Army and to refuse orders to serve in
Vietnam.
PM He advises them. They are his own words. He advises them to join the
Army and then to disobey orders--. And if you read the transcript of his press
statement, he makes it perfectly, explicitly clear in the sentence and I quote
from memory but I thin".. it's accurate " if they get the order to go, when they
do, they should disobey". Well, I'm sorry, what's your pointt That, surely,
is saying what should halopen. 0 3 
3.
Q. But there is a difference between urging somebody to do something and simply
telling them that. if -he feels he must violate orders that perhaps that's the way
he should do
PM I think yu are drawing a sort of hairline aren't you here? Here is a Leader
of the Opposition, a young man going to him and saying, " I don't mind bearing
arms but I don't want to fight in Vietnam" and he says to that young man, " All
right. You don't mind bearing arms, then join the CMF and you won't have to go
to Vietnam". But he doesn't say that.
Q. Well, I want to raise this question of the CMF, You said if a young man : rally
wanted to avoid service in Vietnam, he could join the CMF. Now isn't this being
rather destructive to the CMF, to load it up with young men who in time of war
might not want to serve overseas?
PM You are talking about time of war. I am talking about a young man who
would be a National Serviceman and who could be called up and who could be
se.. t to Vietnam and who feels he has a genuine conscientious objection to going
to Vietnam. In that case, he has the full opportunity of taking a legal course o;
joining the CMF and not being subject to that liability. Now surely that would
be the advice to give and where the advice should stop.
Q. But if we are to treat the CMF as a serious organisation......
PM Now you are trying to talk about the CMF, I'm afraid, instead of the real
central point the advice g; ven was to join the Army and then to refuse to obey
orders, and the results of that can only these can be the only results that
you would make it impossible for an Army containing an element of National
Servicemen to be able to be used. People could say " I don't want to go to
Vietnam". Other people could say, " I don't want to go to Malaysia". You
wouldn't know where you were. It lays the young man himself open to very
serious penalties and it is an advice, advice to disobey the law when the young
man can obtain the objectives without disobeying the law.
Q. Now you say this would make National Service unworkable, and yet
Mr Snedden and the Government has said only a very minute fraction of young
men eligible for call-up have tried to evade call-up. So how many men do you
think would actually try to refuse.....
PM CK. Net very many because 99 per cent or 99. 8 per cent, I think it is,
of young mt go into the Army when they are called up and accept their obligations.
But if this advice that is offered by the Leader of the Cpposition, which he says
hundreds of young men would want to take, if this advice is to be offered by him
and accepted by an increasing number of young men, then this would be the end
result. 
Q. Mr. Gorton-I -thipk you have acknowledged in the past that the anti-war
movement, in this country has many moderate and responsible followerc. Nov'
isn't there a danger that by making extreme or distorted remarks about come
of these moderate followers that you might tend to drive them to an extreme
position and tend to further develop splits in the country......
PM I haven't made any extreme or immoderate remarks about the moderate
elements nor about thos e who are anti-war, nor about those who seek by legal
methods to change the law as it stands. I am concerned only with the man in
the position of the Leader of the Opposition urging that the law as it stands, after
an election in which National Service and continuation in Vietnam were key
points, that a man in the position of the Leader of the Cpposition after that
should advise a breach of the law.
Q. Well, finally, and after all is said and done, Mr Gorton, do you consider
S" r Whitlam to be a loyal patriotic Australian with the good of his country at
heart?
PM I think that the advice that he is giving to young men and according
to his own statement not mine is unpatriotic.
Q. Thank you, Mr Gorton. 


P. M. No 96/ 1970
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, has sent the following message to Egypt's Acting President, His Excellency Anwar Sadat:
" On behalf of the Australian Government I extend our sympathy to the Egyptian Government Gand people at the sudden and sad loss of their Leader. President Nasser was a spokesman of stature for the Arab world during a time of great change and complexity. His recent support for a truce in Jordan will be ramemnbered as a contribution to the prospects for a general peace in the Middle East. 
J. G. GORTON."
CANBERRA29 September 1970



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTIATIVES ON
SEPTEMBER 1970
Mr. Speaker, I received approximately two hours ago, a copy of Sir H-enry
Bolte's Budget Speech, and I have noted the statement in that speech that it is not the
intention of the Victorian Government to seek an appropriation from the Victorian
Parliament for the purpose of paying payroll tax to the Commonwealth. Sir Henry
Bolte indicated that exclusion of provision for the payment of payroll tax to the
Commonwealth would mean a reduction of about $ 9 million in the payments side of
the Victorian Consolidated Fund for 1970-1971, and I interpolate, it would also
mean a reduction of $ 9 million in the amount of receipts into the Commonwealth
revenue. Payroll tax has been imposed by the Commonwealth continuously since 1941.
The relevant provision of the Commonwealth law concerning the payment of this tax
by the States has since that time, 1941, remained unchanged. The relevant
Commonwealth Act, the Payroll Tax Assessment Act 1941-1969, provides that an
employer" for Payroll Tax purposes includes the Crown in the right of a State.
The payment of financial assistance grants by the Commonwealth to the
States has, since introduction of the payroll tax in 1941, allowed for the payment
of payroll tax by the States and all the States have in fact paid payroll tax since
1941 in accordance with the provisions of the Commonwealth Act. If they had not paid
payroll tax, then their reimbursement grants would have been less.
At the June 1970 Premiers Conference, when Commonwealth/ State financial
relations for the period of five years commencing with 1970-71 were discussed, I
made plain to the Premiers that the Commonwealth proposals were on the basic that
there were no significant changes in the financial relationships between the
Commonwealth and the States during the five-year period. I indicated in particular
that under the proposed arrangement we would expect that the States and their
authorities would continue to pay payroll tax. The actual words used at that
conference were
" If we are to provide such a substantial increase in revenue assistance and
in resources available to the States, it should be on the basis that there
are no significant changes in the financial relationships between the
Commonwealth and the States during the period of the agreement. In
particular, we would expect that the States and their authorities will
continue to pay payroll tax and that the distribution of tax resources
between the Commonwealth and the States will remain unchanged." / 2 
2.
Although the Premier of Victoria made claim that he did not regard hL
Government as having agreed to the financial arrangements that resulted from the
Conference, there was no indication by him or any of the other Premiers that they
proposed not to continue to pay payroll tax.
On the other hand, as I have indicated, there was a clear and Unequivocal
intimation from the Commonwealth that the continuance of the payment of payroll
tax was a key part of the offers made by the Commonwealth.
The Commonwealth Budget for 1970/' 71 was accordingly formulated on the
basis that payroll tax would continue to be paid by the States to the Commnonwealth.
This was allowed for in the Budget estimate of payroll tax collections and also in
the provision for the payment of Commonwealth grants to the States.
If Victoria or any other State or States were not to pay payroll tax, there
would Cius be a direct and significant effect on the -Commoniwealth Budget. The
Government is therefore unable to accept the position talken by the Victorian
Government, as stated in Sir Henry Bolte's Budget Speech.
My Government will therefore consider what course of action it should take
in relation to S--r Henry Bolte's statement in order to see that the Commonwealtha
Budget is not impaired. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 97/ 1970
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE MEMORIAL
Statement b-the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
On behalf of the Commonwealth Government, the National Capital
Development Commission is inviting entries from Australian sculptors who would
be interested in the design and execution of a Royal Australian Air Force Memorial
to stand in Anzac Parade, Canberra.
The nature of the Memorial and the sculptor to undertake it will be
announced in March next year to coincide with the 50th Anniversary of the Royal
Australian Air Force. The Memorial is to be sited in Anzac Parade where along with
other memorials it will commemorate notable feats of arms of national significance.
All Australian sculptors interested will be welcome to submit
entries detailing examples of their completed works and locations.
From these, five sculptors will then be selected by a panel of
assessors and invited to submit entries for the actual Memorial.
The closing date for the first stage of this com petition will be
Friday 23 October 1970 at 12. L30 noon.
The assessors for the Competition will be
Sir William Dargie, CBE, FRSA ( London)
Chairman, Commonwealth Art Advisory Board.
Mr. R. Boyd, FRAIA, FRSA, HEAIA,
Member, National Capital Planning Committee.
Mr. C. Last, Member, Commonwealth Art Advisory Board.
Air Marshall, C. T. Hannah, CB., CBE.,
Chief of the Air Staff.
Mr. R. K. H. Johnson, FRAJA, MAPI, ARIBA, AMTPL,
First Assistant Commissioner ( Civic Design and Architecture),
National Capital Development Commission.
CA NBERRA
1 October 1970 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
RECEIPTS DUTY LEGISLATION
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 1 October 1970]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-As a preface to my statement
on receipts duty legislation I point out to
the House that I know of no dispute with
any State Premier other than the Premier
of Victoria on this question of payroll tax.
Honourable members will recall that las,
June legislation was introduced to impose a
continuing Commonwealth receipts duty on
business receipts. The Treasurer ( Mr Bury)
explained that this was being done at the
request of the States, and for their benefit,
the purpose being to ensure that the States
did not lose revenue as a consequence of
the High Court decision which invalidated
their own receipts duty legislation as it
applied to certain types of receipt. The
Treasurer also explained that the Commonwealth
legislation would-again at the
request of the States-apply retrospectively
to 18th November 1969, the date on which
the Commonwealth's agreement to introduce
legislation for the benefit of the States
was foreshadowed. Provision was made,
however, for exemption from duty under
the Commonwealth legislation, in respect
of the period 18th November 1969 to a
date to -be proclaimed as the end of a transitional
period if duty, whether or not
validly imposed, was paid under State
legislation. 23116/ 70 The proposed legislation was approved by
this House but failed to secure the approval
of the Senate. Immediately after the resumption
of the House following next
week's recess, the legislation will be reintroduced
in the House with inclusion of
provisions under which the Commonwealth
legislation will cease to apply to
amounts received after 30th September
1970. The overall effect of the new Commonwealth
legislation will be that business
receipts during the period from 18th
November 1969 to 30th September 1970
will be liable to duty under it at the rate
of 0.1 per cent, but that this liability wil
not arise if the provisions of State laws
in this period-whether valid or invalidare
complied with. One effect of this will be
that, to the extent that receipts are specifically
exempted or simply not dutiable under
State law, they will not be dutiable under
the Commonwealth law. Another effect will
be that receipts which Queensland legislation
has purported to make dutiable during
this period will remain liable to duty at the
lower rate of 0.02 per cent-provided of
course, Queensland duty is in fact paid on
the receipts or has already been paid.
I add that, knowing of the Government's
stated intention to proceed with Commonwealth
legislation to impose, at the States' 
request, a duty on business receipts, many
businesses have continued to pay duty to
the States even though the payment of an
excise may have been involved. In 1969-70
the States actually collected 85 per cent or
more of the total amount they had estimated
they would receive. The essential purposes
of the new Commonwealth legislation will
be to validate the collections already received
by the States and, in the case of businesses
that have refrained from paying receipts
duty in respect of the period to be covered
by the Commonwealth law, to require them
to make such payments.
The Government appreciates that the
1970-71 budgets of the States have been
framed on the assumption that the Commonwealth
receipts duty legislation would
have continuing operation and that the
States would therefore receive the full benefit
of the receipts duty revenue that would have
been payable to them in 1970-71 if the Commonwealth
legislation had continuing operation.
The Government also appreciates that
limiting the operation of the Commonwealth
legislation to receipts up to 30th
September 1970 will have a significant
effect on State revenues for 1970-71 and that something will need to be done to protect
the budgetary situation of the States.
We propose that additional Commonwealth
grants will be payable to the States in
1970-71 so as to make good the reasonable
losses of State revenue resulting
from the termination of the Commonwealth
receipts duty legislation on 30th September
1970. As in the case of other arrangements
for the payment of Commonwealth assistance
grants to the States in 1970-71, our
willingness to do this is on the basis that the
arrangements resulting from the June 1970
Premiers Conference will apply in their
entirety. For the purpose of ascertaining such
reasonable losses I am in touch with the
Premiers with a view to arranging consultations
between the Commonwealth and State
governments as quickly as possible. We
have in mind that at such consultations
there will be discussed the question of the
future of receipts duty in the non-excise
area under State legislation against the
background that the Commonwealth legislation
will cease to apply to amounts received
after 30th September 1970.
Printed by Authority by the Government Printer of the Commonwealth of Australia 



S T AT EM ENT BY THE PRIME MINISTR
THE RT. HON. J. G. G~ WON, MP., IN THE
1 OCTOBER 1970
SENATE ELECTIDN
Mr Speaker, the Senate will be aware that
to fulfil the requirements of the Constitution, the next
Senate election must be held before 30 June 1971.
Accordingly, the Government has decided to
invite His Excellency the Governor-General to communicate
with the State Governors proposing that the next Senate
election be held on Saturday 21 N-ovember 1970.
When replies have been received from the
States, I shall inform the Parliament of the full timetable
proposed for the election. 



SIXTEENTH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HGUO3E, CANBERRI OCTOBER 1970
Seechby the Prime Minister, Mr. john Gorton
Mr Vice Chairman, , arliamentary Colleagues all
It falls to my lot to propose the toast of our distinguished guests. Sir, it is
my privilege today, both as Prime Minister and as a member of the Australian
Branch I hope a financial member: to preside at this Luncheon in honour of
Delegates to the Sixteenth Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. We are glad
to have you meeting here in Australia and here in our National Capital, and we are
glad that you are meeting in Australia for the second time.
I know that many of you came early to our country in order to have the chance
to look around it a little before settling down to the business at the corference table.
I hope you have found this time well spent, interesting and enjoyable. We indeed
are glad that you took this opportunity to see us while you are here. But now you
have business to do, and I see from the agenda that you will be discussing a wide
variety of topics, ranging from co-operation in development to the challenge of
dissent. This Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is unique. With 7, OC0 members
and 80 branches, it's certainly representative, and it touches at some point or other
through its members, its affiliated branches and its associated groups, just
about every part of the free world. And I believe it serves two broad and im; ortant
purposes. It provides continuing links between members of the Commonwealth of Nations,
the greatest multi-racial association of free nations the world has known. And it seeks
to preserve, for the world to see, the image of parliamentary democracy as we
know it, and as we oractice it in varying degrees today.
Let us look at this Commonwealth of Nations for a moment. It has emerged from
an empire of dominions, of colonies under the Crown, an empire that has now passed
down the corridors of history. And in place of that empire, there are free and
independent nations, some owing allegiance to the Crown, some not, but all having
inherited the principles of parliamentary rule, based on the Westminster model.
Some have abandoned that model, others have abandoned it and returned to it,
but whether it be a Westminster system or a Presidential system, the root is the
same, and that is what is sought to be preserved by the members of this Association. / 2 
It would be unrealistic, Sir, to pretend that all is smooth sailing all the time
amongst the members of the Common% ealth of Nations. It would be dull if that
were so. No great historical development such as this can come to this point
and see in front of it the future it can follow without there having bee-i some
problems, some controversy, without there being able to be seen in the future
other problems and other controversy. And I think the Commonwealth has still
to find a way in the future through many problems. But the fact that it will fi-nd
its way through those problems with success is, I believe, attested to by the
evidence of the problems which it has already overcome in its existence so far.
This Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is the Association that provides
a strong and continuing link between the members of the Commonwealth. There
are other links, of course, the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conlerence,
other Conferences of one kind or another, but the Parliamentary Association is
the most representative because all of us, as members, are directly concerned
in our varying ways with the practice of parliamentary democracy in our own
Houses of Assembly, or Congresses or Senates or whatever the nomenclature
may be. And that, I think, is one reason why the Association is growing in
strength and that is why I hope it will have a long and a useful life, not only for its
members but for the world as a whole.
Now I mentioned a second purpose for the Association, and that was to
preserve the image of parliamentary democracy before the world. And this, I
think, is of immense importance today, perhaps of as great importance as we
have ever known in history. All around the world in, I suspect, all the countries
represented here, there is a clamour for dissent. Our. parliamentary systems
and the rule of law they all have in trust are under test, in all our countries, and
are on trial in many ways, particularly in the eyes of the younger generation.
Let none of us be dismayed by this. Dissent, of itself, is not only not a bad
thing but a good thing. It can be healthy. It can be part of the cleansing process
in a democracy and in the institutions of a democracy, and our institutions I
speak collectively not only allow it, but specifically provide for it. That is why
in so many of our countries here represented, we have an official Cpposition,
a free press, a ballot box. And that is why the Commonwealth Pad iamentary
Association itself puts contentious measures on its agenda and delegates can
speak with heat on this and disagreement on this, and dissent with each other
on this, but each point of view is thereby heard.
But in this goodness of dissent, however, and clamour for it, there can in all
our countries be dangers. There are dangers that in searching for a change for
the better, we may let the legitimate ways of bringing that about become
illegitimate and fatally weaken our system. We should never forget that urbridled
dissent on the part of Hitler's brownshirts led to the overthrow of the parliament
in that country and the world into the bloodbath which followed. a a / 3 
I believe there is no better syst . n than parliamentary democracy. I think
it is the only system which has validity, if we are going to speak of -man's right
to be free and to choose for himself t he way of life he wants and who vwill direct
those public affairs which so impinge upon the way oZ life he wants.
There are many drawbacks to democracy, but I repeat -, It is the best
method of obtaining these ends yet discovered.
The laws which govern our lives are laws we all in our parliaments mk
for ourselves. They are laws we can change in an orderly fashion by exactly
the same process we used to bring them into existence. There are many vilo
consider in one country or another that a law is a bad law, and that can be
changed. There are in many countries good laws, in themselves, but laws whiich
have become out of date. And they can be updated. But if we are to retain before
the world, all of us, that image of parliamentary democracy of which I spokle,
then changes of that kind must be made in a constitutional and parlia-mentary way.
Dai -Yers arise as soon as we reject this course. And, indeed, on this*,-subject,
that great parliamentarian, Edmund Burke, put it quite clearly two hu:ñ idred
years ago
" The only liberty I mean is a liberty connected with order; that
not only exists along with order and virtue, but which cannot exist
at all without them.
That was true then, that is true now for all who espouse parliamentary democracy.
And that, because those gathered here today are throughout the world showing
a method of government different from a totalitarian government, that is why I
really meant it when I said it is a privilege for me today to welcome you to our
country so that you can continue this great work. This, I think, is the spirit in
which the Parliamentary Association meets, and it is, in that spirit that I welcome
you all here and trust that your deliberations will further advance the cause.-
of all those countries here gathered. 



OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE SIXTEEINTH CONFERENCE OF
THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION
CANBERRA, A. CT. 2 OCTOBER 1970
Spech y~ the Primne Minister,. Mr. johln Goto
Your Excellency, Mr President, Mr Vice-Chairman, Leader of the
Obpoosition, Mr Premier of Queensland, Mr Speak-er and Parliamentary
Colleagues: Yesterday at a social occasion I welcomed you here to Australia and
extended wishes for the success of this Conference. Now that you are met in the
Chamber in which your deliberations will take place, I extend again on behalf
of the Government of Australia, and I believe I can say on behalf of all Australians,
our best wishes for the success of your deliberations in our country.
You have much of which to speak, and yesterday you had to listen to much
of what we had to say. I think that on this occasion, so that you can get on with
what you will make your business, I will merely say some few sentencesa in
welcoming you to this Chamber and to your work in it. But if those sentences are
short, that is not to be taken as an indication in any way that the streg1 of feeling
behind them is not strong and that the welcome is not very genuine.
It is not for me to repeat what was said yesterday, and what Hi0 Excellency
expanded on today, but I feel that at this and succeeding conferences much will
depend that will affect the future of the world.
In all the diverse nations of which His Excellency has spoken and which
meet here, there does lie hope. And I believe this Conference and this Commonwealth
Association will be successful as long as it never seekis to turn itself into a
mini-United Nations, as long as it never seeks to pass resolutions which purport
to be binding on all the members present, as long as it ' keeps to its charter of, bringing
together Parliamentarians for discussion of problems and for meetings of people
from the various countries of the Commonwealth.
And now if I can say this without anybody seeing any political implications
in it I quote " Let observation with extensive view
Survey mankind from China to Peru"
And thiC., indeed, is what this Commonwealth of Nations will be doing, spread as it
is across the world, and the possibility of being a force for good across the world.
Welcome. 



EMBARGO: 6. 30 p. m. Saturday, 3 October 1970
" FOUR CCIRNERS"
TELEVISION I\ TERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
KROT OTNO B VEWO
Interviewer : Mike Willesee
Recorded on 2 October for screenin~ g on 3 October 1970
We open our programme this week in Canberra, and it's been quite a
hectic week in the National Capital. The controversy wie might loosely term " law
and order" reached a peak with an Opposition motion ofZ No Confidence in the' : ri.-. ne
Minister; Sir Henry Bolte stepped in and trumped that with a $ 9 million gesture of
defiance towards the Commonwealth, and the Prime Minister rounded off the week
with the announcement of the Senate election date November 21 which is sever,
weeks away or perhaps I should say almost rounded off the week, because in fact
the Pria1Te Minister is here to do that now.
Q. Prime Minister, could I start talking to you on this issue of law and
order, and I stress it's a loose covering term. Now you have foreshadowed
some new legislation, but you have shown reluctance to use existing regulat ions.
Now are you going to apply the law to those young men who have failed to
answer the call-up? If so, could I ask you when't
PM Well, yes, we are going to apply the law to young men who have failed
to answer the call-up and, indeed, have already begun to do so. Th-ere was
a case in Adelaide last week, if I remember rightly, and other ones will be
coming along as the wheels of the law grind and I don't grind them. The
Attorney-General and others do. But you spoke of something called " lawi and
order" which has become a journalistic kind of a headline. What I have always
said we needed to do was to protect the civil rights of the majority and that
is the way I prefer to put it.
Q. I am going to come on to that specifically in a moment, Prime Minister.
On the point of prosecuting those people who failed to answer the call-uro, would
I be right in understanding there may be some 103 such prosecutions in the
pipeline?
PM I think less than that. I haven't got the figures in my mind. The
Minister for Labour and National Service or the Attorney-General would have
but my recollection is rather considerably less than that.
Q. And would they be imminent enough to see them before the Senate
elect ion.?
PM I believe they would follow the ordinary course of the application o! the
law. We would not be hastening them nor delaying them. a 0 2 
Q. In the norml procedure of time, would you expect they would come up
before the ' 3enate election?
PM I am sure some will. One has.
Q. So we could see some more young men in gaol because of this prior to
the Senate election' 7
PM That would depend on the Courts' consideration.
Q. Prime Minister, the other point where you have shown some reluctance
to prosecute is in those who are inciting others to break the National Service
Act which is, or could be a breach of the Crimes Act. Do you intend to take
action in that area?
PM This is a different area. I think we had a ijress conference once at
which you were present at which this matter was raised. And the Attorney-
General later traversed that particular ground, indicating that he had in
those kinds of case to be quite sure that he would be on proper legal grounds,
and provable legal grounds and he also had to take into account the whole
of the public interest. On the one question you asked me first, I can give you
a specific answer. On the second one, I can only refer you to w'hat the
Attorney-General has already said.
Q. Coming on to this point which you described as offending the civil rights
of people-. Now, firstly, do you want new legislation because of any increase
in the incidence of such off ences?
PM I think we do. We are limited in the area that our own legislation can
cover because the States cover quite an area of it. What we have got to do in
this field is to properly allow dissent to be held and expressed and at the
same time protect the people who aren't interested or mixed up in that from
being annoyed or having their own rights interfered with by that dissent.
Q. The point I was making there was the incidence of such offences. Now,
you want to legislate further because of a rising incidence of such offences?
PM I think to prevent a rising incidence. We have had, as you ' know,
incidents where people have invaded the Labour and National Service C~ ffice,
torn up the records, intimidated the civil servan~ ts working . behind the counter
and poured ox blood or something on the floor. We have had incidents where
people have invaded the office of the Minister for National Service and
locked him in. We have had incidents where people have invaded Mr Bury' s
office. The incidents are there. They weren't there before. I think there
are insufficient penalties to prevent that kind of offence. 9 e 
Q. Looking through some of th-. various -: tatutes, both State and Con-onwealth,
it seemed to me there were quite a few acts which covered such
violations or apparent violations.
PM Well, I don't think they do myself, and the Attorney-General doeSn't
think they do either. Now let's put it this way. If, in fact, you are wro-ngIa
in your legal assumptions and you are not a legal man
Q. Quite right.
PM and the Acts don't cover them, then the Attorney-General would be
right in seeking to see they were covered I think.
Q. Yes, but I am specifically asking you on this point because you have
spearheaded this campaign. Now, just for a cou-ple of examples I don't
wiant to go reaching into the statutes too long, but on the point o! going into
Commonwealth offices, Ministers' offices, there is a Section 20, of the
Commonwealth Crimes Act which specifies that " any person who wilfully
and unlawfully destroys or damages any property whether real or personal"
. two years' imprisotument.
PM Yes, that's right. Now, you would not wish to have two years'
imprisonment.... you are asking me now to try and translate the law anvd
I am not a legal man. I can only take the legal advice that is given to me.
This I think is something which requires a jury trial and, from memory,
two years is the penalty this is from memory. Now what we would want
to do would be to make a greater penalty than exists at the moment for
trespass or for preventing people from using roadways for preventing
citizens from using roadways, and see that it was a penalty which was
sufficiently severe to stop it.
Q. But even on that, there is a Police Offences Act which covers unaut~ iorised
demonstrations and people who don't go away when they are told to are liable
to up to three months and,: or $ 100. This wculd -3eem to be adequate'
PM Have you ever heard of people being fined more than $ 2 or $ 5 or
something of that kind for sitting on roadways arid preventing people fromn
using them, or for unauthorised entry?
Q. But, really, Prime Minister they are different charges such as
vagrancy, and Police Offences Act covering riotous behaviour I'm talking
specifically about the Crimes
PM Well, really, what you are saying now to me is this, that in your
opinion you thinik there are enough laws already to cover the kind of offfence
of which I have spoken * 1s ; 4 
Q. No, I am saying there appear z) be enough laws to questionñ it.
PM Well you are saying that you think there appear to be enough laws to
question it. I am saying that the legal advice that I have is that it would be
necessary to bring in an Act to provide penalties for the sort of offence,-of
which I have spoken, and it -would also be very necessary in bringing in that
Act to see that one didn't take away the right of people to dissent or to
congregate to dissent. Now, it ought to be perfectly easy to arrange that
people can congregate for dissent but that they can do it without interfcering
with other people's rights, without letting off stinkc bombs in post officer, for
example.
Q. P rime Minister, why do you make this move now rather than some time in
the past say twio years ago?
PM I think the incidence of these incidents has been increasing, but you may
remember that two years ago I did indicate then that I fe I t some moves along
these lines were necessary.
Q. You now say they are increasing. Ycu said earlier that you didn't k11now
that they were increasing
PMA Oh, now wait a moment.. . You are now going back to two years
Q. No, no, no. I am talking about earlier in the irt erview when I as'.-ed you
if the rising incidence....
PM I know you did but you said.... rising incidence since when"' Since last
week or something? I think that since two years ago there has been an 1increase
in this kind of activity.
Q. Do you have any evidence of any increase s'f
PM Well, just recently I suppose we had the refusal of some Moratorium
marchers in Sydney to obey the instructions of the police. That's a State
matter. We have the invasion of Mr Hughes' ownn home.
Q. You are talking about specif ic things, and in 1967 and 196C...
PM I though that you wanted me to talk about specif ic things.
Q. The point is that we have had these things happening for four or five
years. Now you say there is a rising incidence, and I asked you if there was
evidence of this. S 
PM And I thought I was answering you because in the last few weeks I have given
you two instances of two things which have happened.
Q. Couldn't we go back to the visit of President Johnson or Marshal 7Ly and
say, well, there were certain things happening then. Is there an overall increase
i numbers, for instance?
PM I can only tell you you don't have to believe it, you obviously don't; but I
can only tell you that I believe there has been an increase in there kinds of
incidents. Now, let us suppose there hasn't been
PM Well let us suppose there hasn't been. Would that mean tha'-t you still didn't
need a law to pr event them?
Q. No, the point I was questioning you on, Prime Minister, was whether there
was evidence cf any increase. You now say it is an observation on your part
that there has been. an increase.
PM This is right.
Q. I think the overall criticism that your opponents direct towards you on
this is that it is olitical. Now what do you say to that criticism"
PM I say that it is not political. I say that if Parliaments are going to function
properly, then they are going to make laws after they have been elected and that
those laws should only be changed if a government is changed or if a government,
through Constitutional methods, decides to change them that they shlould
not be altered by people seeking to bring pressure outside of the ? arliament on
individuals by attacking their privacy, on the public by interferinga with their
use of public facilities, on the Government by taking over the streets. Th1is
obviously must be stopped, or else you could get to a situation such as Thappened
in Germany where, under the guise of dissent, H1-itler's Brownshirts took over
the streets and terrorised people they didn't likl-e or who disagreed with the~ ri
and eventually overthrew the government. Now, I would think most people of
Australia of eithe r political party would agree w~ ith what I have just said.
0. 1 think your opponents might say this is why it could be political because
you judge popular support for such a move.
PM Our opponents by which I presume you mean the Labor Party'.. 0 0 a / 6 
Q. Well. . the Labor Party
PM The Labor Party would say I am being political in what I have just said
because I think that most people would support it. Well, the onldy answier I
can give to that is that I believe in it so strongly that I believe it should be
attempted to be done if a minority of people sup-ported it. It could always be
changed by Constitutional means if the Labor Party wanted to, if they had the
chance.
Q. Prime Minister, I would like to move to Vietnam and a good linkiing point
seems to be conscientious objection. Ncw, of course, you agree a man has a
right to follow his conscience if he objects to a war, and have legislated accordingly-
And you would agree, I am sure, there are some circumstances where a soldier
must follow his conscience rather than an order. Do you agree with that'-
PM You are going to sort of talk about Nuremberg trials if you are going to
bring in Nuremberg triat stuff we could go on for a long, long time, and one would
have to say, yes, there must be instances where according to what was laid
down at the Nuremberg trials, a soldier can't excuse himself because he has been
given an order to do something......
Q. Yes, well, My Lai would be I don't vwant to labour that point. " What I
am trying to set up is that on these two points, there is room for conscientious
objection.
PM There is room for conscientious objection to bearing arms at all. As you
say, we have legislated for that in two ways. ' We have legislated to enable a
man to claim conscientious objection to bearing arms and to come before a
court, and we have subsequently extended that to say that if he doesn't do it,
we are prepared to do it on his behalf. Now, there is then a ques-tion of whether
a man should have a conscientious objection to a particular war. I do;.' t believe
that he should. I believe if he has no objections to bearing arms then the question
of saying, " Well, I won't fight in Malaysia. I wion't fight in Germany. I won't
fight in Vietnam
Q. Well they are not saying that, in fact. Th-ey are saying Vietnam.
PM If that is admitted, it must be admitted for any theatre that anybody says
they have conscientious objections about.
Q. All right. Well how can you feel so strongly about this point when.-it is a
matter of conscionce?
PM Because there is no conscientious objection to bearing arms -or to fighting
or to war. This then is merely a matter of judgment, or alleged to be a matter
of judgment as to bearing arms in a particular theatre of war. But, of course,
as you know, we have also legislated to prevent anybody really being faced with
that dilemma. if they genuinely have it. 9 / 7 
Q. You are referring to the CMF?
PM I am referring to the opportunity people have to join the CMF.
Q. But don' t you invite young men to gamble when you provide this lottery?
PM You say young have all young men got this conscientious
objection? I don' t think we are inviting young men to gamble at all. I think
all we are saying to them is, " Look, if you have conscientious objections to
bearing arms, there is a way in which you can have that tested. If you think
you are going to be called up and you feel you will have conscientious objecziua iiow
tOVietnam, maybe tomorrow to Malaysia, OK, join the CMF and then you won' t
have to have those conscientious worries.
Q. Don' t you think it' s reasonable that a young man, not wanting to go to
Vietnam and not wanting to go into the CMF which takes up a lot of time, might
look at that lottery and say " I've got six chances out of seven of avoiding it".
PM You used the words " not wanting" which is quite different from a genuine
conscientious objection.
Q. Well I didn' t give any reason why he might not want to. We are talking
about conscientious objection.
PM But you said some youing man not wanting If he is not wanting to do
it, and that is as far as it goes, then it is up to him, isn' t it to judge his
chances. If he has got a really, genuine, deep conscientious objection to it,
then he has an opportunity to avoid a confrontation and getting into difficulty.
Q. Prime Minister, I wonder if this might not prove to be an academic
argument. I wonder whether you intend to send any more conscripts to
Vietnam?
PM What do you mean?
Q. Do you intend to send any more conscripts to Vietnam?
PM At the moment, the situation in Vietnam is that one of our battalions
is being withdrawn. It is coming back and some supporting troops. You
are asking me what will happen regarding the two battalions that remain there
after this one is withdrawn. I can' t give you an answer to that because it
depends upon the progress of the Vietnamisation and the capacity of the
Vietnamese to look after themselves. But if you are saying will we replace
the other battalions that are up there when they in turn come to be withdrawn,
you are asking me to make a guess as to what situation will have arisen up
there and how strongly the Vietnamese will be able to look after themselves. / 8 
Q. It's conceivable then that no riiore conscripts may go to Vietnarn'i
PM You said that and I didn't.
Q. But you don't disagree with that?
PM How could I disagree with that? Supposing the Paris peace talks were
successful, and -aeace started tomorrow"' Let's conceive that. Then, of course,
no more troops of any kind would go to Vietnam, but you are ask.-ing me to say
what is going to happen in the future when nobody can tell you what is gofing to
happen in the future.
Q. You foreshadowed the withdrawal of the Eighth Battalion six months ahead.
PM Yes, we foreshadowed it when the Americans foreshadowed their own. We
joined in that withdrawal. I haven't seen any other similar foreshadowing because
uf Vietnamisatio-n. But let's turn it round the other way. You must conceive
there will be more conscripts going to Vietnam?
Q. You say I must conceive there will be
PM. Well if I must concede that I can conceive there won't be, you muct
concede that you will conceive that there will be. You are talking about soomething
we don't know in the future.
Q. Well, I think we could make a simple point that there is a real chance
that no more conscripts may go to Vietnam?
PM I wouldn't miake that simple point at all.
Q. Would you like to be optimistic about that i
PM I wouldn't make that simple point at all. 1 Simply cannot tell you vfhat is
going to develop in Vietnam. All I know is that we would like to have our troops
all of them cut of Vietnam as soon as our objective was achieved, and thet
is of allowing the South Vietnamese to be strong enough to look after themselves.
Now, when that will happen I can't tell you.
Q. Well, let's talk about something happier, -Prime Minister. Mcrney, for
instance. Do you think Sir Henry Bolte has been..., do you thirnk:-he acted
responsibly with this move on the payroll tax the $ 9 million?
PM Well he didn't let me know that he was going to do it at any stage. I don't
want to say whether he acted responsibly or irresponsibly. I don't know what
was in his mind. But all I can is that it was quite a surprise since at tiie last
Premiers' Conference, all the offers that the Commonwealth made to the
States which increased very, very considerably the benefits to the States 0 / 9 
were made on the condition that the 3tates did pay payroll tax. I-lw, Sir Henry
Bolte didn't agree to that, which means there was no agreement either as to him
paying payroll tax or as to us to paying any of the offers that were made. The
other States did agree.
Q. This whole area of Federal/ State financial relationships seems to be in
pretty poor shape at the moment. Now, can you patch up the problems or do
you think it requires a rebuilding job?
PM I am interested to hear you say it seems to be in pretty poor shape at the
moment. I have got some figures here on this which show that the States are going
to get $ 291 million more this year than last year through various fields. This is
a very great percentage increase in their funds, deliberately done by us to
enable them the better to finance their schools and hospitals and the other
responsibilities they have.
Q. But don't you think this Bolte move would indicate it is in poor shape. You
ate calling a special meeting next week.....
PM Oh no. I am not calling a special meeting next week on the Bolte move.
Q. On Federal/ State financial relations?
PM No, I am not calling it on Federal/ State financial relatiorships.
Q. Could you tell us what the meeting is?
PM It is to consider the receipts tax and the areas in receipts tax rnon-exiz.; e
areas and excise areas....
Q. Wouldn't this add to my argument?
PM I don't think so.
Q. Receipts tax is part of Federal/ State financial relations?
PM. Sure. But the fact that there is such a meeting to find out how best the
Federal Government can help the States and in what areas the States can help
themselves, would, I should have thought, indicate that the relations were
working fairly well and fairly smoothly.
Q. I am surprised that you should say that because particularly as you had
to back down before the Senate on the receipts tax. 
PM Well, that' s right, but has that got anything to do with the fact
that we are having a meeting to find out how best in co-operation we can
overcome that difficulty?
Q. I thought it would have a lot to do with my earlier question that
Federal/ State financial relationships were in some sort of a mess.
PM just because a Senate votes against a proposition which we bring in
at the request of the States again showing co-operation in order to help
the States, again showing co-operation, doesn' t, I think, show that Federal/
State financial relationships are in a mess.
Q. Isn' t that a dangerous argument because an argument could be made out
to show cause for a double dissolution when a government is not able to put
its measures through the Senate. But you have said, " We 11, we were doing
this on behalf of the States". Couldn' t you take that to the point, that
argument of saying perhaps at the next Budget, " Well the Commonwealth
is happy but the States need more money, so we are going to lift taxes for
the States?"
PM No, this was a specific measure, the receipts tax one, and you are
seeking to translate a specific measure which came into being as a result
of an unexpected High Court judgment in a particular field, you are seeking
to translate that into the whole field.
Of course, if the Commonwealth brought in a taxation
Budget of some particular kind, and the Senate went to the unusual lengths
most unusual and I think, improper lengths, of disallowing it that would
create a very serious situation. But they would need to disallow the Budget.
Q. Prime Minister, I have judged time badly. I would like to skip through
a few more things fairly quickly. Talking about the Budget, the last Budget
you described as possibly being one of the great Budgets, despite the fact
that you introduced more indirect taxation which is generally regarded as
being an inequitable tax. / 11 
PM Well we will see what the fut're says about it, but it was a Budget which
did a number of things. One was to greatly increase the amount of fina:-ce
available to the States to the extent that a third of our entire Budget is going
to finance the States and more than a third of the increase in expenditure.....
this to pick up the problems which the States had been indicating, or to
help to pick them up. It reduced direct taxation in a meaningful way. You
can argue whether it should have been less on $ 10, 000, but throughout the
range it reduced it in a meaningful way which was the promise we had made.
It introduced indirect taxation which, if I may take issue with you, is not
generally regarded as an inequitable tax. Indeed, you will find that nearly
all countries in Europe, for example, are moving towards indirect and away
from direct taxation, and the last Labor Chancellor of the British Government
made a very strong speech showing that indirect taxation was not inequitable
when that Labor Government moved towards more dependence on it.
Q. Now just one other point that intrigued me out of that.... you said at the
time that if people wanted to drink more wine and drive cars and smoke, that
was their business and they could pay the extra taxes because cf it. But I
wonder by what principle you tax moderate people more lightly than you tax
the people who want to drink and smoke and drive?
PM I think the principle I would advance would be this.... that there is a
certain amount of money left in people's pockets after they have paid direct
taxation, after they have paid their income tax. That is the same for all
people at a given level of income. Now what they do with that money is their
own choice. They can save it all if that is what they wish. They can spend
whatever part of it they wish to spend on cigarettes or on wine, and this is
a choice that they ha ve as to how they use the money that is eft in their
pockets after direct taxation. And one of the tenets of Liberal philosohy is
that people should have a right of choice rather than be told by an overriding
government everything they have got to do.
Q. Don't you think people have exercised that choice as to the general way
in which they will lead their lives and the people who drink and smoke will
continue to, even with this extra imposition?
PM If they do, that is their decision.
Q. Haven't you discriminated against them because of their way of living?
PM No. We have given them a right of choice.
Q. Prime Minister to close. You have got the Senate election coming up.
How confident are you about the election?
PM Oh, I am never confident about elections, either confident that one will
win them easily or that one will lose them. I think people that talk about
elections before they are held are always rather silly. 
Q. Let me ask one more question on this. Do you think it matters more
how you go vis-a-vis Mr. Whitlam or do you think it really matters as to
the seats and the votes and the general counting of the election?
PM As far as the wellbeing of the Australian people goes, L think what
really counts is how the Liberal Party goes as against the Labor Party.
Not me as against Mr. Whitlam or the other factors you mention. What I
feel is that the people of Australia will see a continuance of advancement and
a continuance of improvement under the Liberal Party that they won' t under
the Labor Party, forgetting me and forgetting Whitlam.
Q. Do you think the Press and the public might see it in terms of
Gorton versus Whitlam?
PM I don' t know what they will do, but you asked me what I thought was
the really important thing, and I think the really important thing is that
Australia should continue with the type of Government which has given it
such great advances for the last twenty years.
Q. You don' t think the minor exchange of seats which might come out
of it is going to matter very much?
PM I wouldn' t think so. I think that mathematically in any case there
will be a very marginal exchange of seats.
Prime Minister, thanks very much for talking with Four Corncrs. 


 P. M. No 98/l970
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Australian Government holds strongly to the belief that a just and permanent settlement can only be finally achieved around the conference table.
For this reason we warmly welcome these initiatives taken by President Nixon to bring peace and tranquility to the states of South Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and their neighbours.
I emphasise that our view about a negotiated settlement has been based on two fundamental democratic principles : the right of the people of these war-torn states to determine their owrn future and as a corollary that we will not be a party to imposing on other nations a form of government which the people do not want.
We understand the President's proposals envisage that the people of South Vietnam should freely vote for their own government and that candidates of any party should be free to stand at such elections.
We also understand that the peoyple of South Vietniam will by their own vote decide whether or not they will eventually join with any other state.
Success or failure of President Nixon's new initiative will depend on the agreement by the Communists to accept the basic principles put forward and on their willingness to abide by them.
Particularly we welcome the proposal for the return of all prisoners of war, journalists and other civilians, without exception and without condition to the place of their choice.
CANBERRA8 October 1970


FOR PRESS: No 99/1970 
Every Premier asked the-Commonwealth to agree to their dropping completely the receipts duty as it now exists and to make good to the State Budgets the whole of the loss involved, for this financial year.
They were of the view that to continue imposing receipts duty, even where it was legal, would be inequitable in its incidence and administratively too complex to be at all feasible.
The Commonwealth has accepted the arguments of the States and has acceded to their request. Discussions on arrangements for future years are still continuing.
CANBERRA8 October 1970



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MlNSTER ON RECEIPTS DUTIES
Discussions this afternoon centred upon the arrangements to
be applied regarding receipts tax during the four years after 1970/ 7 1.
It was agreed that the total amount which would have been
collected by each State on transactions in 1970/ 71 would be accepted as the
base figure for collections in future years for that State. This figure is to
be the subject of discussion with each State.
It was also accepted that the figure arrived at for each State,
as a base, would be escalated in the remaining four years of the present
finai. zial assistance arrangements in accordance with the formula applied
to tax reimbursement grants at the June Premiers' Conference.
The States agreed to meet together to seek some common field
within the area covered by the receipts duty in which they could commonly
impose a tax, such taxation revenue to be an offset against the Commonwealth
liability for payment to the States.
It was agreed that if a common field of such taxation could not
be discovered the States would try to work out, each one, a field in which tax
could be imposed. These arrangements we re made subject to the proviso on the
part of the Commonwealth that they depended on the conditions governing the
offers of the Commonwealth made at the June Premiers' Conference.
Liability for receipts duty of all kinds, as at present levied,
ceased on transactions after 30 September.
CANBERRA 8 October 1970
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 100/ 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. Noo-01/ 1970
FJI INDEPENDENCE
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, has sent the following message
to the Prime Minister of Fiji to mark Fiji's independence tomorrow
" ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT A1-, D PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA,
I SHOULD LIKE TO EXTEND MY WARMEST CONGRATULATIONS AND
BEST WISHES TO THE GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF FIJI ON THE
OCCASION OF THE ATTAINMENT OF INDEPENDENCE AND ADMISSI: ON
TO THE COMMONWEALTH.
AUSTRALIA HAS FOLLOWED RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN
FIJI WITH CLOSE AND SYMPATHETIC INTEREST AND OUR TWC
COUNTRIES HAVE LONG ENJOYED CORDIAL AND CLOSE RELATIONS.
I LOOK FORWARD TO A FURTHER STRENGTHENING OF TI-H3E
RELATIONS IN THE YEARS TO COME."
CANBERRA 9 October 1970 



FOR PRESS PM No. 102/ 1970
MR WHITLAM'S ATTITUDE ON VIETNAM
Tv-TD7
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Whitlam's statement that there is no military
rationale for the presence of Australian troops in Vietnam is
illogical and endangers the chances of success of the President's
peace efforts. The rationale for an Australian military presence
is that it is necessary to have a military presence until a settlement
giving self-determination to South Vietnam is achieved.
A withdrawal of all Allied troops now, merely
because an offer of negotiations has been made ( and not yet
accepted) would be the equivalent of capitulation, an abandonment
of the object of securing self-determination for South Vietnam,
and an encouragement to the North Vietnamese to refuse to enter
into negotiations. A unilateral withdrawal of Australian troops would
have a similar effect and would in addition be an abandonment of
our Allies and of the people of South Vietnam.
CANBERRA, 9 October 1970 



EMBARGO: 10O. 30 _ mSunda, 1__ October 1970
JOH1NGORTON'S FIRST 1, 000 DAYS"
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY TIIE PRIME MINISTER
MR. JOHN GORTON ON CIANNEL 7i'TV NETWORK
Interviewer Peter Martin
Recorded on Wednesday 7 October for screenln on Sunia 11 ctober 1970
P r o g r a m m e opens with film segment showing Mr Gorton speaking to well-wishers
outside Parliament House on the day he became Prime Minister 9 january 196F.
Q. Prime Minister, that was more than one thousand days ago now, more than
two and a half years ago. Ncw, looking back on your first weeks of settling
into office, you must have had some expectations about the office what it
meant and some of those expectations, if you are like everyone else, must
have been fairly solidly tested or abandoned pretty quickly. Did you have
ary expectatio-s that got shot to pieces?
PM I don't think I did. I don't think I had firm expectations a;. d therefore no
expectations to be shot to pieces, and indeed, there wasn't much time to arrive
at firm expectations. The first day I was there Harry Lee rang up from
Singapore about problems with the British withdrawal, and then we had a postal
strike and things just seemed to pour in one after the other.
Q. It was a very busy time. You also had in a matter of weeks the beginning
of the Tet offensive. Did you wonder at that time what the hell you had gotten
into?
PM Well I had been in the Cabinet, but I think what struck me most in the first
month or two was the enormous importance everybody seemed to place on every
word that one spoke..... and the interpretations that were put on that word. The
words were taken inside out and interpreted different ways by different people,
which is something I hadn't expected. I guess that is one expectation. And
you mentioned the Tet offensive. At that stage I had made the statement we would
be sending no more troops to Vietnam. That, of course, had been decided by
the Cabinet in the previous Cove rnment. It was known to our allies a: nd everything,
but I was surprised at the surprise with which that was received.
Q. 0-e newspaper wrote when you were elected Leader of the Liberal Party
" Fasten your seat belts, please". Some political corresponde.-ts who have
been here for twenty or thirty years or so tell me that they have never seen such
a tumultuous timae around the Parliament in all their experience. Do you agree
that this has been a stormy and eventful period S 2 
PM Oh, I am sure it has been. It has been stormy and eventful inside the
Parliament, but it has been stormy and eventful in Australia's history, I think,
We reached a stage where from the defence point of view the whole of our
previous concept of our history was changed by Britain's withdrawal. We
reached a period of development where we took a completely new approach in
trying to protect Australian ownership, as far as we could, without stopping the
inflow of overseas capital. There was a completely new kind of approach there.
We had to look again, or suggested we should look again at Commonwealth / State
power relations. And all these matters were things that had just gone along
quietly for years and suddenly they came to a point where there were new facts,
new requirements, new discussions.
Q. They are all things that lead back to you, though. Do you acce; t responsibility
for the fact that it was a stormy period?
PM For everything except Britain's decision to withdraw from the near North:
Q. Your first Cabinet was generally regarded in the Press as something of
a disappointment. The phrase that was being used was " new broom". People
said the new broom hadn't swept clean. You later made considerable changes,
but why didn't you change at first'? Were you overawed by your more senior
Cabinet colleagues?
PM I don't think any of my then more senior Cabinet Ministers who sat with
me in the Cabinet would for a moment think I was overawed. But they were
senior Ministers of considerable standing in the Party and in the cou-try and it
could have been too much of a new broom I won't mention names but there
were a number of senior people and changing them all round straight away I
think could have had more detrimental effects than good ones.
Q. Well, if I may be impudent enought to suggest names because they have
been suggested publicly it was suggested that Mr Hasluck ar: d Mr McMahon
and Mr Fairhall, with their seniority were a little more conservative on many
issues in Cabinet than you were and that they tended to resist the changes you
wanted to introduce. Did you find that frustrating?
PM Well, I vo uld say it was true to say that as a general thing these
gentlemen were more conservative than I was on many matters. Did I find
it frustrating? No, and eventually I think the conservatism tended to be
overcome.
Q. How? 6 / 3 
PM Oh, by force of circumstance, cogency of argument and persuasion and
passage of time you put it how you like.
Q. Now, it's a fairly open secret, T think, that there's not a great deal of love
lost between you and Mr McMahon and between you, and for that matter, Sir Henry
Bolte. Do you find that when people within your own Party disagree with you
that they are harder to get on with than some Opposition members, for example?
PM Well, I suppose that anybody in any Party would find that peo-le within that
Party who disagreed with one were more difficult than people in the CQ; Jposition.
You expect the Cpposition to disagree, but I found Mr McMahon. a very, very
good Foreign Minister and a good Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party.
Q. You didn't mention Treasurer?
PM Well he's now the Foreign Minister.
Q. One of the early storms came with the one of the fairly quiet storms,
I suppose, the appointment of Mr Hewitt as Secretary of the Prime Minister's
Department. This brought up allegations of interference in the Public Service,
and you are quoted on one occasion as saying, " I see every reason why the
Prime Minister ought to be able to appoint somebody in whom he has complete
confidence and with whom he has worked before". Do you regard Plublic Service
neutrality as a bit of a myth say, at the top level?
PM No, I think the good public servants at the top level, or at any other level,
can't be expected not to have their own political beliefs, but can be eg.-ected to
subordinate those political beliefs to carrying out the policy of the Government
of the day. But I don't think that has got much to do with what you have just
quoted. I think the appointment of the Head of any Department ' s within the
province of the Minister running that Department, and it will run much more
smoothly and much better if the two men know each other and can work together
well, than if they don't, and this I think is particularly true in the case of the
Prime Minister's Department. Now I had worked not with Hewitt but when
I was Minister for the Navy he was in the Defence Section of the Treasury and we
had many an argument on that occasion, and then I worked with him when I was
Minister for Education and he was the Head Qf the Universities Commission, and
one knew each other's style of work and it seens to me had co-mon confidence
and that's a good thing to have in any Department.
Q. Do you accept the fact that Mr Hewitt is very often regarded as something
of a bete noire'
PM Well, I have got to accept that a lot of people from time to time, and a
number of people constantly, regard Mr Hewitt as a bete noire. Then I have also
got to accept the fact that that applies to me too. So why shouldn't we work
together 
Q. Well can I ask you then you have talked about your relatiopnship with
Mr Hewitt. What about at the Cabinet leveli Now after you had settled in and
you had the first Cabinet, you then introduced a number of other people : who
were associated with what people called the Mu. hroom Club. Do you -find that
you work better at say the Cabinet level with men who are close friends? Would
you rather have that than a situation where some of the people who disagree
with you get right in at the first level of policy"!
PM No, I wouldn't. And what's more I don't see that they are mutually
exclusive. I don't see why a person can't be a-personal friend but have a
completely different view on some matter and put it forcefully. I can'-t see any
reason for any hangover of resentment when that happens, and ideed, it seems
to me that in a way it is essential that it should happen. It would be a bad thing
to have everybody just sitting around just waitin~ g to see what a Prime Minister
wanted and then, saying It would be bad for the Prime Minister and for
the Government and for everybody el-e. And jr. the Cabinet I don't thin-k we have
got anybody who was in any way associated with what has come to be called the
Mushroom Club.
Q. Not yet? 7
PM Well, don't think we have at the moment.
Q. The philosophy of the Liberal Party also seems to have come in for a lot
of testing in your period of office. Apart from the Federalism issue we'll
deal with that later perhaps, the free enterprise plank of your party's -Alatform,
one of its basic tenets now seems to be accepted with perhaps a few more
qualifications than before. For example, you made the MLC decisiorn without
consulting Cabi-net. You also had the Industrieo Development Corporation, the
business surrounding the guidelines for overseas capital generally. Nlow can
you tell us how, for example, the MLC business came about'i
PM Well that came about as a result of our learning that an u-ndiscloced buyer
or buyers were buying up large quantities of NLC shares and putting them in
the names of nominees. Nobody knew who had them and they were continuing this
buying process and it became evident, and I believe factually evident, that unless
some action was taken fairly quickly, a stage could be reached where this buying
up of shares would give whoever was buying up a controlling interest ill the MLC.
And we felt that that was an Au,. stralian company with a great lot of ca. Ital at
its disposal, a lot of premium income, a lot of! other income a-lid that wie wouldn't
want that capital and the investment of it to fall under overseas control. You
wanted to ask me something about that?.,
Q. You were in Western Australia at the time, I think. Was this a question
of getting hurried phone calls? 0 
PM Oh, no, no. We had the papers beforehand. I had to go to Western
Australia, but I had studied it through beforehand and took them with me and
made the decision from there, but it didn't just come up when we were in
Western Australia at all.
Q. On this general question. You have dealt now recently, for example,
with Queensland Mines. You have dealt with MLC business. You have dealt
with ESSO/ BHP. This is what is generally -being termed your economic
nationalism. Wouldn't it be better to lay down set rules that everyore knows
so nominate perhaps certain industries that would be cc-sidered
vital . in the national interest to control locally'
PM I don't think it would. 0 f course, there are some industries which have
been nominated as industries which shouldn't be allowed to fall into overseas
hands television stations and media, newspapers, banking a number of
industries. I don't think you could lay down a statement saying well, mining
mining covers an awfully large field should not be allowed to
fall into overseas hands, nor should you. I'm sorry, I'll start again..... should
not be allowed to fall into overseas hands. Nor could you lay down a rule
saying well, the level of investment from overseas in mining should not be more
than twenty per cent or thirty per cent or forty per cent or whatever you mention,
because there is so much variety in mines. There is so much variety in the
amount of capital required. ESSO/ BHP, for example is a 50/ 50 partnership.
It requires hundreds of millions. Some other mines require far less an amount
and I don't think you could lay down rules which didn't become restrictive
because they were insufficiently flexible.
Q. Aren't you worried, though, about the possible feedback in future if you
make another decision like that, and someone can say, " Well, Gorton's done
that because one of his Liberal Party backers is in that company and he want a
bit of protection," if you do it on an individual company basis.
PM Well if somebody could say that and could in any way advance any evidence
to back it, yes, one would be worried, but I don't think they ever could or
would be able to say that.
Q. You are confident that you can avoid that.....
PM I couldn't avoid somebody saying in the case of a decisicn, " Well,
somebody who supports the Liberal Party is there and that's why the decision
was made, but I am quite sure that in any circumstances of that kind the
reasons for the decision would be such that the vast majority of people vould
see that there were reasons for it, whether they agreed with them or not. a / 6 
Q. Prime Minister, getting down to what might be generally called your style.
Someone said of you once you probably recognise the quote " He's really too
wilful, I think, and obstinate sometimes, rather than strong-minded. I think
he is the sort which learns only from experience." Dr Darling, your previous
Headmaster at Geelong Grammar. Do you accept that as a criticism of you?
PM Well, of course, he wrote that when I was at school and I have had a lot
of experience since then and presumably learnt a lot from that experience I
hope:
Q. Well one of those o ences has been suggested as maybe reflecting that.
It was the off-shore one 1t? Off-Shore Legislation crisis. Nc. w it was
suggested, for a start, that ou had reached breaking-point and had a vh ole
series of criticisms within the Party room. And then the Off-Shore Legislation
came up and suggested one theory that explained the crisis that followed, and you
said " I'm sick of this now. This one I am going to stick with."
PM No, no. Well, if there were any truth in that, which ones did ore not go
ahead with before which would lead one to say, " Well, I am sick½ of pulling
things off" I mean, we did have a lot of criticism from certai: quarters on
the IDC and we didn't say well we won't go ahead with it. We had a lot of
criticism about the Health Scheme which we introduced and theories about
what might happen, but we didn't stop. We went ahead.
Q. There were some modifications, I thinllk, at that stage?
PM Oh, I don't really think
Q. Well you accepted the Senate's modifications?
PM Oh, well, they were not basic in any way at all. No, the Off-Shore Minerals
Legislation is legislation which is needed to define just who has got sovereignty in
these areas. At some stage that will be defined one way or the other.
Q. I am not in fact querying that suggestion, but I am wondering, and a lot of
people wondered whether that was really the way to do it. You havern't got that
legislation through yet.
PM No, we haven't got it through yet.
Q. There was a story that one of the compromises that came up from members
of your Party Mr McEwen took it to you you took one look at it and told him
what the people concerned could do with it. 9 / 7 
PM But these were all stories which were written by people who were-n't anywhere
in the vicinity. I am sure that Mr McEwen would completely deny some d the
wild far-out stories that came up. There were, from memory, propositions h ich
I didn't think were sensible propositioas. But this way that people wrote about
throwing them on the floor, or something. This is just ridiculous.
Q. But couldn't you see at the time it might have been better just to null off,
wait a little and then put it through later? As it turns out, you are probably
going to do that.
PM Well it might have been. But it seemed to me to be a prooer thing to
happen for Australia, and it still seems to me to be an essential thing to happen
for Australia. Perhaps it would have been better not to go ahead but I think the
adherence to the necessity for doing this was necessary, and is necessary
a matter of timing and other things comes into it.
Q. You have occasionally got annoyed with your critics. You referred at one
ste 3e at a time of crisis on the eve of the general elections last year, to white
frog-bellied things that come out of the sewers or something. You have also
criticised some pressmen for taking an attitude to your New Guinea trip,
sayi ng It was going too well they were saying it was going too well and
what could they do to denigrate it. One gets the impression that you feel
sometimes, in times of stress rather plagued by people.
PM Well let's look at both those things you have mentioned. May I say that the
-white frog-belly or whatever it was, was not on the eve of the gereral elections
I'm sorry, I think it was the day before the election. It could well have
been, but it was in reply to a specific question about a lot of calumny, personal
calumny that had been poured out and somebody printed photographs, denigratory
photographs which didn't seem to me to have anything to do with political matters
or anything of that kind just personal calumny. And that was in relation to
that alone. As far as New Guinea was concerned, well, you know I can't
reveal my sources but I think the sources are fairly I believe in the sources
anyway that some of these statements were made on that New Guinea visit, and
if so, I think it is a reasonable sort of a thing to say they are not quite impartial.
Q. You concede then to pressmen who rely on similarly reliable sources
that they could sometimes be right.
PM Sometimes be right and sometimes not:
Q. Prime Minister, you mentioned the obvious one of the calumny directed
against. Your personal criticism by Mx St Joh was one of the most dramatic
events in the Parliament. / C 
PM Yes, it was.
Q. What wac your reaction? Were you furious? Were you aigry'! ' Were you
cool?
PM I was very surprised that that should happen, not only at the strictly
personal attacksG but the other statements made about never consulting:-with
Cabinet, acting like a dictator and a lot of things which seemed to lave no basis
in truth whatever. And it is an unpleasant thing to be publicly attacked in that
way.
Q. Can you remember your very first reaction? Just surpri-e 7Ths it anger?
Or did you find yourself very cool? There tend to be the two extreme
PM I don't think I could say one would find oneself to be very cool under that
kind of approach. I do remember getting more and more surprised as all these
odd accusations about dictatorship and so on came up. Nor do I really think that
anger is the exact word that describes one's reaction. There is a word, but I
can't think of it, but it is nearer to anger that to coolness, but it's not quite
either.
Q. Another criticism that is made of you is your tendency, as one vrriter put
it, to talk too much about what the G ocernment hopes to do without first working
out how it hopes to do it. Do you accept that criticism?
PM In one way that could be a criticism, and yet I started perhaps I am not
doing it as much now I started with a belief that in many, many areaS, a
Government should stimulate public discussion on a particular subject, should go
before the people and say, well, this is one way a thing could happen; on the
other hand, this is another way it could happen, but on the whole we would hope
it would happeli this way. And that would get people writing into the newspapers,
or writing columns or arguing, which I had thought was quite a good way for a
democracy to function before the Government finally came dowm. I still think
it is except that it does tend to the sort of criticism that you just mentioned being
made. I don't think that that criticism leads to a better way of running a government,
but it probably leads to getting into lesS trouble.
Q. Forgive me, but I have just thought of one example that puzzled me at the
time which may come in that category. The Cape Keraudren business, the
atomic harbour, that was a puzzling one because the announcement was made
that that would be tried, that a study would be completed within six mo: nths,
whereas in fact, in basic terms, you need two years for an ecological study
to be made. / 9 
PM Well, no, at the time, the Department of National Develomient at that time
had received this request tbr this to be done, for this atomic harbour to be
blown, and the expense of it was to be borne by the entrepren~ eur who had a lot
of iron lea ses. an the United Sta* people were prepared to carry out thi s
study and those were the time scales given. But it subsequently transpired that
the man who was going to finance it believed that the richness of his ore deposits
was not as great as he thought they were and so he wasn't prepared to go ahead
and finance it and that's what happened. But it was quite a firm proposal as put
forward.
Q. I got the impression at the time that it might have been a bit of grandstanding.
PM No, it
Q. When you drop these phrases at first, as you fly a kite, it can look a bit
like grandstanding.
PM but this was what happened to this one. It was going to be
financed by the big businessman
Q. Now, Prime Minister, one of the areas vwhere you have bad criticism has
been in the External Affairs area, the Foreign Affairs area where you have taken
the initiative yourself on a number of occasions0. Now very early in*.
your Prime Ministership you said " No more troops in Vietnam". Shortly
afterwards you were saying,. " Well, I am not quite sure. I don't want to be
committed all the way into the future", or to that effect.
PM Yes.
Q. You have also said during the last election campaign, or a bit be:. 2ore it, as
far as the troorps in Vietnam are concerned, itt s" one out all cut but in fact it
will be one battalion back. Is this the function of your speakiig too soon?
PM No, I don'tt think it is, but you can makce your own mind uip about that. We
had made a decision as a government that we wouldn't be providing a14. y more
troops to Vietnam and the question actually asked of me was a question about the
immediate future because of the Tet offensive and so on, and I announ. ced what
the Government's decision had been. But later on I was asked " Does this apply
forever", and no-one can say that something applies forever because a whole
scene might change, but it did apply and in fact did apply all the way up-until
now. On the question of the withdrawal of our own troops, we had three
battalions there carrying out a particular funiction, and they were a viable force
we could have 1people at rest and people out. And they would not be able to
carry out that same function, and they won' t be able to carry out that came
function with a paart of them being withdrawn. They will have to have a
modified and different function. But if they were to have carried out thle
same function that they were carrying out at that time, then they would all need
to stay there or the whole lot would have had to come out. 
Q. You don't think you could have foreseen that at all?
PM I don't think, so, no, on the advice I had at the time.
Q. There was only a matter of about sever; weeks, I think, between the two
statements
PM Well we did have, if I remember rightly, further movements towards
Vietnamisation and other changes in the overall picture in V etr-n.
Q. One gets the impression at times, if I can put this to you, that sometimes
in our Vietnam commitment, on one or two occasions anyway, you have seemed
to have been a little annoyed with the Americans. There was the instance that
came out in public to some extent of the bombing pause that President Johnson
announced just after Mr Fairhall had made a very strong speech in Parliament
saying no bombing pause was out, Vietnam pulling out, giving concessions. Do
you have problems or have you had problems over this two and a half year
period in the relationships with the American. people?
PM No problems in the relationship with the American people or with the
American Government. I think at the time you were speaking of and one has
got to cast one's mind back quite a while for this -I think we had a feeling
if there was going to be a bombing pause, we might have beer, told soo-ner
than we were that that was the actual . policy af the United Stat es. We were told
but not far in advance.
Q. There was then t'he thing which I think Mr St John raised to some extert
and it has also been raised by other people, that you held a midmight press
conference on October 17 and you said that there was only gave the only
official confirmation, I think, throughout the world at that stage.....*
PM This has been alleged, of course. What actually happened there was that
the cables were running hot from the United States and perhaps from Europe
I don't know the media cables were running hot with statements ofZ What was
going to happen and what the United States were going to do, and our owin
press people wanted to talk to me about it. And so I came baick to the House
and talked to Alan Barnes of the " Age" and some other man
Q. AUP
PM Ken Braddick of AUP. They seemed to get slightly different stories and
Braddick's was a little bit the more interpretive, I think, than Alan Barn~ es'
and led to this allegation of official confirmation of something. I think if you
see the stories that Barnes wrote or that somebody in the " Sydney Morning
Herald" wrote covering him, they were rather different from what Braddick
himself wrote. 
Q. Then again in the foreign affairs area, the Malaysia Five Power talks, and
the Malaya/ Malaysia controversy. This was also one which struck me at the
time. In that same speech you refer -ed to " Malaya" rather thani " Malaysia".
You also suggested to the Malaysians that they should tidy up their ovin affairs
a bit. they were having racial trouble. Was that diplomatic'i
PM I don't know, but I think it was necessary for Australia's position to be made
clear to everybody and Australia's position was that we were not goilng to get
mixed up in inter-racial strife. I think it might have been more diplomatic to
say something which could be interpreted several different ways, but it wouldn~ t
have been as clear to all concerned and on the whole, in the long run, I think it
is rather better for a nation's attitude to be quite clear in relation to things
like that. And so that was made clear. Also we did not wish to become involved
in any quarrel that might arise between the Philippines and the claimns to North
Borneo. We therefore drew some distinction between the commiitmernts that we felt
we had in I'm sorry, Malaya or the Peninsula of Malaya. I think everybody
knows what that mearas as distinct from the other component parts of Malaysia.
And I think it's proper to make one's position ' known in these matters.
Q. We have very little time left, Prime Minister. I want to touch on a couple
of other areas, one is New Guinea and the controversy you have beer, involved
in. It seems to have been, for a start, the only area in which that I can think
of where you have used the Menzies technique of stealing the Opposition' s
thunder when you appointed Mr Johnson as Administrator.
PM Why? Were they going to do that, or something?
Q. Well Mr Whitlam had mentioned him favourably in the House.
PM Well he had been mentioned favourably to me by quite a num.. ber ai people
who knew him and had known him during his Army days and ever since. And
in fact I especially asked him to do it, and great credit is due to him because
he had been appointed as the Head of a College of Advanced Education in
Tasmania at a far more comfortable job, a far less straining job, and I could
imagine at least at the same amount of remuneration, but he went backx there
because he felt that was his duty. I think it was a good appointment, as I think
the new Secretary, David Hay, was a good appointment.
Q. The hot issue of New Guinea is still the Mautaungans, and it is a
continuing one it looks like. Can you understand, follow their argument against
the way European and Chinese influence may be increased unnecessarily in
their view by having a Multiracial Council? e. / 12 
PM No, I can't but that doesn't matter. That doesn't matter whether I can or
not. I don't believe the European..... I can't understand how a multi-racial
council, made up as it is, could increase the European or the Chinese influence.
But if the people of the Gazelle Peninsula believe this that's a different matter
and that is why I said, " Well for goodness sake let's find out what the people
want. Let's have a referendum and we will abide by the result".
Q. Are you confident that we can avoid the kind of thing that has been in
Africa?
PM No, I'm not. I think if we precipitately vi thdraw that we could lead to
the situation where the majority of the population would be sorry that ve had
withdrawn I am speaking of all the Highlanders and many in other areas would
not wish to be ruled by the elite and where there could be repetition of some
of the internal struggles that we have seen in Africa. And this is one of the
great, great problems of . New Guinea.
Q. Can't we also get into a situation as in Kenya where we find ourselves
having to put people in gaol? And then finding them national leaders. That
happened in so
PM I suppose that that is so, but isn't the difference between our approach
to New Guinea and the approach to Kenya that we say and mean that when we
can discover the wishes of the majority of people then we will meet those
wishes. There is no question about that. Certainly we have given evidence
of our continuation along the path of handing them more self-government, but
the real difference, I think, is that we say, " Right we will get out". Now, it
is hard to know exactly the best way you can discover what the wishes of
the majority of the people are, but it could be done either by statements and
votes in the Hcuse of Assembly, it could be done by a referendum of some kind,
it could be done by something which is more natural to them than to us, which
is sitting down and getting a consensus of opinion. But I wouldn't go into the
means of it, but I do think we should find out what they want before we take
action.
Q. Prime Minister, one final question, because we have run a bit beyond
our time infact. Does it perturb you as a proclaimed Australian nationalist
that the time of your office has seen some of the strongest emotional
divisions in the Australian community the youth/ age problem, which wraps
up with drugs and marihuana to some extent, and different standards of
morality, the anti-Vietnam movement, and the growth of conscience issues
rather than economic issues to some extent? ./ 13 
PM I don't think the growth of conscience issues in internal matter iz divisive.
You are thinking of people saying, " Well, more ought to be done for the poor,
and more ought to be done in preserving the environment, arid these.
matters, and I don't think there is any strong antipathy between.-the peop. le
who are saying " More should not be done for the poor" or we shouldn't look
after our environment. It is disturbing that the Vietnam question should have
raised the controversy it did but then I think it's a matter of decisior. as to
whether we are divisive or whether those who use the methods agalinSt observance
of the law are divisive.
Q. Prime Minister, what do you see in the next one thousand days'!
PM Well I hope there will be a little more peace and quiet at some stage during
that thousand than there has been during this thousand which has Seen more
changes, more new problems, more solutions of many problems than I think
any other thousand days has probably seen.
Q. Thank you, Prime Minister. 



FOR PRES3: P. M. No 103. 1970
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS CGMMISSION
The Prime Minister, the Right Honourable J. G. Gorto.-,
announced today the re-appointment of Mr. H. J. Gcodes, C. B. a, id
Mr. W. R. Lane to the Commonwealth Grants Commission. Mr. Goodes
has been re-appointed for a period of one year from 1 October 1970
and Mr. Lane for a period of three years.
CANBERRA 12 October 1970 


FOR PRESS: P. M. No 104/1970The Parliamentary Liberal Party met this morning to consider the principles of the Government's proposed Wool Marketing Scheme.
The overwhelming majority feeling fully endorsed the principles of the Scheme.
CANBERRA14 October 1970



FOR FRESS: PM. No. 105 1970
MELBOURNE BRIDGE TRAGEDY
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, this afternoon
sent the following message to the Premier of Victoria, Sir Henry
Bolte " I AM SURE THE WHOLE OF AUSTRALIA IS
SHOCKED AND SADDENED BY THE SERIOUS ACCIDENT
AT WESTGATE BRIDGE.
PLEASE EXTEND MY DEEPEST SYNMPATHY TO ALL
THOSE FAMILIES TO WHOM THIS TRAGIC EVENT HAS
BROUGHT SUCH GRIEF.
CANBERRA, October 1970 



Edited Transcript ANINUAL CONVENTION OF THE 14. S. W. YOUNG
LIBERALS SYDNEY, N. S. IN. 17 OCTOBER 1970
Speeh b ! nim ister, Mr. on Gorton
I think you will agree that this is neither the time nor the place for a long
dissertation on political matters. I am here primarily to express, on behali of the
Government, our gratitude for the assistance we receive from the Young Liberal
Movement throughout Australia.
I don't agree with the speaker who said that we are a pretentious country, or
a country with an inflated idea of our own importance. We may be a little brash, perhaps:
and brashness is a good thing in a young country. We have got something to be a little
brash about, when you consider that in such a short space of time as far as history
goes in the blinking of an eye a harsh continent has been translated into one which is
giving as . high a standard of living to the people in it as any other country in the world
and as great an opportunity as any other country in the world. Now this is something
of which we need not be ashamed.
We also have frontiers and there are not many countries left that have them.
I will admit that too many young Australians stay away in droves from the frontiers.
I am talking of the mining towns in Western Australia, I am talking of the new
developments in Queensland, I am talking of going out where something new is being
built and something new is happening and people can work very hard and get very
high rewards. Well those are frontiers and they are there for those who want to take
advantage of them and the very fact they are there is, I think, of sign~ ificance, in our
national life. So I don't think we are pretentious, and I do think we have ar. agportunity
here as a community of people seeking the answer to the age-old questions of how can
a community best be run.
We have an opportunity to present to the world a pattern which might be
better than any pattern so far devised and therefore I don't think we are pretentious,
though we may be brash. I don't think we have an Inflated idea -of our own importance
because although we haven't got great physical power,, we do have enormous opportunity
and I think the achievements we have already made augur well for the future for the
Young Liberals and the other young members of the Australian community coming
on with them. Nor do I think the Young Liberal movement is without a cause. After all,
there has been a history now of some twenty years of Liberal rule, and of course
all the decisions made in that time were not right and of course some opportunities
during that time were missed. But by and large, most of the decisiorns were
reasonably correct and most of the opportunities were seized and the advancement
that has taken place In that period of time is probably unparalleled in a similar period
of time in any other nation's history. e. a. / 2 
We have reached in this nation towards giving to the individual more opportunities
to express himself in whatever field of endeavour he may wish to engage. Vie have
advanced our material development enormously, and that is important, because only
by advancing materially can you take resources to help the poor and the under
privileged and advance other non-material requirements of a nation. And it not a
reasonable cause to want to continue, and to improve, what has been, I think on any
impartial observer's judgment, very successful indeed. Surely we viould riot be able
now to have ten thousand members of Young Liberals throughout Australia if there
were not achievements to which they could look and which they would seek to better in
the years ahead. So there Is a cause, a significant cause to defend Australia, to
advance Australia, to improve the material benefits of Australia, and to further advance
the non-material requirements of a nation.
I have heard, from time to time, talk of something which is described as a
generation gap. And people who have spoken about it have spoken as if this is some new
phenomenon just suddenly discovered, never having occurred before in the history of
the world. Well, I don't think, for myself, there is a generation gap. I disagree
violently with a lot of young people and a lot of young people disagree violently with
me. But then a lot d-young people disagree violently with a lot of other young people,
and so it is not a matter of a gap between generations. It is a matter of argum-. ents
advanced and arguments rejected and discussion on those arguments.
I can't see myself that there are any new theories advanced which can't be
discussed between the generations. I haven't discovered that, and I hope that by and
large, you haven't discovered that either. There has always been Some difficulty of
communication between parents and children. Always-, Because parents have got into
the habit while the children were very young and while they were growing up, of telling
them what they ought to do instead of sitting down and discussing with them whether
they ought to eat their supper or whether they ought to go to bed at seven'. They have
got into the habit of telling them what they ought to do and it is a little difficult
sometimes for parents to realise that children have reached an age where that no
longer obtains. But this has always been so.
It has also always been true that at a particular period of development young
people thought that their parents knew absolutely nothing, understood absolutely
nothlng, were as dead as a dodo, And then it has also been true that a little later on
when young people have grown up a little bit and when parents have mellowed a little
bit, it has been possible for discussion to take place and for young people to say,
" My gosh. My parents have learned a lot in the last ten years, or five years".
I think it's nonsense.. that's all I want to say about the generation gap. Surely
whatever age anybody is, it is their mind that counts), their ability that counts,
the capacity to analyse that counts and there ought to be able to be a dialogue between
somebody of sixty and somebody of sixteen, given those circumstances. 9 e. / 3 
And there are many things on which dialogue should take place in this country.
Many think now that all that is required is questioning of the society in which they live
criticism, which is quite proper and questioning. B-ut that can't go on for too long,
because the very passage of time itself means that before long, those who today are
questioning, and having the luxury df questioning,. will tomorrow be saddled with the
sometimes agonising discipline of providin,; the answers to the questions they are now
asking. I think it augurs well for Australia that there are groups Of young -people such
as this who now question, but who in questioning are learning because they wiant to be
able to contribute the answers tomorrow will demand. And this again is a reason why
I am so pleased to be here. I will sketch some of the problems that I see will need
to be answered in the years ahead, and these are just some briefly touched on samples.
We hear much today about the question of dissent and the question of how far
dissent should be allowed to go. For myself, I would suggest that dissent mnust be
protected, that there must never be any interference with the right of people to object
to what a government is doing, to attack what a government is doing, to march i~ f they
want to, in order to bring attention to their objection to what a government is doing.
Thbis is a freedom which is essential. But freedom can degenerate into licence at some
stage, and for myself, I don't believe this right should be extended to licence. I don't
believe such a rights of other people are invaded and rejected by those who, wish to
dissent. I think people ought to be able to use the post offices if they want to; I believe
people ought to be able to use the streets if they want to. I believe they should be able
to drive cars and walk-along footpaths and indeed what I am saying is that there are
civil rights for the majority, and those civil rights are as important as are the rights
of a minority to dissent.
This may not be easy and simple finally to clarify. Nevertheless, this is a
question before us now. It will be before us in the future, and we must in this nation,
I believe, reach a solution which will enable both rights to exist and which will prevent
a repetition of what we have seen in other countries o! people in brown-shirts taking
over the streets as bully boys, and people in red-shirts fighting them in the streets so
that all that happens is a difference in the colour of the shirt, and riot a reasoned
argument.... but a situation where the decision goes to those with the greatest muscle
rather than those with the greatest right or the greatest capacity to persuade their
fellow citizens. We will have in the years ahead, problems concerned with what some people
claim to be a racist approach by Australia in the field of immigration.
And this is not a simple or an easy matter. We have a restricted immigration
programme. A policy under which it is easier for a p.: erson with a white skin to enter
Australia than it is for a person of a different colour.
That policy is under attack. I cannot justify it on moral grounds. F'or the
kindniess or cruelty, the competence of incompetence, the worthiness or unworthiness
of man can surely not be judged by the colour of their skins. / 4 
4.
Yet though I cannot justify the policy on moral grounds, as I look around the
world I see that wherever there are large communities of different racial origins in
a country, racial problems in that country are greatly increased.
These racial Droblems are not jut betweell those with white okins and those
with black, as in America or Britain but between, -for example, Chinese and Indonesians,
Chinese and Malaya-0. s, Tamils and Ceylonese, Kenyans and Indians,
If it is true that in these circumstances, racial policy is exacerbated and racist
stresses increased, then I do not wish to import these problems into this country; as
I am sure I would do if large communities of different racial origins were established
here. Indeed I think that it would be more immoral to do this than to continue with cur
present policy. I think that it would lead to a growth of racist feeling in Australia whereas we
do not have such feeling now.
But there is a difficult moral problem on which, in the fulniess of time, it will
be for those who are now young Liberals, and young Australians ger. erally to decide.
As for me, I make it clear that I am not going to chiai'ge our present liberalised policy
in any way. And then we will have in the years ahead many, many discussions as to what is
the proper role of a central government and what Io the proper role ofi' a state government.
I have found myself that on this particular problem, the Young Liberals seem to be
more conservative than the people who formed the Party in 1949, and on the whole, adopt
the conservative attitude without giving very many reasons for it as to why that attitude
is adopted: Well, fair enough.
I offer no solution -here, none at all. But I do say that for the proper running
of this nation in the years ahead this is a significant question and one which ought to
attract the attention and the analysis of the young people of Australia who w~ ill, before
long, be in a position where they will have to take sonrie real stand Oan it. I won't
develop that, but I do believe that it is of significance for our whole future.
So all these things those are but some samples all these and many others
will be before us in the years ahead. Many problemo have been overcome and many
more, I think, shortly will be. But there will be no nation ever, and Australia certainly
will never be a nation that has not got new problems before it, new answers required.
And it will only get those answers to the problems now and in the future if there are
sufficient numbers of young people prepared to devote their minds and their efforts
and their attitudes to trying to work out what the best answers in the interests of
the nation may be.
I think I will finish as I began, having given you I hope some indication of why
I am so happy to be with you tonight and having given you I hope some indication that you
really have a cause and that that cause is significant and more significant to you than
it is to me and more significant to your children generally than it will be for me.
Thank you for having me. 



OPENING OF BOTANIC GARDENS
CANBERRA, ACT OCTOBER 1970
S-) eech by the Prime Minister, MrjhnGoton
Mr Minister, Distinguished Guests, Lad; s and Gentleamen
You have heard from my colleague, the Min-: ster for the Interior somiething
of the history of these Gardens, which have indeed been unofficially open for somle
three years. And I have no doubt that many of you over the weekend have wallked, as
my wife and I have walked through these gardens when they were unofficially c.-eil, and
watched them taking shape and -watched the imaginative use of running w.. ater, of native
stone and of groupings of native flora in this lovely area.
It is, as Mr Nixon has said, an event of special relevance in our Cook
Bi-Centenary Year because these gardens are, in a sense, a tribute to Joseph Banks and
the naturalists and botanists who have followed in Bank.-s' footsteps. Because it was
Banks, even more thar. Cook, who urged on the British Government the foundation of
the first colony on our east coast, and it was he and his scientific team who were the
first to take home to England specimens of Australian shrubs and plant.-, collected
when that team came ashore from the " Endeavour" in Botany Bay and at other Doints
along our coast two hundred years ago.
Banks was important in his time, a wealthy young squire who spent on
fitting up in the " Endeavour' for his team of botanists twice the amount a~ money
that the " Endeavour' itself as a ship cost. To give you some indication of the
thoroughness with which he did his job, when he got home with his collection ai
Australian flora, it was described by a world-famous Swedish botanist of the day
as " a matchless, and truly astonishing collection, such as has never been seer.. before,
nor may ever be again. I don't know what Linnaeus, that Swedish botanist woculd have
said had he seen the matchless collection which has now come before us -for its official
opening today, and if this collection here in these gardens is not thoroughly matchless
although I think It probably is but if not, and if it is not unique of its kcind, then I
have no doubt whatever that under the guidance of Mr Shoobridge it very shortly will
be if it isn't already.
This has taken, much work, much effort and much planning. I think it was
Kipling, was it not who wrote " The Lord God made a garden, and gardeas are not
made by saying ' How beautiful' and sitting in the shade. And that is true of any
garden, but particularly of Botanic Gardens such as this, for they spring as do almost
all things of significance and enduring importance, from hard work, hard thinkcing, hard
planning, a genius for a feeling for nature, and then really solid hard sweat as well.
These are the ingredients of gardens. a o. / 12 
4 I 2.
We have here, as Burley Griffin was told to make in Canberra, in his brief,
a garden city, and I think he has made one in C-inberra because we have in the city
generally brought together exotic plants from other countries and I may be permitted,
perh aps, to call the oak and the elm an exotic plant as far as Australia is concerned
mixed with our own flora, and they make a delightful combination for the~ eye. But
here in this garden within a garden is a part of Australia of Australian trees alone.
I hope that there will be many such gardens as these throughout Australia,
and I hope that we will never reach a stage when our flora is confined to gardens such
as these, for we would all want to see them growing wild and free around the
countryside. And it is a part of community responsibility to protect flora so that this
can happen. This I believe, is becoming far more ingrained into the consciousness of
Australians. And also, perhaps, it is a task, a simple task that many might tak,-e up
to do what Johnny Appleseed did through the Mid-West of America when he wallked through
just planting apple-seeds as he went, in places he might never see again, hut they
grew -For the benefit of other people. And so could plants and trees and shrubs be
planted, perhaps as a return to what this country gives to those who live in it, -planted
by individuals for the benefit of other individuals later.
Sir, it is my great pleasure to welcome you all here to this official
opening and to say how pleased and proud we are in Australia to have So many
delegates from the International Congress of Parks Administrators. VWe are glad
that your First Congress in the Southern Hemisphere was here, and equally proud
that your new President is our own Director of Parks and Gardens, Mr Shoobricige.
So we are happy to have you in Canberra, and especially glad to have you with us on
this occasion when I now declare these Botanic Gardens open. 



ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE VICTORIAN WOMEN'S
SECTION OF THE LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA
Melbourne, Vic. 26 OCTOBER 1970
a~ ech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Madam Chairman, Distinguished Guests and all those present here:
We are meeting on the eve of a Se.-, ate election. We have far too many
elections, I know. That is not my fault: You will have to look further back than that.
We have far too many, but this is one, and I think a very important significant one,
particularly in the State of Victoria. Because the results of this Senate election caci ld
they could, I don't think they will, but they could result in Labor being able to obtain a
blocking half of the Senate 30 Members, and if they did, then they would be able to
do nothing constructive, but they would be able to do everything obstructive to frustrate,
to delay, on occasions to throw out measures brought in by the Government to fulfil the
promises it made for a three-year period only a year ago. And it could frustrate the
Government achieving the objectives which it has over and above the specific promises
made.... objectives of which I hope to say something to you a little later.
It would be a tragedy for Australia if this election were to result in such
capacity for obstruction and frustration and delay, and that is why it is of such
importance that we should, particularly in Victoria where we can win a seat from
Labor, do everything in our power to see that in fact we do so win.
Let me tell you some of the reasons necessarily briefly why I think
this is so. There is a vast gap between the approach of the Government and the approach
of the Opposition in the fields of defence and Australia's security; i the fields of the
need to see that any gains made by the community are real gains and not merely illusory
monetary gains which buy no mnore; in the attempt to approach the tasks before us
responsibly and not to make a myriad of irresponsible, undocumented promises Vhich
can't be carried out.
Let me advert to those few headings for a start. I believe that a good deal
of discussion at the election will centre on the question of whether Australia and
Australian troops should or should not remain in Vietnam, and wie -, 7ill be called
immoral because we are in Vietnam, and we will be told it is feutile to be in Vietnam,
and we will be told we should at once withdraw. May I examilne in tha light of history
and of present events those matters?
There was a time, after the Geneva Conference to 1954 or thereabouts, when
the people of North Vietnam had their Government and lived under it cand the people of
South Vietnam had theirs. There were no incursions by the Governent or people of
South Vietnam into the North. There were, during that period, no significant incursion
from the North to the South. Both those peoples could have lived in peace. Both of them
2 
2.
could have lived with independence. One of them at least, South Vietnam, could have
chosen the kind of government under which it wished to live anid that was the situation.
But then there was incursion from the North, there was invasion of a country which wished
to be left alone. There were kidnappings and murders of the people of S,, outh Vietnam.
And if I may paraphrase a former great statesman, the people there were living in peace
but the North was prepared to resort to war rather than to leave the people of the South
to choose their own government, and the Soi'th was prepared to accept war rather than
to have a government imposed on it by force -from the North, arnd sothe war came, and
so South Vietnam asked for help. And President Kennedy, no great reactionary, provided
that help, and we had an alliance, and we also provided that help. But who is immoral
in that situation? Those who are prepared to wiage war rather than let a country live in
independence or those who are prepared to accept war rather than let the independence
of a country be overthrown? Let us think of that.
And then, over the long years, we have had a growing crescendo of attacks,
on South Vietnam, and America, and ourselves. We have had allegations of immorality
lovellbd against us; allegations of immorality for what we have done, but over those
years too, the situation has dramatically improved. We have grown us-ed to hearing 1h e
spokesmen for the Labor Party saying " This isa dirty war" of course it is, all wars are
dirty. We have grown used to them saying " This is an unwinrnable war". Yet, as I
hope to show, it is being won. We have grown used tothemsaying that " There Is no
chance of deciding this matter by military meas". But during all that long period, it is
only the spokesmen of the Labor Party and their friends who have said this. You have
never heard the spokesmen for North Vietnam or the NLF saying there is no chance of
deciding this matter by military means because they know there is, andae they are seeking
to continue and always have been using military means to gain their political ends, and
they will go on doing so until our use of military means convinces them that they are
destined to failure. And so just recently, because we had stayed. in South Vietnam, and the
United States had stayed in South Vietnam while the Sauto. Vietnamese built up their own
capacity to look after themselves, to a point wh~ ere we could begin to withdraw
and that point would not have been reached had we not stayed but because we have done
that President Nixon has been able to offer a cease-fire so that thelkilling can stop,
and negotiation-s so that the objective of the South Vietnamese choosing their government
can be attained. We've offered that. And the cease-fire has been reJected by the North
Vietnamese and the negotiations have been rejected, and yet we who oi~ fered that ceasefire
are held to be immoral while those who rejected it and wanted the killing to continue
presumably are moral. I don't think that Australians will accept that.
And I don't believe, having reached this point where that offer can be ma de,
where the South Vietnamese have so built up their own strength and their own capacity
that Australians would want now to betray those people to whose help we went, to render
useless the sacrifice already made, to render in the future the position of Australia
more vulnerable. Rather do I believe that they would have the resolution to finish what
they have started now that the light at the end of the tunnel grows brighter and would
wish to see that that which was begun was finished and that those people of South Vietnam
had the right to choose their own government, with communists standing for election
if they want to. This will be a matter, I think of significance im this Senate campaign
and it is a matter, I know, of great significance to Australia and to its -future. 3 
That's only one aspect of the defence and security of Australia which is likely
to come up, because if Australia were to ado-ot the Opposition's policy in Vietnam, then
there would be no credibility at all to any offers of help to arty other nation in South-East
Asia and we would see threatened not only Laos and Cambodia, whomn we now find being
overrun, but Thailand threatened and probably invaded and the tide moving closer to the
borders of Malaysia.
And having done that, for that wuuld be the result of a Labor policy, it NO uld be
compounded by withdrawing all Australian military assistance to the Five-Power Pact
a Pact designed to try and help those countries even nearer to us Mvalaysia and Singapore.
Having inzreased the threat, the next step wie are told is to withdraw assistance to the
newly threatened areas. Surely all can see whatfeffect that wiould hava on the security
of Australia, we having taken up a position at the request of Malaysia and Singapore and
as a result of' us taking up that position, Britain having come back to t'his area of the
world, we turn our backs upon it and say " Sorry, you can go away. We won't help you.
We are -retreating to our own boundaries alone And Mr. Whitlam can't even pretend
to justify this by " conscience" unless he argues that his conscience will allow him to
have air and naval forces in the area but not ground forces.
Havir g done that, the next step we are told, is then to abolish National
Service Training altogether and reduce the size of a standing Army vie would need far
more in those circumstances than we have ever before needed a standing army in
Australia's history. These are not insignificant matters for a Senate election to
affect. But then I turn to the home front. Here, I think I can say that in the period
we have been in Government, we have made promises and we have carried out more
of those promises in that period than any government has carried in a like period
before. We have heard much lately on the subject of pensions, but on the subject of
pensions generally, ladies, the payment of the pension has increased by 50 wh ile I
have been Prime Minister, and the cost of living increased by 7Th3re has been a
steady improvement in the buying power of the pension in that time, but this is only one
fraction of what has been done in the field of social services. Let me from this bulky
tome of things we have done in all kinds of areas, tell you some of the other matters
that we have done in this particular field.
We have, as you know, provided subsidies to the Meals on Wheels Scheme
ten cents to one dollar and for many living alone, unable perhaps to get out to shop,
if they can get out to shop, paying more for food than is paid by the Meals on Wheels
people who can buy it in bulk and cook it finding it difficult to cooic these Meals
on Wheels cheap, hot, nutritious, are of great benefit indeed, and I am happy that
we have been able greatly to assist this particular organisation because there we have
a marrying of governmental finance and private work which ia this field should never
be lost. 4 
We have I speak of some relatively minor things first set up an employment
training scheme for assistance to married and single women previously restricted by
domestic responsibilities. We have had quite a significant number of applications for
training under this scheme, and one of them, I think, you might find of interest. There
was an application sent in to us by a woman and she said to the person she was writing
to " I am forty-two years of age, but when you read that, don't think ' ah, an " oldie".'
Think, by George, this woman is the same age as Liz Taylor, Sophia Loren and the
astronauts. She was accepted.'
We have brought in the increases in pensions generally of which I have spoken,
brought in, as you know, a tapered means test, provided capital for homes for handicapped
children, brought in hearing aids for pensioners, helped the FlyiIlg Doctor Service,
provided help for nursing homes from $ 2 a bed to $ 5 a bed for people requiring heavy
care, given greater assistance to homes for the aged, increased tuberculosis
allowance, helped in the case of deserted wives, increased grants to the Australian
Council for the Ageing, increased the age allowance which is the level at which
taxation begins on old people's salaries, advanced vocational training for widows, helped
widows . idowed overseas, paid pensions to persons absent from Australia, increased
unemployment aid sickness benefits. We have introduced a Health Scheme which costs
the patient less and provides the patient with more than the discredited Labor Scheme.
I don't want to go on, there are too many things here. I believe there are thirty new
approaches which have been made in this one field, and of that no one of us needs to be
in any way ashamed.
But this area this area of social help is the other great area to vh ich I think
we must direct our own attention. There are still some promises to be fulfilled.
We stated, just a year ago, that we would provide more help for low-income earners
with large families. This we will do. But there are other objectives not yet clearly
stated, not yet clearly put in the form of promises, but objectives which we have before us.
One of these is to further help those who have long-term illnesses, not in
hospitals because we have helped them, but long-term illnesses in nursing homes. Some
help has been given, but yet there is still a great and unsolved problem which is a
weight, I knovw, on many families.
Another of them, another real objective, must be to set up throughout
Australia, or to help with the States to set up throughout Australia kindergarten-cumchild-
minding centres, because now so many families are both working and so many
children do not have areas to mh ich they can go and be properly cared for an perhaps
be taught a little while their r -s are away. This I would regard as of very high
priority. 
May I touch very briefly on twio other great
objectives because I think perhaps I have spoken long enough already. But there are
new problems now which are not yet solved but are crying for solution. I think indeed
that in the last two and a half to three years there have been more new problems, and
more old problems, greatly exacerbated than has occured in any similar time. Some
of them in the Defence field I have touched on~, but one of the really sgiicant
problems for us all whereever we live is the problem faced by many a! our rural
industries, problems brought on because tne world either will not buy what they produce
in the quantities in which they produce it, or 4-f they will buy it, are not prepared
to pay for it sufficient to enable it to continue to be produced. There is no simple
answer to this. But that it is a problem of immense significance, I am sure you will
agree. My Government believes it is and believes that it is one of the great tasks
before it in the ensuing period of its office. And I know this that the problems of
the rural industries, the difficulties which they face, will be greatly exacerbated and
their economic position will greatly deteriorate if the Opposition and Mr Hawke, with
whom ' the Leader of the Opposition works so closely, can bring in a 35-hour week in
the rest of industry, and can unrestrictedly increase wages in the rest of industry
without any regard for the productivity of the economy as a vhole. This will hit
rural industries more than anything else, for this will raise the costs to them which
they cannot pass on. And this is what we seek to avoid. We want to see insofar as it
is possible, that all those working in this country in whatever jobs, get wages as high
as they can be, provided they are real wages which will buy real things and not
merely figures on a sheet of paper which will not improve their real wages oxtheir
living standards at all.
After all, what is earned by an individual, or what is earned by the companies
for which those individuals work is not the end of the story. ' That is take-home pay, if
you like, for the worker take-to-investors pay, for the company. But then out of that
there must come all the requirements that the community wanits. Cut of the company
profits must come half or virtually half, at once, for the schools vie need and the
hospitals and the social benefits I have been talking about. And out of the pay packet
taken home must also come some of the cost of these amenities which, looked at
properly, are in fact part of the take-home pay for all people in AuStralia. Ncw, if we
are to develop as we can, provide the things wie need, one of the es senitials should be
that we do it genuinely, that we do it without so inflating prices that what looks as though
it is going to be done is not done, that we work with real money and not fool's gold,
and this is the other great objective before this Government. That's what I meant,
when I spoke of a responsible approach instead of an irresponsible string of glittering
promises. So this is important, this election. The matters which can be affected by
it are important. There are many others I can't touch on now, but I thank you for
having given me the time to touch on those I have, and I look to you all to see that in
Victoria our three Senators are elected for the good of Victoria and -for the good of
Australia. 


AU2TMALIAN INT= OF MANAGEMENTTWELFTH GENERAL MANAGEMENT CONFERENCEHotel Canberra, Canberra, ACT 29 OCTOBER 1970peeh ythe Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonMr. President, Ladies and GentlemenIt is not my intention tonight to dwell on election issues. But ratherI will talk about some of the developments and some of the challenges that Australiafaces and therefore that you and your Institute face. These are the direct concern ofmanagement, whether it be management in government which, in terms of economicmanagement, seems to run in tandem with another organisation outside whichsometimes makes things diff icult; or management in private industry. Theopportunities ahead will only be fully seized and fully utilised by the proper exerciseof management in all spheres.And this year, Sir, is an important year. In a sense it is Year CneYear One of the decade of the Seventies. Sir, those seventies hold for Auztraliamore opportunity if we have t1-will to grasp it if we are prepared to put in theeffort required to grasp it than ever before in this country and possibly in any othercountry. We are getting now the people we need to populate the continent. Indeedthe results of twenty-five years of immigration 1policy, uncomfortable as it m~ y havebeen from time to time because immigration policy is inflationary unless you aregoing to do it the way the United States did in the 1890' s when they shipped peo,' le inand said " Fend for yourself" and we don't but the results of twenty-five yearsof immigration policy, population-wise, are beginning to pay off.We have discovered here recently, and are still discovering, and will,I am positive in the future, discover more, deposits of. mineral wealth greater ' thanour fathers could never have dreamt of and which could well result in our beingthe envy of the other nations of the world.And, thirdly, we are still creating and attracting, through goodmanagement, both governmental and private, capital to keep our people at work, tobring in still more people and to develop those resources we are discovering. Andif you cast your minds, not o~ nly over minerals, but over the new industries, suchas wood chips, such as fisheries, such as the manufacturing industries which haveexpanded so greatly, you will, I am sure, have the same concepts as I have of whatthis country can be turned into by good management. I don't by that mean that labouris not the basis of all production, because it is. But I do mean that no matter whatthe labo~ ur force in a particular industry, no matter how well and efficiently that forceworks, the results and the productions from that force will only be fully effectiveif proper management is brought to bear. And this is why I think the Lstitute is soimportant. o. v a / 2
All of these things that have happened in Australia, including, Sir,the new developments in education which you referred to, the advanced training formanagement which I think was generated when I was Minister for Education andScience. All these things have not come about by chance. They have conie about, Ithink, by reasonably good management at every level and they will be acceleratedby that better management at every levol which is the objective of this gatheringhere today. And as we get bigger, and as we get stronger, as our responsibilitiesincrease, so the demands on management will grow; for just as a new order ofschools is going to be required to deal with the technological revolution going onaround us now, so we will need a new order of management, highly specialised andhighly trained. For this purpose, to help towards this, this proposal formanagement training was introduced.I do not know, or pretend to say to this Institute, just how thisadvanced management training should be coiiducted. Most of the argument at themome-nt is where it should be conducted whether in New South Vkales or inVictoria. That we can leave to one side. We can have a centre of excellence. Weneea-not get rid of other good business training schools We cart have two centresof excellence as we grow. The location is not significant. The curricula andthe philosophy of approach are, and it may well be that there should be not postgraduatemanagement following directly on from graduate management, but thatthere should be required an interval of practical experience in the world of businessand of commerce. It may b. 3 that there should be required " sandich courses" wherefor a while a man works in the business world of commerce and industry and thengoes to academia and then comes back. Whatever it may be, I do hope, with you,that we will not see from this Institute turned out the theoretical people of whomyouspoke, but the practical people who will require this additional ability inorder to i ke the full use of their management potentials. And this is the objective,and this is what you are concerned with and this is what will be worked out in thiscountry as other things are worked out by discussiDn and by experience.Sir, our population now has passed the 12-4 million mark and,continuing my theme of what is possible in this country, our natural growth andmigration being at some two p. er cent a year, we, I think, will see, short of war,which I discount a major war an economic depression which I also discounta doubling of our present population by the end of this century. And that is fairlygood going, and that will make us by the end of this century a population of thesize of Canada today. Sir, there are great prizes, there are great opportunitiesfor service, not only to one's industry but to the nation in which one lives.And this being so, I think there are two questions posed for the future.What kind of a society will it be as it increases in size? And how, then, will wecontinue to develop it" I am sure that it has the opportunity again given goodmanagement to be a society which will provide, to those citizens who malke it up,a better life than any other society in any other country in the world has yetprovided. 3
3.There is an oppo~ rtunity to see that the individuals who make a country andwho are the most important components of a country, will be given the oyportun ityto develop their own desires, their own aspirations. whether it be to be a topmanager of a great firm, whether it be to be an opera singer, whether to be a farmer,whatever it may be, there will, I think, be an opportunity here because I believe wewill have the material resources which will enable governments to divert thoseresources to give opportunities to the citizens of its nation. And this is the sort of sxmietythat I expect we will see in this country in the years ahead.But how then can we provide those material resources* You, Sir, spokeof the theme of this conference as being the outlook for international business forAustralia. The outlook for international business for Australia must, in the ultimate,depend on the capacity for Australian industries of all kinds to produce at a costwhich will enable that which is produced to be sold in competition overseas.If this is not able to be done, then there is little outlook for the future ofinternational business. If this is done, then the outlook is almost limitless, exceptof course, when countries suddenly change trade treaties and put impediments in theway of 6a primary produce.But leaving that to one side, Sir, we have not done badly in this countryin this field over the last decade. Our rate of inflation has grown at a slower ratethan any other significant trading cuuntry but one. But I am sure you will agree withme that it is essential that it should continue to grow at a slower rate, arAd it wouldbe better if it didn't grow at all, cr grow only very little. And the deciding factorin this matter is not entirely gowernmental action but the action of arbitration courts.What ' world destroy, in my view, the opportunity -Zor international businesos inAustralia, would be the introduction at this time of a 35-hour week which must eitherreduce the amount produced for a given sum of money or, if the irlea is to workhours and have five hours' overtime, must produce the same amount of goods at amuch greater cost. This we simply cannot afford to do if we are concerned withinternational business and growth.But there is also the question of national business to be cons-idered andhere, I think Australia faces a priblem which in a sense is new, and certainly isgreater than it has ever been before. We have had periods in the past when we have hadtrade recessions, when we have had depressions. But when that has happened in thepast, all sections in the community and all kinds of businesses have been affected bythat trade recession or by that depression. But today we face a situation where a greatsegment of Australia, the rural area is, unlike other sections of industry, hit hard bythe fact that the world either will not buy what it produces, or will not pay for whatit produces the price that is required to allow production to continue. 4
And this is not a matter which just affects the rural sector..... not at all.Because let that sector be affected and it will not be long before all sections areaffected. These are the people who buy the machinery, who buy the refrigerators, themotor cars, the trucks, who keep the demand in the country towns for the manufacturersto fulfil. And what happens in that section of this country will inevitably affect allother sections. And so here too, because, in the case of manufacturing industry, whatcan be sold internally affects the price of what can be sold externally, and thereforeinternational. business here, too, there is a problem which we as a Governmentwill tackle. I think we must tackle it by seeking to help with long-term finance forthose who are, in banking terms, worthy of long-term finance, for reconstruction ofproperties, and with help for those who have to leave a rural industry to establishthemselves in other areas. This we can do. But if on that section of industry whichcannot pass on any cost increases there is to be imposed again the additional cost ofthis 35-hour week, then whatever we may do for that industry will not prevent it goingto the wall. And if it does, because of what I said, it will affect all industry andinternational trade. And these things, Sir, I am sure your Institute would have well inmind. Sir, I would finish on this note. If we can restrain the cost of whatwe produce, if we can restrain any rises, if management will-see that the increasesin productivity which management can bring are shared between those who labourand those who provide the capital, if management can see that with costs stable, pricescan drop and this is possible if that can be done, then there is, as I said, analmost unlimited prospect for international business from Australia.We will only do it, I think, by keeping the spirit of competition aliveand by that I don't mean by allowing laissez-faire to run rampant, but by keeping thespirit of competition alive. I am sure those of you who are in management willagree with me or some of you will that the spirit of competition is a littleuncomfortable sometimes for people in private enterprise. Because it is competitionit does require harder work, it does require to go out and sell, it does require tomake a better product and it is easier and simpler to avoid this if possible byhaving a merger or by arranging for price controls applying through an industry. Thisis not what I mean by keeping the spirit of private enterprise alive. But I thinkthere will always be enough individuals in this country who will see that truecompetition does remain and if it dGes, and if government can be orevented fromintervening too much and just provide guidelines, then, again, Sir, this Institute,if it can see that this happens, will have served a great national cause.One more thing. I have opened my mind to you as to what I thinkis possible for the future of this country, as to the growth which is attainable, as tothe riches which are there. I reiterate something that I said perhaps two and ahalf years ago or more. I want to see as much Australian control as possible ofthose riches as they grow, of those resources as they are discovered and developed.I can say this now with more confidence, perhaps, than I could before, becausebefore, at once, I was attacked andpeople said, " If you say this, there will be no
capital inflow from overseas. If you say this, it will dry up and there will be nodevelopment. But we said it, we said that was what we wanted, and the overseascompanies of significance understood that and have responded to it. And then wesaid we would put down guidelines for borrowing fixed capital inside Australia,and the more Australian equity there is in an enterprise, the more fixed capital willbe able to borrow from abroad. And people said, " If you do that, you will, frighten off overseas capital. It is a very skittish animal. It won't come. But wedid it and overseas capital has continued to come.Then we thought it would be helpful to do something about con~ vertiblenotes so that a class of investor who required an income could invest in Australianequity, could invest in Australian companies and change that to equity when thecompanies were profitable, and that was another step. And the2n we put up and someof the bankers here still don't like it the AJDC, in order to help to see that ifcapital was able to be borrowed overseas at fixed interest for Australian developmentit should be done, and then paid off and the development remain in Australian hands.The capital from abroad is still flowing in, in spite of all these steps. And I saythis to you. Sir, quite urepentantly, I think they were good steps, I thin-' theywere good management and I think that in a few years' time, people will lookback and say so, and that there will be more Australian ownership of Australianresources than there otherwise would have been, which in my view i s goodmanagement. But ask me back in a few years and see whether you agree w~ ith me onthat. For the moment, I agree with you in your objectives and in the way you areseeking to attain them and I thank you for letting me come and talk to you tonight.


FOR PRESS: PM No. 106/ 1970MR. WHrrLAM'S SENATE CPENINGComment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Speaking beneath a banner inscribed " A Labor Senate Makes Sense" Mr. Whitlam, who is pledged to the abolition of the Senate, last night delivered a lack-lustre rehash of denigration and generalisation.
While doing so he was divided from the Opposition Leader in the Senate. This gentleman was absent owing, it is said, to the divisive effects of a discussion on who got what television time.
Nevertheless the dull and stodgy speech contained as many falsehoods as a suet pudding contains currants. last year.
there was. It is simply not true that there was a 50 cost of living increaceIt is simply not true that the Treasu7er ever " admitted" thatIt is simply not true that the National Liberation Front is recognisedas a principal party in the negotiations at Paris, or that the approach of theGovernment to helping the sick aged is discriminatory, or that if a Governmentdoes not do what the Opposition demands it is therefore being divisive.But perhaps the most intriguing part of the address, which wassingularly free from constructive proposals, was that wherein M\ 4r Whitlam appointedhimself as the only man with a conscience and as the sole custodian of thenational conscie-nce. The implication of course is that anyone who disagreeswith him on anything must be acting against the dictates of conscience. Thismay be most consoling to this all-Australian Jimimy Cricket. But it isn'tnecessarily true.If it is thought that this i. not a particularly serious comment, itis because Mr. Whitlam's contribution could not be regarded as a particularlyserious speech.CANBERRA 29 October 1970



FOR PRESS: 7M No 1970
CONSTRUCTION O CKBUN SOUND NAVAL BASE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Government has approved plans for the censtruction, over
five years, of the second stage of Naval Support Facilities at Coczburn Sound,
Western Australia. It is proposed to provide base facilities capable of supporting four
escort vessels and three submarines for periods up to a year without dry
docking. Capital works will include the wharf and service area, dredged
basin area, workshops and stores buildings, engineering services, barracks,
hou., ing, and a jetty and armament depot.
The Base will enable ships to operate in the Indian Ocean and will
significantly increase the flexibility of our Naval Forces.
I am glad to say that the decision has met with warm approval in
Britain and the United States.
The British Minister for Defence has sent us a message which
reads " I confirm that my Government warmly welcomes your intention to establish
a Naval Facility at such a strategic point, which underlines the extent-to which
the threat posed by the Soviet maritime presence in the Indian Ocean, and the
need to keep all the sea-lanes in that area open is being recognised by the nations
of the free world." The United States Secretary of Defence has written " Your stated
intention to develop a naval base in Western Australia is most welcome
The timeliness of a decision to move ahead with a Cockburn Sound Base is
accentuated by the burgeoning Soviet interest in the Indian Ocean and its appruc s,"
Thus the naval construction approved as part of Australia's own
defences is seen by our allies who will be able to use the Base if they wish to
as an advancement of the common interest in contributing to security in the
Indian Ocean.
CANBERRA Octcber 1970
NOTE.-Text of message from Secr tory Laird attached. 
COCKBURN SOUND
Text of Messalefo Se rar La ird
The United States recognizes fully the important security
contributions Australia is making to free world defense in the Southwe -at
Pacific and Indian Ocean areas. Your stated intention to develoY. a Naval
Base in Western Australia is most welcome.
The generous offer to open. such a facility to ships of the U. S.
Navy is indeed gratifying; such a base would play an important role L_ U. S.
contingency planning for the region; and as operational requirements or
opportunities may arise, we would make use of the port.
The timeliness of a decision to move ahead with a Cockburn,
Sound Base is accentuated by the burgeoning Soviet interest in the India-,-,
Oce-n and its approaches. The current Soviet interest in Singapore, thea
growing number , of their vessels visiting ports of the Indian Ocean, littoral,
and the historic Soviet desire to exercise control over the Suez area comrbine
to indicate that the free World's interests in the Southwest Pacific India-,-
Ocean area may encounter serious new challenges in the future. An
Australian Naval Base at Cockburn Sound could afford a valuable position
from which manifestations of such a threat could be observed arAd, if
necessary, countered. 



EMBARGO" NOT FOR RELEAS3E BY ANY MEDIA
E. 30 PM, WEDNESDAY 4 NOVEMBER BEFORE 1970
SENATE CAMPAIGN
FIFTEEN MINUTE OPENING TALK ON TELEVISION
BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. JOHN GORTON
National Netwcrk and Commercial Channels 8. 30 pm
Wednesday 4 November 1970
( NOT1P:
The Prime Minister will officially open the Camrpaign with
a public meeting in the Malvern Town Hall, Melbourne at
8 pm Wednesday 4 November 1970. This Opening Taltk on
television touches on specific issues and is not a complete
summary of the Prime Minister's Opening Speech.) 
E M B A R G 0 NOT-FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
8. 30 PM, WEDNESDAY 4 NOVEMBER 1970.
Tonight I want to talk to you briefly about the coming Senate Campaign.
I shall report to you on our achievem -: nts in the last year. I shall
touch briefly on the further objectives we have i. mind and I shall poi -t out the
great differences between Labor and ourselves 11 defence, foreign policy, and
responsible non-inflationary internal Governme. t.
The result of a Senate Election does not usually affect Australia's
future. But it is possible that this election could result in Labor's gairing a
blocking half in the Senate that is 30 Scnators.
If that happened Labor wcu'. d not have power to do anything positive.
But it would have the power to obstruct, frustrate, and delay all the processes of
government. It could refuse supply, or defeat a budget. And I believe it would
use that power, as it would use any power it could gain, to damage Australia's
security, to destroy Australia's alliances, to disrupt Australia's economy and
to affect Australia's future very greatly.
Nevertheless the election is not an occasion for us to advar. ce new
policies, or make new specific promises. The occasien for that was oi-le year ago,
at the General Election, when we put before you a programme, policies, and
promises for a three year period. And you elected us.
I can report to you that in the one year since then we have carried cut
most of the promises we said we gould carry out over three years. I shall not
weary you with a detailed list in this short address. But we have brought in a
vastly improved health scheme. We have reduced the burden of direct taxation in
one year by the amount we promised to do in three years. We have continued to
protect and advance greater Australian ownership of our developing resources.
Vie have greatly increased spending on education and on new initiatives i
social services. And we have given the States a new financial deal by greatly
increasing the funds they require for their own responsibilities.
These are only a few ct the year's achievements. The complete list is
much longer. I think that I can justly claim " that which we promise, we perform".
" While they talk, we act."
We have additional objectives. We shall attain these as we feel it
financially responsible to do so. We wish to continue the improvement of social
welfare services generally; and I remind you that in tlr: ee years of
Government the variety of social services, and the buying power of pens. ons
generally, have been increased irpre than they have ever been increase-in a
copnparable period of time. ' 2 
2-
We wish to reduce the burden of long-continued illness
on those in nursing homes as -we-have already done for those in
hospitals. We wish to initiate throughout Australia, in conjunction
with the States and voluntiry bodies, a network of kindergarten-cumchild-
minding centres. We wish to undertake a programme in rural
areas designed to help farmers obtain long-term credit and to enable
rural reconstruction to take place where it is necessary. And we have
taken a firm decision to establish an Office of the Environment and seek
to join with the States in the formation of a National Council t o co-) rdinate
the fight against the growing problem of pollution of all kinds.
This, in brief, is the story tif what we have done, and what
we hope to do. And these things are important.
But even more impor-ant is the harm which Labor would do
to our security. Let me first discuss with you the question of Vietnam.
Why I think it was right, and in our interests to go there to help. Why
I think it is right and in our interests to remain there until the
Vietnamese are organised enough, and strong erough, to defend themselves.
May I remind you how this War began.
For a number of years after the Geneva Accords of 1954
the people of North Vietnam lived under their communist government
and the people of South Vietnam lived under their non-communist
government. The people in both sections lived in relative peace. That
peace could have continued.
But the Government of North Vietnam was prepared to wage
war rather than let the people of the South retain the right to choose
their own Government and way of life. And the people of the South were
prepared to accept war rather than have their right of self-determination
taken from them rather than have an alien government imposed on
them by force. And so the war came.
It came at first through an uprising armed and directed by
the North and then through an invasion of the South by the North Vietnamese
Regular Army. I do not ask you to accept this on my statement alone,
f or the Piresent Deputy Leader of the Labor Party, Mr Lance Barnard,
has endorsed what I say. In May 1967 after a visit to Vietnam he
reported publicly that there was a large-scale invasion of South Vietnam
by North Vietnamese troops. " 1 am satisfied", he said, " that this is
more than just a guerilla war and I suppose it can be compmai with the
earlier conflict in Korea".
So there was invasion. And the object of that invasion was
to destroy self-determination in South Vietnam; to take away the people's
right to choose how and under what government they would live. 3 
Again, I do not ask you to accept this on my statement alone. For
in his Evatt Memorial Lecture of 1966 the present Leader of the Opposition,
Mr. Whitlam, wrote:
" It is, however, quite clear that victory by the Vietcong
and Hanoi would destroy any hope of self determination in
the South as it has destroyed it in the North".
And this invasion was accompanied, as Mr. Whitlam has admitted, by ' Vietcong
brutalities and cruelties in Vietnam".
Don't you think it was right to help fight that aggression? Were we
immoral to do so as we are now told or were the invaders immoral' Should we
follow the dictates of Mr. Whitlam's present comsciezceandceasetor csit invasion,
the imposition of communist dictatorship, and the brutalities perpetrated, or
should we continue to resist and finish that which we began.
Well, the invasion was resisted with the help of the Americans and
of , urselves and other countries. It has been resisted for six years. And
in that time the strength and purpose of South Vietnam has so grown that it is
now able to take over more of its own defence; it has so grown that the
Americans and ourselves have been able to reduce our troop numbers without
endangering the objectives we sought.
It is possible for us to make this reduction because we stayed and
fought when Labor was clamouring for us to withdraw. And because we stayed
and fought it is now possible for President Nixon to offer a cease fire, an end
to the killing, and negotiations designed to allow the South Vietnamese to elect
their own government from the candidates cf any political party including the
communist party. Who then is immoral? We, who offer an end to killing or they who
insist on continuing the killing to achieve military conquest and who refuse a
cease fire?
What does that present conscience, of which Mr. Whitlam speaks so much,
suggest we should do7 To continue to resist brutal and unprovoked invasion
To help a small nation retain the right to govern itself' Or to withdraw all
our troops now as Mr. Whitlam presently demands.
If we did that we would betray the people of South Vietnam. We
would negate . he heavy sacrifices already made. We would be recreant to
the hopes for future universal peace because future peace can only endure if
small nations are not threatened with invasion and conquest. 4 
We would destroy the confidence of the other small countries in Asia,
and by doing that, we would increase the possibility of future da: ger to
Australia itself. We look forward to the day when, with South Vietnam able to guard
its own independence without help, we can withdraw all our troops, That day is
coming nearer as the military war is being won. But until it does arrive I
suggest that morality, conscience, and self interest all require that we should
finish the task we began.
But Labor under Mr. Whitlam would renege in Vietnam.
Having done this and thereby increased the danger to other Asian
countries including Malaysia they would ther withdraw from the Five ? ower
Arrangements designed to help Malaysia and Singapore and at the same time they
would drastically cut the strength of our own army by abolishing National Service.
We would be alone, with our alliances shattered, regarded an
accepting no responsibility to help maintain peace in our regio: n. And with
our own army halved.
That is what I meant by saying Labor would damage Australia's
security and destroy Australia's alliances.
And that is one reason I ask you not to give them the chance to do
this damage. Just as I ask you not to give Mr. Whitlam the chance to wreck
our internal economy. Both he and Mr. Hawke are pledged to attain a 35 hour
week. The only difference between them is that Mr. Hawke is pledged to do
this all the time, and Mr. Whitlam is pledged to do it all the time, except at
election time.
If he achieves that aim our rural industries will suffer a loss of at least 9%-cf
their income and many farmers now-in great difficulty will be utterly destroyed.
Those living on superannuation will be hard hit, the value of all pensions will
be drastically reduced, prices to the housewife will soar, Eidae-~ a.
our country will be destroyed, and our development will wither away.
There are many other issues to be debated in this Campaign. There
is our intention. to introduce laws which will not interfere with the right of the
minority to dissent, but will protect the civil rights of the majority of citizens.
Labor appears to oppose this. There is the question cf whether the growing
industrial unrest, hitting workers harder than anyone ALetan be-avoid rd e, Cnd-t
means by which it can be avoided.
There is the question of whether the way ahead for Australia is
best assured by a continuance of private enterprise and competition or through
the direction of business by socialist dictation to which Mr. Whitlam is
pledged. 
There is the need to consider the divisions within
the Labor Party you have heard these words " divided" and " divisive".
There is need to consider the divisions in the Labor Party, particularly
in Victoria where the saga of the struggle for control of the Executive
is rapidly assuming the character of a serial like Blue Hills.
Will Gough ' eat jim? Will the TUDC still control the Party? What
of Hawke lurking in the wings? Will the meeting called bogus last
week be bogus or beneficial this week? Listen for our next
thrilling episode' It would be funny if it were not clear that what
Mr Whitlam has called a monolithic junta-ridden group is still
so significant in Victorian Labor affairs and therefore in Australian
Labor affairs. But these issues we must deal with later in the
campaign. All I ask now is that you weigh these matters very
seriously. I ask you to remember that Whitlam has talked
while we have acted, and I ask you to give us the chance to continue
to act, free from obstruction in the Senate. 



E M B A R G 0 NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
8.09 PM, WEDNESDAY 4 NOVEMBER 1970
SENATEC A M P A I G N
OPENING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. JOHN GORTOi\ N
MALVERN TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE
Wednesday 4 November 1970 
EMBARGO : NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
4 OEBR-97-
Tonight I want to talk to you about the coming Senate Campaign.
I shall report to you on our achievements in the last year.
I shall touch briefly on the further objectives we have in mind and I shall point
out the great differences between Labor and ourselves in defence, foreign
policy, and responsible non-inflationary internal government.
The result of a Senate Election does not usually affect Australia's
future. But it is possible that this election could result in Labor's gaining
a blocking half in the Senate that is 30 Senators.
If that happened, Labor would not have power to do anything
positive. But it would have the power to obstruct, frustrate, and delay all
the processes of government. It could refuse supply, or defeat a budget.
And I believe it would use that power, as it would use any power it could
gain, to damage Australia's Security, to destroy Australia's alliances, to
disrupt Australia's economy ard to affect Australia's future very greatly.
Nevertheless, important though it is, the election is not really an
occasion for us to advance a lengthy programme of new policies, or make
new specific promises. The occasion for that was one year ago, at the
General Election, when we put before you a programme, policies, and
promises for a three-year period. And you elected us.
I can report to you that in the one year since then we have carried
out most of the promises we said we would carry out over three years. I shall
not weary you with a detailed list in this short address. But we have brought
in a vastly improved health schemle. We have reduced the burden of direct
taxation in one year by the amount we promised to do in three years. We have
continued to protect and advance greater Australian ownership of our developing
resources. We have greatly increased spending on education and on new
initiatives in social services. And we have given the States a new financial
deal by greatly increasing the funds they require for their own responsibilities.
These are only a few of the year's achievements. The complete
list is much longer. For example, at the last election, we made 43
promises and already 3 1 have been carried out. I think that I can justly claim
" that which we promise, we perform". " While they talk, we act.
We have additional objectives. We shall attain them as we can
do so with financial responsibility. I shall refer to them later in this
speech. And they are important. 
But even more import. ant is the harm which Labor would do to. our
security. Let me first discuss with you the question of Vietnam. Why I think
it was right, and in our interests to go there to help. Why I think it is right
and in our interests to remain there until the Vietnamese are organised enough,
and strong enough, to defend -themselves.
May I remind you how this WE began.
For a number of years after the Geneva Accords of 1934 the people
of North Vietnam lived under their communist government and the people of
South Vietnam lived under their non-communist government. The people in
both sections lived in relative peace. That peace could have continued.
B ut the Government of North Vietnam was prepared to wage war
rather than let tI~ e people of the Souti retain the right to choose their own
Government and way of Ife. And the people of the South were prepared to
acctept war rather than have their right of self-determination taken from them
rather than have an alien government imposed on them by force.
And so the war came.
It came at first through an uprising armed and directed by the North
and then through an invasion of the South by the North Vietnamese Regular Army.
I do not ask you to accept this on my statement alone, for the present Deputy
Leader of the Labor Party, Mr. Lance Barnard, has endorsed what I say.
In May 1967 after a visit to Vietnam he. reported publicly that there was a
large-scale invasion of South Vietnam by North Vietnamese troops. " I am
satisfied", he said, " that this is more than just a guerilla war and I suppose
it can be compared with the earlier conflict in Korea".
So there was invasion. And the object of that invasion was to destroy
self-determination in South Vietnam; to take away the people' s right to
choose how and under what government they would live.
Again, I do not ask you to accept this on my statement alone. For in
his Evatt Memorial Lecture of 1966 the present Leader of the Opposition, Mr.
Whitlam, wrote:
" it is, however, quite clear that victory by the VIietcong and Hanoi
would destroy any hope of self determination in the South as it has
destroyed it in the North".
And this invasion was accompanied, as Mr. Whitlam has admitted, by
" Vietcong brutalities and cruelties in Vietnam". 3 
Don't you think it was right to help fight that aggression? Wvere we
immoral to do so as we are now told or were the invaders immoral? Should
we follow the dictates of Mr. W* hitlam's present conscience and cease to resist
invasion, the imposition of communist dictatorship, and the brutalities
perpetrated, or should we continue to resist and finish that which we began.
Well, the invasion was resisted with the help of the Americans and
of ourselves and other countries9 It t is been resisted for six years. And
in that time the strength and purpose of South Vietnam has so grown that it is
now able to take over more of its own defence; it has so grown that the
Americans and ourselves have been able to reduce our troop numbers without
endangering the objectives we sought.
It is possible for us to make this reduction because we stayed and
fought when Labor was clamouring for us to withdraw. And because we stayed
and fought it is now possible for President Nixon to offer a cease fire, an end
to the killing, and negotiations designed to allow the South Vietnamese to
ehkct their own government from the candidates of any political party including
the communist party.
Who then is immoral? We, who offer an end to killing or they who
insist on continuing the killing to achieve military conquest and who refuse a
cease fire? What does that present conscience, of which Mr. Whitlam speaks
so much, suggest we should do? To continue to resist brutal and unprovoked
invasion? To help a small nation retain the right to govern itself? Or to
withdraw all our troops now as Mr. Whitlamn presently demands.
If we did that we would betpy the people of South Vietnam. We
would negate the heavy sacrifices already made. We would be recreant to
the hopes for future universal peace because future peace can only endure if
small nations are not threatened with invasion and conquest.
We would destroy the confidence of the other small countries in
Asia, and by doing that, we would increase the possibility of future danger to
Australia itself. We look forward to the day when, with South Vietnam able to guard
its own independence without help, we can withdraw all our troops, That day is
coming nearer as the military war is being won. But ui~ til it does arrive I suggest
that morality, conscience, and self interest all require that we should finish the
task we began. But Labor under Mr. Whitlamn would renege in Vietnam. / 4 
Having done this -mand thereby increased the danger to other
Asian countries including Malaysia they would then withdraw from the Five
Power Arrangements designed to help Malaysia and Singapore and at the same
time they would drastically cut the strength of our own army by abolishing
National Service. We would be alone, with our alliances shattered, regarded as
accepting no responsibility to help mr-ntain peace in our region. And with
our own army halved.
That is what I meant by saying Labor would damage Australia's
security and destroy Australia's alliances.
And that is one reasn I ask you not to give them the chance to
do this damage.
RURAL INDUSTRIES Australia has a new problem new in scale to solve. That
problem is the plight of many of our rural industries.
Some have been hit hard by drought ( in many sections of the
Nation) particularly by the tragic drought in parts of Queensland.
This has drastic impact on many individuals but it will eventually
pass. It is not new. And we can take measures to help those who are hard
hit. In fact we have, during the past five years provided some $ 94
million for drought relief freight concessions, restocking loans, assistance
with shire rates and so on and we stand ready to support the States further
whenever the cost of approved drought relief measures is beyond their resources.
But the problem of selling our produce on world markets now and
in the future is far more serious. Many of our rural industries now find either
that the countries of the world do not wish to buy their produce, or: that they
will not pay enought for it, to provide a living to the producer.
We have had hard pressed rural industries before. But what is new
( about the present position) is that where rural industries were hard pressed
before so was every other section of industry. Now rural industries alone
are hard pressed while other industries, and other sections of the community,
are not. a 0 
This does not come about through lack of help and support by
Governments to rural industry in Australia-
* We have increased the superphosphate bounty to $ 12 per
ton: We have extended taxation concessions-
We have introduced a drought bond scheme:
We have raised exemption levels in relation to estate duty:
We introduced devaluation compensation payments following
the devaijation of steriing at the end of 1967.... and to the
3) June i97.), payments made to rural industry totalled
million: In the last Budget we provided $ 30 million for payments to
woolgrowaers whose income from wool fell by more than 8
per cent between 1968/ 69 and 1969/ 70 and who received at
least 50 -er cert of their gross income from wool.
We have increased the funds available to the Term Loan and
Farm Development Loan Fund and made arrangements for
the e xei-r-. tion of primary producers in adverse financial
circumstances from the increase in the maximum overdraft
rate approved by the Reserve Bank in March 1970.
The Government has under consideration at this moment a
proposal for a stabilisation plan for certain exports of fresh
apples and pears.
All this we have already done.
The result of the squeeze on rural industry is not a matter
of concern to those industries alone. The country towns which depend on their
prosperity are hard hit. And because those on the land are buyers of cars,
machinery, chemicals, and a maltitude of consumer goods this recession will
be increasingly felt throujih the whcoile fabric of industry ' And commerce in
Australia. Further, because the salle of rural products earns over 50% 0
of our foreign exchange a decline in earn ings will severely affect our overseas
balances. This is a national, not a sectional problem.
The solution must lie not in a withdrawal of the kind of help which is
now given. 
Rather does it lie in seeking new and different methods of assistapce.
Methods designed to ensure that the highest price which buyers are prepared to
pay is in fact paid. Methods designed to increase the efficiency of handling,
where possible, and reduce the costs of marketing.
Methods designed to help reduce the cost of production to the
individual, efficient, grower and not by means of subsidy.
An example of this approach is the Government' s action to help
wool growers to help combat the disistrous fall in wool prices.
There we have secured legislative authority to set up the Australian
Wool Commission. The function of this Commission is not to set a -high reserve price
which buyers will not pay, and which could result in huge stock piles of wool
and in manufacturers switching to synthetic fibres.
Its function is to operate a flexible reserve price, determined from
day to day, in order to ensure that if buyers are prepared to pay a certain price
they will in fact pay it and not be able to buy moire cheaply because of the
vagaries of the auction system.
Its function, too, is to regulate the flow of wool onto the market; to
encourage the adoption of technological aids to wool selling such as pre sale
objective measurement, ultimately selling by sample, and reduction in handling
costs thas ensuring the highest possible return to the grower without trying to
defy the market. My colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry has been working
energetically on this. He has already chosen, after consultation with me, the
members of the Commission. He will announce the names tomorrow.
We expect the Commission will hold its first meeting this week.
We hope and believe the Commission will be operating the flexible reserve scheme
within a few weeks.
This will help. But more is needed.
It would be a1a enormous help to many farmers and it would remove a
constant worry from their minds, if they could be assured when their
circumstances justified it of guaranteed long-term finance. If they had a loan
for a term of years, instead of short-term loans or overd~ rafts on call, they could
plan better for the future and would have a security they, now lack.
We therefore propose to discuss with the appropriate financial
institutions the setting up of a Finance Insurance Corporation to insure long-term
loans to rural producers and to act in much the same way as the Housing Finance
Insurance Corporation acts at present.
But I must emphasise that the key words in what I have said are" when
their circumstances justify it". This is not a proposal to advance long-term
credit to rural producers who may be in a hopeless financial position or who may
not be a good credit risk. / 7. 
The Bureau of Agricultur al Economics has been examining this proposal
and has reported to the Minister for Primary Industry on it. We believe that it will
work, that it will be of assistance of a new kind, and that it will be in the national
interest. There is an additional problem. That of existing farm debt. In a number
of cases a load of debt is crried which is greater than the farmer or property can bear.
This will require a programme of debt and property readjustment. I do not mean by
this that we should adopt the slogan " get big or get out" because bigness is not of
itself any guarantee of eonomy or efficiep'y.
But I do mean that the harsh realities of the world will require a policy of
" oget to a stage where you can produce at a cost that meets the market prices or
accept a lower income or leave the industry.
And if this is so then it requires that the community should help in the
retraining and rehabilitation of those -who, for one reason or another, cannot meet this
criteria, and that the Commonwealth should work with the State to bring about that
structural readjustment. just as I asked you not to give Mr. Whitlam the chance to damage our
security and alleances so I ask you not to give him the chance to wreck our national
economy. HOUR WEEK I have been speaking of the rural industries and of what has been done, and
can be done, to assist them.
But one thing is clear. With their costs already high and their returns
already fallen they wiould be dealt a crippling blow if Australia introduced a
week. Under the Whitlam-Hawke partnerslip there is a real danger that this would
happen if they had the opportunity.
And this would not only hit rural industries.
Introduction of a thirty-five hour week must mean one of two things.
Either those who now work forty hours would work only 35 and the volume
of production would therefore drop, and the cost per unit of production would therefore
rise, Or those who now work forty hours for a given wage would work 35 hours for the
siame wage and an extra five hours at overtime rates. In which case the cost per unit
of production would therefore rise.
in either case the end result must be greatly increased costs. This would
hit all those on fixed incomes; all on superannuation, all living on the income from
investments, all pensioners.
It would raise the price of everything the housawife buys, and the
transport and other public facilities she uses. 
It would place Australia at great disadvantage in trying to sell our products
on the competitive export market. It would raise the cost of building schools, hospitals,
roads, houses, and the other services the community needs.
It * would damage overseas confidence in Australia's future and impede the
inflow of capital to helpa in our needed development. And even though this damage
would have been done th worker himself would be no better off.
The most he could gain would he higher money wages which because of the
higher prices for everything he bought would not be higher real wages and would buy
no more. It Is hard to think of any action whicliwould more damage Australia and
Australians. Yet Mr. Hawke of the A. C. T. U. has announced that 1971 will be the year
of the ' 5 hour week. That is his stated aim. And Mr. Whitlam is bound, by the
platform constitution and rules of the Labor Party to do all he can to help Mr. Hawke.
For the platform, constitution and rules as adopted in August last year state " That
conference considers that an effective political campaign be undertaken, in conjunction
with the A. C. T. U. to achieve our objective of a 35 hour week.
Typically, Mr. Whitlam is now evading all questions on the marter. But
he is bound to support Mr. Hawke by " an effective political campaign". I belileve that
if he had the opportunity he would.
He could do so by permitting statutory bodies over whom the C3overnment
had control to take the lead in introducing the shorter week. He could do so by exerting
political pressure on those who determine the hours orl public servants.
Above all he could do so, should a case be put to the Arbitration Court,
by intervening and urging the Court to do what he is bound to do.
Well, we will not. We will use all means open to us to point out tile
disastrous consequences of such a step.
Whether or not the question is pending before the Arbitration Commission
we shall publicly point out the economic consequen ces of the proposal. We shall
publicly urge that it ought not to be entertained.
Mr. Whitlam and Mr. Hawke think it terri: ble that we should do this. I
reply by paraphrasing the words of Mr. Trudeau " Nf your hearts want to bleed over
this, go ahead and bleed. It is better that you should than that the country should
bleed economically because of you.
It is true that because of automation and the use of new machinery the
same amount can be produced with fewer men, or in a shorter time by the same number
of men. But surely this does not mean we should seek to work less for the same
amount of production. 
Surely what we need is greater and greater production from the same
number of men, made possible by increased automation, so that real wages can be
increased and so that the needs of the community the public works and services of
all kinds which depend on production can be the more quickly and the more ch~ eaply
supplied to the community.
The time for less work has not yet nearly arrived.
Both the individual and the community have too many pressing needo. and
these needs cannot be met unless they ar--worked for.
That, at any rate, is our approach. And that is a point of difference
between us and the Opposition which I ask you to consider at this Election.
SOCIAL WELFARE AND EDUCATION
Let me now speak of that field in which my Government has done much.
The field of Social Welfare and of education. There are two promises,
made at the General Election last year, which have not yet been fulfilled. I
make no apology for this because no one could expect mie to carry out all of a three
year programme in one year.
Those promises were
To pay special attention to the needs of the low Income family with
young children.
To tackle the problem posed because many. people after paying health
insu~ ance contributions f3r many years, find that they are obliged to spend
long periods under intensive care in nursing homes as distinct from hospitals,
and do not receive hospital benefits.
I renew those promises and reiterate that as promised we shall act on these matters
during tIe life of the Parliament.
The Minister for Health has been discussing with the Funds the question
of long illness in nursing homes. And the Minister for Social Services has been
studying the varying means by which our promise on the needs of the low income family
can best be carried out.
In the field of education direct Commonwealth Government spending has
increased from $ 192 million in 1968--69 to $ 312 million this year. And by providing
a new financial deal for the States we have indirectly assisted the States to raise
their spending on education to an expected one billion, three hundred and eleven
million dollars this year or almost 15% more than 1969-70. 
9a,,
I now announce a new objective to which wie give very high priority. That
is, the establishment of child care centres for children of pre-school age,.
In Australia, as in other advanced countries overseas, married women
including those with children of pre-school age are entering regular em ployment in
increasing numbers. Thus, in the decade 1960-1970 the number of married women
in the work force almost doubled from 9. to 18. 3% 7.
We wish to ensure that the children of there women have every opp) ortunity
for the fullest development in both the et.. otional and physical sense. Studies made
by the Department of Labour and National Service show that existing facilities to
ensure this are woefully inadequate.
We therefore announce as an objective our desire to introduce a Scheme
to assist in the establishment and operation of child care centres of approved standard.
In consultation with the organisations at present concerned with such child care
that is the State, Municipal and voluntary bodies which now maintain such facilities,
we hcoe to work out guidelines and standards covering the nature of the accommiodation,
the equipment required, the staffing required, and the training requirements oZ staff
needed for the effective conduct of these centres.
Further, wie will discuss with employers the most effective means of
providing incentives to employers to induce them to provide child care facilities.
Overseas experience has demonstrated the value of the participation of-employers
in such schemes. In the discussionswe propose with State and Municipal and volunuary
organi sat ions we will be helped by the liaison already established by the Women's
Bureau of the Department of Labour and National Service with many ofL the
organisations to whom we shall be speaking.
A programme of this kind cannot be put into operation overnight but we
shall begin it, and shall discuss with the States methods of increasing the numbers
of pre-school teachers to staff the centres.
This does not mean that we believe the need for pre-school teachfing
centres generally is not important. But it does mean that we think the proviston
of pre-school centres for children of working or sick: mothers should be the
first steps we take in this area. 
OFFICE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
There is a mounting, and justified, concern in Australia at the risks
of environmental pollution.
Such pollution is not the inevitable by-product of advanced technology
and popuiation increase, but it does represent a failure to take fully into
account the environmental consequences of our actions, and of the disposal of
waste products by individuals and factories.
The results in Australia are not yet approaching the catastrophic
results which are threatening to occur in the more heavily industrialised and
more heavily populated countries.
But the time to begin to correct present pollution and to prevent
increasing pollution is now.
The State Governments are showing an awareness of this and the CSIRO
has Leen carrying out a wide range of investigations into environmental quality.
It has indeed been engaged in some 48 projects concerned with such matters as
studying biological control of insect pests as distinct from insecticide control
methods of treatment of factory effluent, control of the ash content of coal.
But in many cases pollution can best be tackled by a National Body
since, for instance, pollution of a stream in one State can lead to pollution of e
river in another State.
WNe therefore have taken the decision to set up a Commonwealth Office
of the Environment under the control of the Prime Minister' s Department.
This Office will be responsible for advising the Commonwealth and
recommending to us action that should be taken to prevent or reduce pollution
arising out of the activities of any Commonwealth Department or Authority.
We shall also approach the States to seek the formation of a National
Advisory Council to advise the Commonwealth, and the States, on action
to be taken in areas where co-ordination can properly be achieved.
LABOR AND WHITLAM
You will no doubt have noticed Mr. Whitlam' s a ccusations that we
are divided and divisive.
Divisive, one of his favourite words, seems to mean refusing to do
what he wants. But I am surprised he would even use the word " divided". 
11.
For we have against us a Labor Party openly divided as it has not been
since 1954. The Victorian organisation is in a state of cnaos, more concerned
with internai squabbling than with anything else.
A meeting to protest against Federal Labor intervention recently
att racted twice as many people as Mr. Whitlain attracted to the opening of
his campaign. This Vict orian meeting was tu be declared bogus one week and
given Federal Labor Party blessing the next.
The group of extreme left wing unions which has for years ruled the
Labor Executive the Trades Union Defence Committee and those
characterised by Mr. Whitlam as a monolithic, junta-ridden, and undemocratic
group have not been defeated.
The struggle still goes on and the odds are that Mr. Calwell' s
pro~ hesy that nothing will change will be proved right.
They are in dissaray so complete, and so publicly evident, that one
would imagine that the word division was the last word their so-called
Leader would use.
As to their Leader I propose to leave snide personal attacks to him.
It suits him. After all who can forget the sophisticated wit and generosity
of spirit he displayed, when, on Mr. McEwen' s last day in Parliament, after
a recorc' career of real achievement for the Nation, Mr. Whitiam' s
contribution was to call out " let the lame duck waddle off".
But I bel ieve it fair to say this. Mr. idhiclam has begun his campaign
with a string of false statements.
Hie stated in his opening speech that we had placed unprecedented
reliance on indirect taxation. This is false.
He said we had a 5% O cost of living increase last year. This is
false. He said the Treasurer had " admitted" this. This is false.
He said our approach to the care of the sick aged is discriminatory
and unplanned. This is false.
He said that Labor had proposed to recognise the National Liberation
Front as a party to negotiations and that this had been accepted. This is false. 
Labor proposed the N. L. F. snould be recognised as a Principal
party to negotiations, this has not been done, and the N. L. F. are regarded
only as part of the Hanoi delegation.
He has since accused me of breaking a promise to legislate for
portability of pensions this is false. The legislation has been introduced
into the House. He has accused me of doing nothing to implement the
construction of railways in South Aus~ ralia. He states no money has been
provided for this in the 197J/ 71 Budget. This is false. The Port Pirie!
Adel aide Railway is held up, at the request of the Premier of South
Australia, who has asked for further discussions. But the Budget contains
an Appropriat ion of $ 3 million for the Port Augusta/ Whyalla Railway. It
is contained in Appropriation Act No. 2, Division No. 890/ 2/ 05. At the
moment tenders have been called, received, and are being considered.
I have not dealt with all his false statements. It would be
w , arying to do so.
But the credibility of the man, and of his campaign, might
perhaps be judged by these tactics. Genuine grounds for criticism must
be scarce if he is driven to invent them.
One thing more I gould say.
Mr. Whitlam accuses us of judging the Australian people to be
selfish. Yet it is we who ask the Australian people to accept that
there should be an obligation for National Service.
It is he who urges the easier course of abolishing it.
It is we who ask the Australian people to accept the burden
of completing the task in Vietnam.
It is he who urges the easier way of immediate withdrawal.
It is we who ask the Australian people to accept the need to
join with Britain, Malaysia, Singapore and New Zealand in a pact to help
bring stability to our North. 
14
It is he who urges the easier way of retreating to isolation.
It is we who place the defeat of inflation, and responsible
management of the economy, amongst our highest objectives.
It is he who pursues the popular path of promising to do everything
that anyone wants at once. Regardless of whether there are the men and
materials to keep the promises, regardless of the effect on prices.
Who is judging the Australian people to be indolent, and selfish?
I suggest that we are not and that he is.
Which does not seem a proper course for this self appointed
custodian of the national conscience to follow.
CONCLUSION I have shown some of the differences between us and our opponents.
In Defence and Foreign Affairs and concern for the future security
of Australia we are poles apart.
Domestically we are pledged to fight inflation and rising prices.
Every utterance they makE-whether political or industrial supports action which
will inflate prices. We know the importance of rural industry to the economy and of the
personal suffering which many engaged in some rural industries now face.
Labor's leader devoted two lines of his opening address to this subject and,
so far as I know, he has not spoken of it since.
We are pledged to preserve the right of dissent, except when that
interferes with the civil rights of the majority, which we shall protect. A
leading spokesman for Labor has stated that authority has had its day.
I believe that if these differences are understood you will give us
the right to govern this nation in rhe years ahead as those of our persuasion
have done in the years past. That is the right to govern in such a way that
Our security against attack will be advanced, our
internal economny will continue to provide full
employment and rising living standards.
The war against poverty will be pursued until it is finally
won.
The industrial and commercial strength of our nation
will continue to grow.
Within a broad framework of governmental guidelines
decisions will be left to individuals and not dictated
by politicians and public servants. 
15
We believe that in this decade Australia can make great
advances towards freedom from fear:
Freedom from fear of aggression from without.
Freedom from fear of being old, unwanted and
uncared for.
Freedom from fear of unemployment.
Freedom from fear of being unable to meet the
cost of illness.
We will not gain all we want at once. Nor will we gain it
without working for it. But we have advanced towards the goal and given
effort by Australians, and responsibility by Governments, we will advance
still further. We ask you now to let us take further steps towards this goal
unimpeded by obstruction from a Labor Senate. We ask you give us
Government Senators and let us get on with the job. 



FOR PRESS: PM No 108 1970
DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Executive Council approval was given to-day
to change the name of the Department of External Affairs
to the Department of Foreign Affairs. The Governor-General
administered a new Oath of Office and issued a new commission
to the Right Honourable William McMahon, M. P. as Minister
of State for Foreign Affairs.
CANBERRA 6 November 1970 



7. 15 PM. MONDAY 9 NOVEMBER 1970
SENATE TV AND CAMPAIGN 1970
RADIO TALK NO. 1 BY THE PRIME MIIISTER
MR_. O HN GORTON
( To be broadcast on ABC Radio 7. 15 pm E. S. T. Monday 9 November
and TV 8.30 pm local time Tuesday 10 November).
G 0
TV AND
E M A 
Tonight I want to talk with you on the relative merits of our Health Scheme
and the scheme with which you are threatened by Mr. Whitlam.
For with a Certain sullen obstinacy, Mr. Whitlam is still threatening to
introduce his scheme if he can. Thbis could hurt every hIousehold in Ausotralia and
the facts about it should be known.
Further, an examination of the statements made to justify his scheme provides
a test of his credibility.
Now his first intention is to take away from you your freedom to choose which
fund you want to join. All the existing friendly societies and other closed fujids, as
well as all the open funds, would be abolished under his scheme You wiould be
compelled to deal with the single, monopolistic fund which would be the 2py fund he
would allow to operate.
He justifies this by an incorrect statement. That statement is that " the
existii. g funds squander or retain $ 1 out of every $ 4 they receive in contribut ions."
Now the independent Nimmo Committee found no support at all for the claim
that a number of different funds adds to the cost of the Health Scheme. Indeed, it
recommended that the friendly societies and closed funds should be encouraged. to
continue. And it published tables showing the cost of management of closed funds
to be, on the average, 6 cents in the dollar, not 25 cents in the dollar as-Whitlam
claims. And it showed tables showing the cost of management of open funds to be
on the average 12 * cents in the dollar not 25 cents in the dollar as Whitlam claims.
So Mr. Whitlam-s statement Is quite untrLra and you lose your freedom Of
choice for nothing.
His second intention is to make most of us pay more in contributions than we
now pay. At present tax deductible contributions . paid by an unmarried person,
insuring for medical benefits and public hospital ward treatment vary from State to
State. But in every case, in every State, Mr. Wh-itlam's threatened levy of 1-1 per cent
of an unmarried person's taxable income would cost that person more in every
case in every State.
At present the contributions paid by a married man also vary as between
States. But in this case the Labor Scheme would cost him less until his income
reached about 000. But this would only be true if his wife were not earning or in
receipt of income. For if she were she would also have to contribute 1' per cent
of her taxable income and the combined contributions would most likely cost the famili.
more., e 9 / 2 
To sum up. Mr. Whitlam's Scheme
Would cost every unmarried person in Australia earning $ 50 a week and over
more It would cost every married man in Queensland more
It would cost all married men in other States more if their income exceeded
about 000.
Ik would cost many married men in other States with incomes less than
000 more if their wives were &amp;. so receiving income.
This is described by Mr. Whitlam as a scheme which costs the citizens of Australia
less. The third intention is to alter the benefits now payable. For small payments
for V" 3itS to a general practitioner the Labor Scheme would give the contributor a
few cents more. But for minor operations it would reduce the benefits now payable
to a patient and for major operations it would reduce them very greatly.
Mr. Whitlam calls this increasing benefits.
Well, think of this and think of the credibility of the statements that have
been made to justify a scheme which in practice would cost you more and in
most cases provide you with less. 


FOR PRESS: PM No. 109/ 1970DEATH CF GENERAL DE GAULLEComment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonPresident de Gaulle was one of the outstanding figures ofcontemporary history.When his country was overrun he refused to surrender andcontinued the fight from abroad. At first he was almost alone, butFrenchmen rallied to him and wearing the Cross of Lorraine he madett. Free French Forces a factor in the fight against Nazism.After the War he played a leading role in France and inpost-war Europe, always dominated by almost mystical devotion toFrance. His physical and moral courage, his devotion to an ideal,his embodiment at times of the spirit of a nation marked him as agreat man. We extend our sympathy to France at his death. and wewill all feel a little the poorer.CANBERRA 11 November 1970



12 NOVEMBER, 1970
SENA T E C A M P AI G N 1970
TV AND RADIO TALK NO. 2 BY THE PRIME MIiISTER
MR. LOHN GORTON
( To be broadcast by ABC and commercial TV channels at 8. 30 p. m.
local time on Thursday 12 November and by the ABC Radio Network
at 7. 15 p. m. E. S. T. Friday 13 November.)
EMM B A R G 0 8. 30 PM. THURSPAY 
When I becamne Prime Minister a little less than three years ago, I spoke of
my wish to help the old and the ill and the handicapped. Now it is undoubtedly true
that a great deal remains to be done in this field, a very great deal. Bu* It it Is also
true much has been done.
We have done a number of things, and if you will bear with me ! or a moment,
I will outline some of them.
We have removed the fear of the cost of long illness in hospitals. Our Health
Scheme has removed the fear of the cost of expensive operations, or expensive
specialist attention.
It is a scheme, moreover, which provides that the community will pay insurance
for low-income families, and it is a scheme under which the contributor pays, in
general, less, and receives, in general, more, than was offered under Labor's
scheme. We have brought in the Tapered Means Test, under which pensioners who can
earn, or who have saved, can receive some of the benefit of their self-help
without losing their pension entirely.
We have brought in a Home Care Programme for the care of aged persons, or
others with special needs, in their own homes.
We are providing $ 5 million a year to the States to build low rental housing
for pensioners. We are providing capital for buildings and equipment for homes for
handicapped children.
We have raised pensions for TPI repatriation pensioners by $ 8 a week, or
more than 25 per cent.
And we have increased the base rate of penisions by $ 2.50 a week for a single
pensioner and $ 4 a week for married pensioners, during a period when the Cost
of Living Index shows a rise of $ 1 a week.
In fact we have raised benefits, or taken entirely new initiatives in more than
different areas of social welfare.
As a result, social welfare now makes up the second greatest item in our
Budget, and will cost this year 800 million, which is a 25 per cent increase on
the Budget of two years ago.
But we still must overcome the problem of long-term illness in nursing homes
as distinct from hospitals. We still must redeem our promise to help low-income
earners with young families. We need to initiate a scheme for pre-school care for
the children of working mothers. And we must continue to improve the lot of the
base rate pensioner, but without losing sight of the needs of other area-" of social
welfare. / 2 
2.
We will do these things as soon as they can be done with financial responsibility.
I have not changed the aim I had when I became Prime M. nister, and I believe
that what we have done in a short time is evidence that we shall continue with the
task. Australia must and will win the war on poverty. We shall not win it in one
battle or in one year. It must be fought on many fronts. It will take time and it
will take effort from all Australians, for after all, it is only from the production of
Australians that Governments can divert resources to these ends. But my
Government is determined we shall win it, and I believe I can claim that the record
shows we have advanced.
Indeed, in this as in other fields, I think that I can truly say to you what we
promise we perform.
Goodnight. 



E M B A R GO NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
7.15 PM, WEDNESDAY 18 NOVEMBER 1970
SENATE CAMPAIGN
SUMMING UP BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. JOHN GORTON 
EMIBARGO: 7. 15 pm, Wednesday 18 November, 1270.
The Senate Election is nearing its end. And it is time to sum up the
matters at issue. The results of the election will not change the Government, But
it is, not like an ordinary by-election. For if Labor were to wvin they could frustrate
the Government's programme, delay legislation inordinately, and even refuse supply.
That is why it is just as important to vote for the Government at this
election as it would be to vote for it at a general election. The election itself has
not been an occasion for new policies or new specific promises. For as I said to
you fourteen days ago, when the Campaign opened, the occasion for that was at the
general election last year.
Rather has this election given to Australians the opportunity to consider
the great differences between the Government and the Opposition on matters which
affect Australia's future. Those matters ar-defence, th e makitenance of our
alliances, the management of our economy, and the future of our rural industries.
The differences between us in these fields have become even more
marker' as the Campaign has progressed. For the Opposition would withdraw from
Vietnam regardless of whether or not the South Vietnamese had sufficiently built up
their strength to defend themselves. They would quit as we are in sight of our goal.
We will not. They would withdraw from the Five Power Agreement with Britain, New
Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore. We will not. They would reduce the fighting strength
of our Army by a half by abolishing national service. We will riot. They would
damage the AINFUS Treaty by refusing to have joint Australian/ U. S. Defence bases
in Australia. We will preserve and strengthen the Treaty for the sake of our owin
security. They would seek to bring in a 35-hour week. We will not. Our concern
is to raise real wages and living standards, and to get production from which the
requirements of the public in schools and hospitals can be met.
They have no policy to assist rural industry. We have. And we have
spelt it out. There has been some attempt, during the Campaign to put pressure on
me to give specific promises on pension rises. I think it would be wrong to do that
in the course of an election campaign.
Elections are not auctions. / 2 
And I have not once commented-on-the mater of -whether or not pensions
Will be raised in the near future. But I think I can fairly claimi this.... our record
in improving social welfare is better than that-of any other Government over a
comparable time. On that record I believe it fair to ask you to conclude that
improvement in social welfare is important to us and improving it is a course we
will pursue in the future, as and when we can responsibly do so.
Besides the diff erences in policy there is another difference between us
and the Opposition. I have tried, in the course of the campaign, to state clearly
and unequivocally our policies on defence and internal economic management.
I believe Australians are entitled to unambiguous statements of policy
from both the Government and the Opposition. That is surely essential to the
proper working of a democratic system. But Mr. Whitlam will not adopt this
course. He has evaded, and refused to answer direct questions on matters of great
moment to Australia's future.
He has refused to answer questions as to whether he favours a 35 hour
week and on whether he will conduct a political campaign, in conjunction with
Mr. Hawke to bring it about. The honest answer he could give to that would be to
admit that he was bound to conduct such a campaign and that he would do so.
But he evaded giving that answer.
He has refused to admit that he would withdraw from the Five Power
Agreement and Agreement entered into for the defence and sta,-bility of our near
north. When questioned recently he evaded the issue and talked instead about the
value of having Indonesia as our defence umbrella. And a bulwark against
Communist China.
Again an honest answer he could have giver, would be that he would
withdraw from this Agreement, because Labor's policy would force him tq. But
he avoided giving the direct answer.
He began this campaign with a number of false statements. I publicly
branded them as false. He has not tried to sustain them. Since the opening he has
made additional false statements. For instance one was that we had provided no
money in the Budget for railways in South Australia.
He began to post late in the campaign as a champion of higher
pensions. And we were at once told by Mr. Griffiths, a Labor Party Member -that
when he, Mr. Griffiths, sought a programme of higher pensions in caucus, Mr. Whitla
rebuked him and said Mr. Griffiths was trying to featherbed the pensioners.
All these matters, taken together, must surely raise some doubts as
to our opponent's credibility and as to his readiness to deal openly with the
Australian people. // 3 
31.
1 believe this, too, should be carefully weighed by electors.
I was asked, at one stage in the Campaign, to tell Australians what I am
for. And I am glad to do so. I am for an Australia which keeps its alliances, and which
helps to maintain stability in its region, an Australia which is not left friendless and
isolated. I am for an Australia which will provide adequate defence for itself. I
am for an Australia which will develop its resources and retain the greatest -possible
Australian owinership of those resources while it does so.
I am for an Australia whose citizens will seek more production, reder
than more leisure, so that prices can be kept down, real wages can rise and the
public facilities required by Australia, including adequate social welfare can be
provided. I am for an Au~ stralia which will continue the war on poverty, and seek
to relieve the neglect and loneliness which some old people who may not be poor,
may row feel. I am for an Australia where ordinary citizens can exercise their
civil rights to use the streets and other public facilities without having those rights
denied them by a minority. I am for an Australia where the performing arts are
encouraged to develop.
And in this and other fields my government has acted to achieve the goals
for which we stand. But I am against a political Party which would destroy our
alliances and our own defence. I am against a Party which seeks leisure rather
than production. I am against a Party whose Leader must follow policies
dictated by an outside body which has never faced the electors.
I am against a Party which is so deeply influenced by communist elements
as is our opponent. I am against a Party which mocks at the maintenance of law and
order, whose Leader advises young servicemen to refuse to obey a legitimate military
order. I am against a Party whose every utterance ignores the danger of inflation,
and urges courses which must create inflation. I distrust a Party as openly and
deeply divided as is the Labor Party today.
We have policies before you we believe in We think that no nation1-which
puts ease before effort can be great. We think no people which talks only of its rights
and not of the duties and the responsibilities that go with rights will ever be secure,
and we do not think Australians are this kind of people. And so at this crucial
election we asIk you to, give us Government Senators and let us get on with the job. 



EMBARGO: 9.30 PM, WEDNESDAY 18 NOVEMBER 09r
TELEVISION INTERVIEW GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. JOH GOTONON BTQ 7, BR ISBA NE
Recorded on 13 November for replayonWded~ 8Nv~ r17
Chairman Reg Leonard
Panel John Wakefield
Alan Underwood.
Good evening to you. In a few days we will be voting in the Senate Election.
In this the last of four interviews with Commonwealth Party Leaders, it is my privilege
to introduce the Right Honourable the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton. Good evening
to you, Sir. Now, the Prime Minister obviously has a very wide field to cover, and I
suggest we might start off with defence with the first questio'nfrom John Wakefield.
Q. Mr. Gorton, you contend strongly that our presence in Vietnam is essential.
Why then isn't the Eighth Battalion being replaced, and can you explain, please,
your chanige of policy or, replacements?
PM Yes, I contend that our presence in Vietnam is escential and thatai
American presence in Vietnam is essential until such time as the South
Vietnamese will be strong enough to be able to look after themselves. Before
the last general election, I stated that should the situation reach the position
where significant withdrawals of American troops could take place, the'n I would
expect to see that some Australian troops were phased into that withdrawal.
Well, there were significant American withdrawals, and because what wie
promise we perform, Australian troops were phased into that withdrawal.
Q. DoeS this mean, Mr. Gorton, that we are now approaching some ai the
goals vie sought when we first went into Vietnam?
PM I think we are much closer to the goals. The goals we sought were a
situation where South Vietnam could defend itself and its people could decide
what kind of a government they wanted to elect. I thinkc that we, as a result
of building up the Vietnamese Forces, as a result of building up Vietnamese
morale, I believe, on all the information t hat I have that we are closer to
these goals.
Q. Senator Gair said on this programme about ten days ago that we should
bomb Hanoi you may have read that. Now do you agree with Senator Gair
on that or, alternatively, do you think it makes sense for us to allow the
enemy ships to come in there, into the ports down along North Vietnam, twelve
of them a day sometimes, to bring in all these war goods? 
PM Well, we wouldn't be bombing Hanoi, of course. It would be the United
States who bombed Hanoi if anybody bombed Hanoi, and I have no doubt at all
that the United States is -not considering carrying out any bombing raids on
Hanoi. Now you asked me a second part of that question, and I think in the
narrow military sense, it probably doesn't make sense not to flatten your
enemy altogether, but in a broader sense, looking at the possibilities of what
might occur if that escalation took place, then I think that it does make
perhaps overall sense.
Q. Sir, the North Vietnamese or the Vietcong have had no hesitation wihatever
about pummelling Saigon.
PM No.
Q. You don't believe ' in reprisals?
PM Well, I wouldn't want to go-that far. I do believe in doing what one can in
those circumstances, provided and this is after all, a judgment for the
United. States to make who will eventually have to bear the great burden, of
this that kind of retaliation doesn't lead to an escalation which leads to a
really great conflagration.
Q. Prime Minister, a couple of seconds ago you mentioned that one pos. sible
course in the war in Vietnam was to flatten the e-nemy. Well, if you don'tdo
that, can you see any early end to the war, and how will it come about will
it be by military means or by negotiation?
PM Well, I am not able to put an answer to your question about an early end,
or any particular time scl
Q. Well President Nixon says 1972. He doesn't say why.
Pm. Well I am not saying why, either nor commenting on President Nixon.
I am just saying I am not prepared
Q. You are not even saying 1972 now?..
PM I am just saying I can not put a time scale on with any confidence. But you
asked me how it would end. Ncw the basic fact that will bring it to an end will be
military victory. You will find Mr. Whitlam and Mr. Barnard and their
supporters wandering around this country saying there can't be a military
victory fcor either side. But you don't find the NLF or the people from North
Vietnam saying that because they know a military victory will eventually
decide this matter. I don't mean that it alone will decide it, but out of the
military success will grow either negotiations, which I think is possibly less
likely, or just a dribbling away of the war and a cessation of it in the way
we sawin the Malayan Emergency. 
Q. just so all Australians will be clear, Mr. Gorton, you think suff icient
pressure is now being exerted by the Allies to win a military victory in
Vietnam?
PM I think the military situation is improving and that as pressure is kept on
in the way it is, there is a real opportunity that the South Vietnamese willi be
able to continue to build up their forces so that they can deny military
success to the enemy.
Q. Do you subscribe to the contention of some of Mr. Vlhitlam's critics as
you know he has advised young National Servicemen who oppose the war in
Vietnam not to serve there. They claim this is treaso: L. Would you go that far(
PM I can--' t give you a legal opinion on whether it is legally treasonable or not.
I am not a lawyer so I can't answer that. But I think it is thoroughly
reprehensible and extremely irrespo, sible advice for a man who aspires to
be Prime Minister to give. You can't confine this to saying to people " Don't
serve in Vietnam if you don't like it. You have got to say " Don't serve
anywhere where you feel that you don't like it. And what is more, that would,
of course, make it almost impossible to run our military forces. What's
mnore it is absolutely rotten advice because it puts a chap in a situation where
he can disobey an order, get a dishonourable discharge, get punished, and the
reasonable advice is to say " Join the CM1F if you don't want to go somewhere."
Q. During this campaign, Mr. Gorton, Mr. Whitlam has referred many
times, and particularly on this programme, to the role which he would lik.-e
Indonesia to play in Australia's defence. Now, quite frankly, I can't
understand it. Can you?
PM Nor really, because I am not sure whether he wants it as a bulwark of an
umbrella. As I read what he said, he said Indonesia would be a bulwark against
Communist China. the best bulwark there was. I supo. pose against Communist
China attacking down this way. Then he said Indonesia would be a bulwark for
Communist China presumably to protect Communist China against attack
from Hong Kong or somewhere: And in the intervals, it was going to be an
umbrella for us. So I an-i not quite clear just what role he has cast the Indonesians
for. But may I add this. It is a strange role because just last year, I think it
was, the Victorian Labor Party came out with an article violently attackNing
the Indoriesians and the present Indonesian Governmeuit, and saying anythipg
Australians can do to get rid of this violent and reactionrary government
ought to be done. Now that is a strange way to win friends and influence
umbrellas.
Q. What do you think, Primr Minister, might be the reaction of Indonesi-ans
that they shculd be the bulwark in other words the ham in the sandwich?
Pm Well if they notice at all what Mr. Whitlam says, I think they would treat
it with the regard due to what he says. 
Q. Mr. Gorton are you worried about reports that the Russians, if they do not
control the situation in the Indian Ocean, are very well on the way to controlling
it.
PM I don't think any Australian, or anyone else in this part of the world can
regard with equanimity the increase In Russian strength in the Indonesian
Ocean, and I think that our attention must be more directed towards that area.
That is why Learmonth has been built, that is why the naval base is being built
in the West.
Q. Well, it has been very freely stated and I don't think it has been denied
that our arrnagements with the Americans regarding W~ oomera and Pine Creek'
at Alice Springs, is that we give them ground facility -for the receptio , n of
photographs which are taken by satellites which show possibly military installations
in Aisa, ir-luding China and Russia, 1"' hich are relayed back to America. Now
for that privilege, what do we get in return from the Americans?
PM Well, can I first make it clear that I am not agreeing with your statement
of what function these bases carry out. I have no right to say what they carry
uut, other than to say that they are entirely defensive and have no off ensive
capacity at all. They are joint bases. They are built according to Article 2
of the AN'ZUS Treaty which provides for this kind of mutual help. Did you say
did we have a cast-iron guarantee that the Americans would.
Q. For that privilege, what do we get in return?
PM Well this is done really under the terms of the AN'ZUS Treaty, and I thinl.
Australia gets a great deal as a result of the ANZUS Treaty. Let us put it
another way. If we didn't have the ANZUS Treaty, or if we had it and didn't
adhere to it and ignored it, then I think we would be in. a much worse situation
than we are having the ANZUS Treaty and adhering to it.
Q. Have you, or have we Australians any firm assurance that the Americans
will stand by us if we are in trouble?
PM We have got the provisions of the ANZUS Treaty which I suppose, legally,
since it provides in the case of attack for the two Governments to consult, could
be held out to be not a legally binding contract. But insofar as treaties between
two countries can go, this treaty goes. And, again, if we didn't have it, we
would really be in an infinitely worse situation; and damaging it, as I believe
the Labor Party would, is to damage Australia.
Q. Sir, I will invite you now to transfer your thoughts to some of the local
problems domestic problems.
Q. Prime Minister, you have condemned the 35-hour week proposal. What thein
must happen in our economy before it could become feasible? 0 
PM I think we should be producing sufficient to ensure that from that production
we are able to provide the materials for the schools and the hospitals and the
water supplies and the other public facilities that are required, and providing
enough so that the real wages could rise. We don't want to reach a situation
where we are producing the same amount as we are now with fewer people or
with a shorter week. Surely Australia wants more and more production to be
channelled into all these fields.
Q. Do you think that production at this present level is inadequate?
PM Well, it is inadequate to meet our needs as quickly as we would like to
meet them.
Q. Mr. V htilam when he was on this programme, seemed unusually embarrassed
when we started to talk about Mr. Hawke's 35-hour week. Now, Sir, do you
personally believe that the political wing of the ALP would support a
week?
PM Well, not let us leave my personal beliefs out of it. I would like to read
you an extract from a letter Dr. Cairns wrote in 1968
" At a special conference of the Party, Mr. Whitlam did two things.
He apologised to the Federal Executive for his public attack on it and
said ' I now undertake to work within the framework of the Party and
to accept the decision of its properly-constituted authorities.
So he has accepted that binding. And the last Conference of the Labor Party, held
in August last year, said
" Conference considers that an effective political campaign be
undertaken in conjunction with the ACTU to achieve our objective
of a 35-hour week.
So leave my personal opinion out of it. He has promised to do what this says
he has got to do.
Q. Mr. Hawke challenged you to a debate on the 35-hour week. Why don't
you accept it?
PM I don't think he challenged me to a debate. I think he dobbed Mr. Whitlam
in, really, although Mr. Whitlam later said he knew about it. He say, " Yes,
yes, yes" when he answered that question on the grounds that " what I tell you
three times is true". But I think Mr. Hawke actually said he would like
Mr. Vlhitlam and himself to debate with myself and xr. Snedden. I am not
going to provide a forum for either Mr. Hawke or Mr. Whitlam. But
Mr. Snedden said he would be glad to debate it with Mr. Whitlam. We haven't
heard from Mr. Whitlam since because the last debate he has was on his call
for mutiny with Mr. Malcolm Fraser and he got done like a dinner' / 6 
Q. Isn't it a singularly futile exercise to get up and spout
PM I'm quite sure it is interruping each other. There is a certain amount of
debate about the 35-hour week going on right now out in the hustings.
Q. Mr. Gorton, in this programme last week, Mr. Whitlam emphasised again
that he could abolish the means test within six years, or in six years, arnd the
cost would be peanuts. Those were his words. What do you feel about that?
PM Well, I think it a typical Whitlam statement. If you regard $ 300 million
as peanuts, then I suppose fair enough, it's peanuts. But it would, ever. on
his ownr figures, cost $ 300 million to abolish the means test, and that only if
the pension didn't move up in the meantime. Now you could do an awful lot
with that money for people wvho have got nothing but the pension.
Q. We all appreciate, Prime Minister, that questions o. n, pensions are generally
associated with the House of Representatives election. But there has been so
much talk about it. Can, you elaborate at all?
PM I don't think even in a House of Representatives election, in my experience,
people have really gone around saying " I propose to raise the pension by this
much or that much or anything else. I haven't heard it there. All I can say
on this field is that I believe, and I think the figures show it, that in all1 fields
of social welfare, including the base pension, we hav2-done more than any other
government has done in a comparable time. And I am determined to go onl
doing it.
Q. Wh-at the pensioner wants to hear tonight, in view of sharply-rising costs, is
some hint that he is going to get relief.
PM. Yes, but I have said all along that I think it quite wrong to give indications
of any kind inthe course of an election campaign. It wouldn't be right.
Q. A Se;:.. iate election campaign, you mean?
PM Well, really
Q. They could be given in a House of Representatives campaign
PM Well, possibly. But after all, the Budget came in just a little while ago.
Q. just talking about inflation, Mr. Gorton. We have asked Senator Gair and
Mr. Whitlamn and Mr. M/ cEwen just exactly what they propose to do about
inflation. Not one of them seemed to have the answer to it. Now, have you?
/ 7 
PM I have got a partial answer to it and a suggestion. The partial answer is that
we should continue Budgets as we are budgeting, which provide for a very large
domestic surplus in order to be a weapon against inflation, and that we should, as
we have done, lower the expenditure on new expenditure for the Commonawealthi.
We have given the Stater, more this year but our expenditures on new things has
only risen by $ 70 million, I think, in the Budget as agaiinst $ 130 million last
year. But over and above that, I have got a suggestion, and that is that if the
Arbitration Court would bring down its decisions having regard to the rise in
productivity, that would be one of the greatest blows that could be struck against
inflation.
Q. Nowi, let's get that one. That is a statement of momentous importance. Ann
I right, Sir, in saying, that you think the Arbitration Court should mould its
decisions in the light of the level of productivity at the time it makes its awards?
PM I believe it should take into accoL'-it when it is making decisions or awards
of one kind or another the level of productivity, the increase in productivity, arid
the effect on the economy of the country.
Q. Prime Minister, do you feel this isn't being done now by the Commission?
PM Well, I don't think I should answer that question in set terms. But I was
asked a question of what cculd be done about inflation and I suggested.
Q. On inflation again, just before we get off it, Prime Minister. What is
your Government doing to set an example to the private sector?
PM Well, as I said, we have budgeted for quite a large domestic surplus this
year. That, I suppose, is not setting an example, so much as using a weapon.
But we have reduced t he new expenditure in this year's Budget as compared
to last year's Budget. But you can't reduce it too much because so much of
the B udget is taken up with things that people really must have. For example,
the second highest item in the Budget is social welfare, and so on help for
schools, for the States....
Q. In your Budget, you increased things like sales tax and petrol tax a-. Id company
tax and interest rates and PMG charges. Now how can you argue, Mr. Gorton,
that these things are not already adding to our inflatio. n' 1
PM I don't think we did increase interest charges in the Budget. We introduced
them as. a weapon against inflation incidentally, as a classic weapon against
inflation.
Q. just to slow things down 
PM Before the Budget came in. Yes, to slow demand down. To slow down the
amount of money borrowed and therefore the demand that money would generate.
Well, we did that before the Budget, although the long-term bond rate was raised
in June and that might be what you are thinking of. I don't think that company
tax an increase in company tax would have any effect on inflation, or rising
prices at all. I just don't think anybody would say it did.
Q. What about as an effect on company returns?
PM It has an effect on company returns, I admit, but I don't think on the
general level of prices. Sales tax, yes, on those items on which it is imposed,
but we didn't impose it on the whole level of sales tax. Only on things which
are mostly sort of luxuries well, there were furs and jewels. But there was
perhaps one item of necessity, that was cosmetics. I must admit that. But
by and large it wasn't on staple items really itemshat are required. Sales
tax, petrol tax would have some effect not a great deal because most of the
petrol is used by private motorists. But it undoubtedly must have some effect.
Q. Don't you consider liquor and cigarettes essentials"
PM Well, I like them.....
Q. For most people. Not for you, but for every Australian, or the majority
of Australians?
PM Not-as essentials. No. I don; t. But of course the major Australia u drink
is beer what is consumed most and nothing was done to raise the excise obeer
or on spirits. V-1ine was the only excise that wa s imposed, . and that ils
scarcely an essential.
Q. You know, years ago, when Harold Holt increased the sales tax o_ cosmetics,
there was such a row he had to withdraw it. You may remember that. There
hasn't been any such scream this time when you do it.
tM Perhaps Australian women are getting much better looking without
artificiai aids.'
Q. Do you think they are necessities for women? Cosmetics?
Chairman We are getting on to awfully dangerous ground. Let us get on to
Commonwealth/ State relations.
Q. Mr. Gorton, can you see any alternative to the present Commonwealth/
State relations and this annual bartering, and now it is becoming even
more frequent don't you think it is almost denigrating the Premiers the
way they have to go cap in hand / 9 
PM I don't think it is denigrating the Premiers. But I think we all have to
understand that the overall responsibility for managing the economy is the
Commonwealth's and I think the Premiers themselves would unquestionably
agree to that. It has been suggested that an alternative might be to lay aside
a certain field of income tax or income tax for the States. I would not support
that. I don't believe Australians would be at all happy to have two income
taxes which one Government could raise and another Government could drop
and varying between the sections of Australia. I really think that would be
retrogressive. Indeed, the abolition of uniform income tax would not be good
for States like Queensland.
Q. What is the Government doing for the farmer? Why are we in this parlous
price throughout all our primary industries.....
I think we are in the parlous price for two reasons one because of the
cost increases which you mentioned that the farmer has to bear, and the other
because world markets seem to be closing down on their requirement for our
produce or the money they are prepared to pay for it. Dairy produce the
European Economic Community has got running out of its ears. There has
jeen a green revolution going on in the growing of cereals, and so on. Beef
and sugar are not bad so far. Tobacco is all right, but wool is an industry
that has been really badly hit and this because of the drop in prices. What
are we doing? Well we have had a long programme of subsidising superphosphate,
of taxation concessions, of zone allowances, of things of that kind, quite a lot
of things of that kind, and we are now tackling the wool one as best we can by
setting up the Wool Commission which, as you know, is designed to see that
people will pay....
Q. It started only two days ago, it is too early to say how it went.
PM It is indeed, but sirce it was announced, and maybe fortuitously, the price
of wool did begin to rise. Now it won't solve the problem, we have got to do
more than that.. And one of the things we have done..,. promised to is
to set up this Rural Finance Insurance Corporation to insure long-term loans
for farmers who are good credit risks, the way there ic a Housing Insurance
Corporation.
Q. Canada has recognised Red China now. Do you think that will cost
Australia any big wheat orders?
PM I doubt it. Red China seems to be singularly unconcerned about whether
countries recognise it or not. It buys where it thinks it is cheapest. 
Q. Can you see any sense in our continuing not to recognise Red China?
PM Well, one thing that immediately comes to mind is Red China's insistence
that Taiwan should be recognised as a part of Red China. I don't believe it would
be right or proper or moral to take 12 million people.....
Q. That didn't worry Canada, did it Mr Gorton?
PM Well, I am not responsible for what Canada does...
Q. No, but if they can do it, we can do it.
Chairman The United States did last week did modify its attitude about
Communist China's admission to the United Nations. I think it would accept
now both Chinas. Does that influence your thinking at all?
PM We haven't altered our own gove. nmental attitude on this.
Q. Why can't we recognise both Chinas?
PM I have always understood one of the reasons is that Communist China has
strong objections to both Chinas being recognised.
Chairman -Gentlemen, can we get on to something as we have only a few
minutes some of the Party problems that face leaders in the country?
Q. We presume, Mr. Gorton, that one of the great worries that you have got
in the Senate election is that you might finish up with a hostile Senate. Wv~ hat
do you think the chances are for that?
PM I think it is unlikely, but until the numbers go up, it is always possible.
It is a possibility. I think it is unlikely, but it is a danger and I do thinlk people
should know it and should realise the difficulty this would cause.
Q. Do you think you car, get a clear majority without having to be propped
up by the DLP?
PM We would have to be very lucky.
Q. Since the last time you mentioned it has Mr Whitlam told any more
what did you say " a string of falsehoods" or something?
PM A string of falsehoods exactly that is what I said.
Q. Factual falsehoods. ./ 11 
PM tvThat is what he quoted, but actually in my initial opening speech, I said
" a string of falsehoods". Well, there was a statement that we had had a five
per cent rise in inflation last year, which wasn't true. There was a statement
that the Treasurer had admitted that which wasn't true. There was a whole lot
of them. I can't remember them. But since thep, he has added a few. Yes, he
has made a statement that nothing has been done to help South Australian
Railways, and there was no money in the Budget for it. In fact the money is in
the Budget for it, as I have pointed out, and it was stanted in the Budget speech.
That is one falsehood. There are a couple of other things which verge on it.
He indicated the other day there wasn't such a thing as a Five-Power Pact. Now,
I suppose legally it has'L-It been signed, but there is agreement between Five
Powers, and this I thinkr tends to be close to falsehood.
Q. I was wondering whether we could ask you two rather personal questions.
Do you feel that at last you have a united team behind you and that all the ruptures
of your earlier months of office are behind you.
PM I think that is becomning evident.
Q. Would you say that you personally have changed since you became P1rime
Minister? And could you tell us in what way you have changed if you havei
PM I dorn't know whether I have changed or not. Other people have to look at that
and say whether I have changed or not. I really can't an_-swer that.
Q. After Mr. McEweri has gone back to his farm, or taken this roving ambasSador
trade Job or whatever it is, what do you think is going to happen to the Country
Party? Do you think it will retain its present strength or it will be more docile?
PM I think it will be under good leadership whoever they choose to lead it. And
I think it will continue to be a good partner in the Coalition Government. I doin't
expect it to be either docile or aggressive. I expect . it to be a co-partn~ er.
Q. just another word, personally from you, on Mr. McEwen. Have you any
plans for him as a sort of senior Trade negotiator?
PM No, I haven'tt. But the way this whole question arose is that somebody asked
him at a press conference if he were asked to do something, would he do itI and
he said, yes, he would. Now, when I say I haven't got any plans, it doesn't meanl
that I am saying he wouldn't be useful. It is just that we had never discussed it
all.
Q. Why do you want the Commonwealth to collect offshore mineral resources
royalties instead of the States? ./ 12 
12.
PM I do it. I made it perfectly clear that the legislation we brought in and I
nean clear to all State Premiers, and publicly clear that should this legislation
pass, then any minerals discovered, the States would get 60 per cent of the
royalties of, just as they do, or perhaps a bit more than they do from the offshore
petroleum legislation. So the short answer is I don't.
Q. When do you expect this legislation to be through? Undoubtedly it is going
to be challenged, I suppose.
PM I wouldn't like to put a timetable on it, but sooner or later this question
has got to be resolved one way or the other. The question of where the real
legal responsibility lies. But royalties.... the States have, and indeed the
running... the way their Mines Departments work...
Q. All the hard work, yes.
PM For 60 per cent of the return.
Q. Prime Minister, you are a Victorian. Can you explain to us nobody on
the Labor side can why Mr. Whitlam can't settle the issue of the Victorian
ALP State Executive?
PM Well, I suppose because first of all he has been insulting the people In
the Victorian ALP Executive perhaps with reason. Then he has bee: n, saying
the most intemperate things about them for quite a lo-: g time, including that he
is going to stop them runn: ing on unity tickets, which he has never done. So
there is a lot of bad blood there. And I think that the people on the Victorian
State Executive are probably stronger than Mr. Whitlarn.
Q. Do you think that the last week's criticism by Mr. Griffith of Shortland
will have any lasting effect in New South Wales?
PM I don't know whether it will have a lasting effect or not, but it is a most
interesting window into the Caucus room because you will have noticed
Mr. VMhtlam, quite belatedly in the campaign has sudde: ly become a great
champion of an immediate pension rise, and now this little glimpse of what
happened inside Caucus that Mr. Griffith has given us is very interesting. You
remember he said " When I ( Griffith) urged higher pensions he ( Whitlam accused
me of featherbedding the pensioners." Well, thereit is.
Q. Well I am sorry we cannot pursue that a little further. It would have
been a most interesting subject I think, but our time has run out. We are
grateful indeed, to you Prime Minister, for having spared the time.
Thank you very much and goodnight. 



FOR PRESS: PM. NO. 110/ 1970
SENATE ELECTION
Commnt Lthe Prime Minister, Mifr John Gorton
It is still too early to predict what the results of
the election will be in terms of seats after the distribution of
preferences. I am, of course, disappointed at the low primary
vote received by the Government.
But I am pleased that those who withdrew their
primary votes from the Governmenc refused to give them to the
Opposition. It seems probable that the Government's primary
vote will be down by about 5 per cent and the Opposition's primary
vote will be down by about 4 per cent, compared with the last
general election. The DLJP deserve congratulations for their success
which I believe shows public support for the policies on defence
advanced by both the Government and the DLP.
A combination of Government and DLP figures shows
a substantial anti-Labor vote, particularly in Queensland and
Victoria. But that does not alter the fact that I had hoped the
Government would do much better in the primary vote than it has
done; it is clearly up to us to try and win back public support by a
positive, continuinlg programme of government in the next two years.
CANBERRA, 22 November 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 111/ 1970
VISIT BYJAPANESE PRINCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
His Imperial Highness Prince Mikasa, brother of the Emperor
of Japan, accompanied by Her Imperial Highness Princess Mikasa, will
be visiting Australia in January as guests of the Government.
The Prince will attend the 28th International Congress of
Orientalists, which will be held at the Australian National University,
Canberra, from 6 to 12 January. The Prince is well known in
academic circles for his studies of ancient civilisations.
We are pleased that the Prince and Princess have accepted
our invitation to make a short tour of Eastern Australia. Their visit,
the first to Australia by members of the Japanese Imperial Family,
is most welcome, and is a further indication of the friendship
between our two countries.
CANBERRA 27 November 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 112/ 1970
DEATH OF SENATOR ORMONDE
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I was sorry to learn of the death of Senator James
Ormonde. Senator Ormonde was a sincere and dedicated Labor
man and for the past twelve years had served the Senate with quiet
distinction. He was a man of integrity, high principles, and
humanity. I extend my deepest sympathy, and that of my
Government colleagues, to the late Senator's family.
CANBERRA November 1970 



VISIT OF POPE PAUL VI
FAR EWELL AT SYDi" L-Y A IRPORT
peech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Your Holiness, Your Excellencies, Mr. Premier, Ladies and
Gentlemen No words of mine are necessary, Sir to let you
know how welcome you have been, for the warmth and sincerity
of the crowds that have flocked to see you have made that manlifest.
This, the first visit by a Pontiff, is something we
shall long remember. It has been specially significant to our
Roman Catholic community, but it has had a wider significance
and one that touches all of us.
Your visit, Sir, has come at a time when there is
a growing spirit of unity among Christian peoples, arid your
1flessage of peace and goodwill, based on fundamental Chris" tian
principles, has universal appeal.
We admire the way in which you have managed
to cope with the many demands and the constant demands upon
your time and energy while you have been here.
You have met many Australians, people-from
various walks of life the old, the young, the native-born, the
migrants but all Australians. And in addition, through radio
and television, the message which you brought has been transferred
to the remotest parts of this great continent.
Now you are to continue your journey, and as you travel
on, I hope you will have with you in your heart warm and happy
memories of our nation.
We are glad you came. We wish you Godspeedl and
a safe journey home. And we thankc you. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 111/ 1970
AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS:
MAJOR GRANTS FOR 1971
Statement byL the Prime Minister,. Mr. John Gorton
I have received from the Australian Council for the Artj recommendations
concerning the major grants to be made by the Commonwealth Government in the
current financial year.
Following last year's pattern, my Government has again provided on the
recommendation of the Council a considerable increase in support for the arts. The
Council's Budget for 1970-1971 has been increased by $ 1 million to $ 3.85 million.
In addition, a further sum of $ 1 million has been provided for the Film Development
Corporation. We have done this as evidence of our concern for the quality of life
which Australians should be able to enjoy. Our country has a most distinctive
cultural tradition one in which a unique natural environment, sporting and outdoor
pastimes and freedom to ' choose a wide variety of leisure pursuits all bring personal
happiness an--d enrichment. The arts in particular have a special place in that margin
forfuifilment which remains between routine daily existence and joy in living.
My Government is gratified to see the surge of enthusiasm and activity
made possible in the arts by the last two years of the Council's work. More and
more talented young people are pursuing creative careers as actors, singers, dancers,
musicians, writers, designers and directors. The big companies which now provide
professional employment for hundred3 df Australian artists are reaching higher
standards and a wider public in city and country. Added stimulus comes from the
world's great performers and directors who now come readily to wlork with these
companies. We can now look back on more than two years of activities. The broad
lines of the Council's work are established. Great importance is attached to professional
training. Funds are concentrated to encourage the highest standards of performance
in the national companies. In conjunction with State Governments, who give to the
arts with increasing generosity, regional companies are supported in all capital cities.
The needs of country people are provided for. Festivals and special productions
throughout the country receive regular as'sistance. Our international activities are
increasing. A research programme examines the needs of the arts and suggests new
areas for assistance. This consolidation is gratifying. But it is not enough. hi the arts
established activity must always be balanced by new development. It is right for the
big drama and opera and ballet companies to present what is best and most lasting
in the cultural traditions of our past. But at the same time changing needs must be
identified and fresh artistic drives liberated. / 2 
In the 1970s we must make possible the classics of the twenty-f irst
century. Investment in the future means tolerating and supporting unfamiliar ideas,
experimental forms and new expression. It means ensuring that young people with
vision can break with accepted and comfortable tradition and find a climate in which
unorthodoxy can flourish.
Each year the Council moves into new areas. Last year it recommended
support for Australian film and television makers. That support has now been given.
A professional training school is in the planning stage; young film makers are
already producing experimental films with our assistance; the Film Development
Corporation-now provides funds for the commercial industry.
Moving forward is the function of the Council's development funds for'
music, aboriginal arts, festivals, film and television and special projects. This year
we have added another fund for youth and education programmes. The Council is
convinced that one of its most important roles will be the encouragement of programmes
which develop talent and stimulate interest in the arts for young people both within the
education system and without. It is heartening to see the response from educationists
and from State Governments which have already given generous support for pilot
programmes in many fields. Co-operative action of this kind will make possible
far gr . ater achievement than we could manag; e alone.
The development funds assist large and small projects all over Australia.
Aboriginal musicians come together in Arnhem Land with a touring wind quintet;
Sir Tyrone Guthrie mounts major productions in Melbourne and Sydney; a workshop
play about King O'Malley grows into a successful touring production; a film director
goes out to help a school film club. As programmes prove successful they are
absorbed into the regular grants of the Council and the funds move on to new
activities. This year we hope to encourage more invention and experiment through
the Special Projects Fund and assist still further community projects begun with
help from city councils, trade unions and welfare organisations. The arts must weave
into the whole fabric of our society.
Internationally our programme is also greatly expanding. We need the
stimulus and pleasure to be derived from world class orchestras and companies vh ich
visit us. We are able increasingly to show our best professional-performers to the
world. This year we have sent abroad excellent chamber groups. The Melbourne
Symphony Orchestra has gone to America. The Australian Ballet will leave before
Christmas to tour the United States with Rudolf Nureyev.
It is my Government's hope that this varied and growing activity will bring
great pleasure to the lives of all Australians.
Grants from the Development Funds and research programnme are announced
regularly throughout the year. It is my pleasure now to announce the first series of
major grants for 1971 based on the recommendations by the Council. 
GRANTS RECOMMENDED BY THE AUSTRALIAN COUICIL FOR THE ARTS
FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31 DECEMBER 19/ 1
1. NATIONAL TRAINING PROGRAMMES
National Institute of Dramatic Art 72,000
The Australian Ballet School 58,000
Professional Training Programmes for Theatre Personnel 60,000
Opera Training Scheme 50, 000
Interim Council for a National Film and Television
Training School 85,000
Travel Grants 25,000
2. NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
National TouringCompanies
Te Austrai-Banlt--ompany 370, 000
The Australian Opera Company 410,000
The Elizabethan Trust Orchestras 480,000
The Marionette Theatre of Australia 55,000
State Drama Com anies
The Old Tote Theatre Company, N. S. W. 165,000
The Melbourne Theatre Company 180, 000
The South Australian Theatre Company 45,000
The Queensland Theatre Company 45,000
The Canberra Theatre Trust 15,000
The National Theatre at the Playhouse, Perth 45, 500
The National Theatre and Fine Arts Society, Tasmania 34, 500
Federal Co-ordinating and Entrepreneurial
Orginisations ' Te AUEs-idn Elizabethan Theatre Trust 262,000
The Arts Council of Australia Federal Division 110,000
Musica Viva Society of Australia 8,000
REGIONAL ORGANISATIONS
New South Wales Professional Drama, Sdne'
The Ensemble Theatre
The Independent Theatre ( in total) 20,000
The Community Theatre
Victoria The Theatre Guild ( St. Martin's) Ltd. 10,000
The Victorian Opera Company 6,000
The Victorian Ballet Guild ( Ballet Victoria) 5, 750 / 2 
South Australia
The Australian Dance Theatre 5, 750
Queensland The Queensland Ballet Company 7,000
The Queensland Opera Company 13,000
Western Australia
The Western Australian Opera Company 12,000
The Western Australian Ballet Company 12,000
The Hole in the Wall Theatre 3,000
Australian Capital Territog
The Canberra Repertory Society 5,500
4. DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES
Special Projects Fund details to be announced 250,000
Aboriginal Arts Programme details to be announced 60,000
Music Programme details to be announced 100,000
Festivals Programme details to be announced 60,000
Film and Television Programme details to be announced 210,000
Youth and Education Programme details to be announced 80,000
RESEARCH PROGRAMME
Details to be announced 20,000
6. INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMME
The Melbourne Symphony Orchestra, American tour B. 80, 000
The Australian Ballet Company, American tour 50, 000
The New Sydney Wind Quintet, South-Eaut Asian tour( Muslca Viva) 5,000
Percussions de Strasbourg ( Musica Viva) 9,000
Zurich Chamber Orchestra ( Musica Viva) 5,000
Mozart's English Friends ( Arts Council of Australia) 5,000
Le Treateau de Paris ( Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust) 20,000
CANBERRA/ SYDNEY
4 December 1970
NOTE: The Council is holding a Press Conference at Sabemo Houce in Sydney at
3 o'clock this afternoon ( Friday 4 December). 



EMBARGO 12. 30 a. Friday 11 December 1970
FOR PRESS: P. M. No 114/ 1970
GOVERNOR-GENERAL TO VISIT NEW ZEtLAND
Statement bythe Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
With the approval of Her Majesty and concurrence of the
Commonwealth Government the Governor-General and Lady Hasluck will
pay an official visit to New Zealand next February at the invitation of the
Governor-General of New Zealand, His Excellency Sir Arthur Porritt.
The Governor-General and Lady Hasluck will fly to
Wellington in the Governor-General's R. A. A. F. aircraft o-n, Thurc-day,
11th February, and will return to Australia on Thursday, J8th February.
In addition to Wellington Sir Paul and Lady Hasluck iill visit
Auckland, Christchurch, Taupo and other centres.
The Government of the Commonwealth will be administered
by His Excellency Major-General Sir Rohan Delacombe, Governor of Victoria,
during the Governor-General's absence. Sir Rohan holds a Dormant
Commission from The Queen and is the senior State Governor in terms of
years of service in his office.
CANBERRI 11 December 1973 



FOR PRESS: P. MI. No. 115/ 1970
COMMONWEALTH'S OFFER ON RURAL RECONSTRUCTION
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
There is no need for a Premiers' Conference on the offer made
by the Commonwealth to tackle the problem of rural reconstruction,
farm adjustment, and retraining of farmers who decide to leave the land.
This is a Commonwealth initiative and a Commonwealth offer
aimed at helping the rural community in all States. If-the Government of
any State does not wish to join in that scheme, or to accept that offer,
that is a matter for the Government a! that State to explain to the rural
community in that State. Those States which do accept the offer can proceed
with the scheme. It is untrue to say that yesterday's meeting of Ministers was abortive.
There was unamimous agreement by all Ministers present on the basic princip]
of the Commonwealth approach as set out in the press release, and
Commonwealth and State officers met in Canberra today to begin discussions
on the details of proposals.
Furthermore, the Commonwealth does not want the States " to
guarantee the financial aspects of a scheme which it promotec.
It does want a State, if it agrees to administer the scheme within
a framework laid down by the Commonwealth, to accept responsibility
for loss if that loss results from a State's faulty administration of monies
provided by the Commonwealth.
CANBERRA 11 December 1970 



FOR PRESS: P . N1617
W] THHOLDING TAX AMENDMENTS TO TAX LAW
Statement by the Prime Minister, kMr. john r ton
The Government has consistently emphasised the importance to Australia of
a strong and continuing inflow of overseas development capital. We have equaly
emphasised the need toietain and increase Australian equity in, aind ownership of, our
expanding resources.
We have now decided to propose to the Parliament, in the early part of next
year, amendments to the taxation law as it affects overseas borrowings, such
amendments to be effective as from 1st July 1971.
We -have recently completed a review of the effect of the interest withholding
tax which must be deducted by Australian borrowers, at the rate of 10%, from interest
payments made to overseas lenders on loans raised overseas.
We believe that this tax, intended to fall on overseas lenders who earn interest
in Australia, frequently falls instead on the Australian borrower. An overseas lender,
knowing that 10% 0 of the interest payments to him will be withheld in Australia, increases
the rate of interest above the level at which it otherwise would have been, or requires
the borrower to meet the tax.
This additional cost falls on Australian Companies for they, of course, do not
have the advantage of access to loan funds from abroad through overseas parent
companies, or associated companies.
kt was, of course, never intended that the interest withholding tax should
make it more difficult for Australian Companies to participate in venture.-in Australia
on equal terms with Companies from overseas. It is therefore intended to amend the
income tax law to exempt from the payment of withholding tax interest payments made
overseas on borrowings overseas by Australian controlled Companies for predominantly
Australian owned ventures, or for financing a substantial Australian equity participation
in a venture. This review of the law regarding taxation of interest on overseas borrowings is
designed to give further effect to the Government's policies of helping to protect
Australian equity and ownership.
At the same time as it proposes the above amendment the Government will
also propose to the Parliament that Sections 126 and 128 of the Income Tax Assessment
Act should be amended so that interest paid overseas on overseas borrowings made
by means of a public issue, or widely offered private placement of bearer bonds, will
no longer incur penalty rates of tax or be subject to withholding tax.
This will apply whether such borrowings are made by Australian controlled
companies or by overseas companies and should confer important benefits on all
Companies operating in Australia.
Our central aim is to create conditions under which overseas investment will
continue to be attracted to Australia yet under which there will be improved opportunities
for Australian participation in development enterprises and industrial expansion
requiring overseas capital.
CANBERRA 13 December 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No 117/ 1970
DEATH OF LORD SLIM
Tribute from the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Lord Slim won the admiration of the Australian
people in war and peace.
He proved himself an outstanding General in
the Second World War, and in the post-war years was a highly
respected and popular Governor-General of Australia.
A down-to-earth, courageous, professional soldier,
who had risen through the ranks, Lord Slim had a particularly
warm place in the hearts of Australians.
We are saddened to learn of his death, and I
extend to his family the sincere sympathy of the Australian
Government and people.
CANBERRA December 1970 



FOR PRESS: PM 1No. 118/ 1970
MINISTER FOR THE NAVY CHRISTMAS v ISIT
TO SOUTCH VIETNAM
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Minister for the Navy, the Honourable D. J. : Nillen, M. P.
will be visiting units of the Australian Armed Forces in S outh Vietnam
and units of the R. A. N. in Singapore and Hong Kong over the Christmas
period. Mr. Killen will leave Australia on Tuesday, 22 December
for Singapore where he will go aboard the destroyer escort
H. M. A. S. Yarra. Mr. Killen will then leave for Saigon on Thursday 24 December
where he will visit as many units of the three Services as possible over
the Christmas period.
After leaving Vietnam he will visit the guided missile
destroyer, H. M. A. S. Perth, which is serving with the United States'
7th Fleet, and also the destroyer, Vender'.-, which will be in Hong Kong.
The Minister will return to Australia on Tuesday,
29 December.
CANBERRA 17 December 1970 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 119/ 1! 970
CHRISTMAS MESSAGE TO THE FOC-RCES
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, has sent the
following Christmas message to members of the Australian Armed
Forces " To all those serving in the armed forces of the Commonwealth
I se-nd warm greetingo and good wishes for Christmac and the New
Year on behalf of the Government and people of Australia.
Throughout the year you have maintained the highest standards
and traditions of our fighting forces on land, sea and in the air.
Cur special thankz-and greetings go to all Australians in
Vietia-m. I hope the knowledge that you are doing an im1portant and
vital service to your country and its allies will be somne compensation
for the separation from your homes, your families arnd your friends.
We are proud of your record and of the resolute way you carry
out your difficult and dangerous duties. By your courage you bring
nearer the day of peace.
Good luck to our servicemen everywhere. We wish you a safe and
successful New Year."
CANBERRA 23 December 1970 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 120/ 1970
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, will fly to Singapore on Tuesday
the 12th of January to attend the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference.
The Conference begins on the 14th of January and will continue until
the 22nd. The Australian delegation to the Conference will comprise
The Prime Minister ( who will be accompanied by M~ rs. Gorton);.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs ( Mr. W. McMahon);
The Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department ( Mr. C. L. Hewitt);
The Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs-
( Sir Keith Waller);
The Australian High Commissioner in Britain
( Sir Alexander Downer);
The Deputy Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department
( Mr. D. J. Munro);
The Australian Highn Commissioner in Singapore
( Mr. N. Parkinson);
The Prime Minister's Private Secretary
( Miss A. Cotta);
The Prime Minister's Press Secretary
( Mr. T. Eggleton); and
The Private Secretary to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
( Mr. C. R. Jones).
CANBERRA 23 December 1970 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 121/ 1970
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Arrangements have now been completed
with the State Premiers for a meeting of the
Premiers' Conference to be held in Canberra
on Thursday 4 February 1971.
CANBERRA 23 December 1970 



FOR PRESS:
NOT FOR PUBLICATION BEFORE 9.00 P. M. WEDNESDAY 23 DECEIBER 1970
P. M. NO. 122/ 1970
VISIT BY THE DUKE OF EDINhBURGH
The following-press statement has been released
from Buckingham Palace, London at noon today
" The Duke of Edinburgh has accepted an invitation
to visit Australia in March 1971 to take part in the
Anniversary Celebrations of the Royal Australian
Air Force. The itinerary will include South Australia,
Western Australia and the Australian Capital Territory.
En route to Australia His Royal Highness will
7 take the opportunity to visit Pacific Island Territories
of the Commonwealth some of whom throughout their history
have not seen any member of the Royal Family.
Visits will include Pitcairn Island Group, Cook
Islands, Western Samoa, Fiji, New Hebrides, British
Solomon Islands and the Territory of Papua and New
Guinea ( Kieta, Madang and Port Moresby).
His Royal Highness proposes also to visit the
Galapagos Islands and Easter Island.
His Royal Highness will be embarked in H. M. Yacht
BRITANNIA for the journey across the Pacific.
H. M. Yacht will subsequently proceed to British
Columbia where Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal
Highness The Duke of Edinburgh will be embarking for
their visit to the Province in connection with the
Centenary Celebrations in May 1971"
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, in welcoming the
announcement said that His Royal I:, ghness would visit Kieta
( 17-18 March), Madang ( 20-22 March), Port Moresby ( 22-23
March), South Australia ( 23-26 March), Western Australia
( 26-30 March) and Canberra ( 30 March 1 April).
His Royal Highness plans to leave Australia on
Friday 2 April. The Duke' s programme in Australia will provide for
Air Force functions in Adelaide, Perth and Canberra. These
and other proposed engagements will be submitted as soon as
possible to the Palace and will be publicly announced when
an approved programme has been decided.
Canberra. 23 December 1970. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 123/ 1970
PM'S MESSAGE TO UN', SECRETARY-GENERAL
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, tonight sent
the following message to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
" The Australian Government fully understands the concern
of the Government of Israel at the circumstances in which death
sentences were recently passed on two Soviet citizens of the Jewish
Race. It is alleged that an attempt was to be made to hi-jack an
aeroplane and no-one would wish to condone such an offence.
But it is disquieting that the trial itself was held in
camera and was not open to observers so that world opinion
could judge of its fairness and of the facts of the case.
it is also disquieting to note that if people of the Jewish
Race were permitted freely to emigrate from the Soviet, in
accordance with the principles of the United Nations, tihis
incident would never have occurred.
I note from press reports that the International Commission
of jurists has expressed concern over the severity of the sentences
and the lack of official -i-iformation regarding the trial.
There is a clear need for all the facts of the case-to be
established for the world to see and we hope that this will be
recognised by the authorities of the Soviet Union and that such
severe punishment of what appearf! to have been an attempt
at escape will not proceed.
CANBERRA 27 December 1970 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 124 1973
ACCESS TO COMMONWEALTH ARCHIVES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Commonwealth records that are 30 years old or more will, as
from 1 January 1971, be available for scrutiny by the public. This policy
will replace the " 50 year access rule" that has operated ir-the past.
The 50 year rule was varied in 1966 to accelerate the release
of World War I records. Currently, records originating prior to 1923
are available publicly and records originating between then and 1939
may be made available for preparation of important wvorks of scholarship.
To facilitate study of the World War 11 period, the Government
will also, as from 1 January 1971, allow accelerated release of records
originating between I January 1941 and 31 December 1945 where they
aze required for preparation of important works of scholarship.
Some categories of records are regarded as not available for
public access under current rules and will still be restricted under the
new rules. Personal papers,, such as those relating to pensions, will not
be released; nor will there be any release of taxation or census returns.
Access to records relating to Australia's national security or affecting
the Commonwealth's legal interests may also be restricted. Specific
approvals will be required for release of Cabinet records.
Custody of Commonwealth records and control over access
to them is the responsibility of the Commonwealth Archives Office, which
has headquarters in Canberra and branch offices in the mainland State
capitals. In Canberra, the Off ice occupies temporary buildings adjacent
to Kings. Avenue Bridge. The Government has decided in principle to erect
a new National Archives building in Canberra which will be the headquarters
of the Commonwealth Archives Office and to which important Commonwealth
records will be transfet red for preservation, public study and display.
The design and siting of the building will be a matter for subsequent
consideration. CANBERRA December 1970 



FOR PRESS: PnM No. 125 ' 19' 10
NEW YEAR MESSAGE TO THE NATION
From the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
New Year's Day is a fitting time to take stock to note what Australia
has achieved; and to consider what improvements and new achievements are re eded.
We have finished the old year greater in numbers and with more material
development than ever before. Most of us enjoy a standard of living and a way of
life that few other countries in the world can equal. But many improvements are
needed. Australians engaged in many rural industries are in economic straits
due to no fault or dereliction of their own. Helping to solve this national problem
must be our great task in the New Year.
We are threatened, too, with the risk of money inflation illusory increaseo
in money wages which will buy no more unless more is produced to buy an inflation
which in the long run benefits no one and hurts everyone in the Nation. Combating
this will be another great task in the New Year.
If we all think in terms of producing more during each hour worked so that
there will be more to divide between the worker, the einployer, the old, and the
nation's demand for improved social action and further development of all kinds
then the New Year can see us beating inflation and improving real living standards.
We must push ahead with the task of further developing our natural
resources with the highest possible degree of Australian ownership. We must encourage
the growing public interest in the preservation of our environment. We must continue
to attack poverty wherever it is found and it is not found only among some of those
who draw pensions. We must continue to encourage self-expression and creative activity
in the arts. We must continue to help our less fortunate neighbours. I believe
these are the goals the nation should strive tw wards in the New Year.
There will be discussion, and divided opinion on how best to move towards
this achievement. I hope that such discussion will be rational, restrained and
productive and that whatever the conflicting views on how to attain our goals there
will be little division in the Nation as to the proper goals for which we should strive.
If we can do this, then I believe the New Year will see our further advance
as a nation and will prove to be that what I wish you all
A Happy New Year.
CA NBERRA
31 December 1970 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 1/ 1971
FLOODS IN MALAYSIA
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, today sent the
following message to the Prime Minis ter of Malaysia who has
declared a state of national emergency because of the damage
and loss of life resulting from extmensive flooding by heavy
monsoonal rains
" I HAVE READ WITH DISTRESS AND CONCERN REPORTS
COMING IN OF THE DISASTROUS FLOODS IN MALAYSIA, AND
OF THE LOSS OF LIFE AND DAMAGE WHICH YOU HAVE
ALREADY SUFFERED.
YOU MAY COUNT ON OUR DOING WHAT WE CAN
TO HELP. I HAVE INSTRUCTED OUR HIGH COMMISSIONER TO
OFFER HELICOPTERS AND TRANSPORT AIRCRAFT BASED
AT BUTTER WORTH FOR USE IN SUPPORT OF YOUR
EMERGENCY RELIEF OPERATIONS IF YOU SHOULD NEED
THEM. PLEASE LET ME KNOW IF THERE ARE ANY OTHIER
WAYS IN WHICH WE MIGHT BE OF ASSISTANCE IN HELPING
FLOOD VICTIMS."
CA NBERRA
6 January 1971 



FOR PRESS: 2
PL'. No. / K1971
ECONOM IC CONSULTAT IONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Invitations have been extended for the next series of
economic consultations between Ministers and representative' of
national organisations, to be held in Canberra in February.
On 10 February Ministers will meet national organisations
in three groups primary industry, manufacturing industry ai-. d
commerce. On 11 February representatives of the Export
Development Council, the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council
and the Australian Council of T: rade Unions will each have separate
discussions with Ministers.
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS INVITED TO BE REPRESENTED
AT ECONOV IC CONSULTATONS
February 1971
Primary Industry Group
Australian NIining Industry Council
Australian Farmers' Federation
Australian Wool Growers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Wheat Growers' Federation
Manufacturing Industry Group
The Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Commercial Group
The Associated Chambers of Comrmerce of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Retailers.
CANBERRA 7 January 1970 



FOR PRESS: PMI No. 3/ 1971
COMMWONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE
Statemen~ y the Prime Minister of Australia,. Mr. John Gorton
It is significant that the first Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference
of the seventies is taking place in South-East Asia.
As the first Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Meeting ever held in this part
of the world, it should lead to a better understanding of the problems and aspirationis
of those Commonwealth members who live in the Asian and Pacific regions.
It is also appropriate that the Leaders of the Commonwealth a multi-racial
organisation whose members have inherited democratic traditions should meet iz
Singapore, a country which has made a sustained and admirable effort to build a
multi-racial, democratic society.
This meeting is being held in the centre of the area in which A.'. stralia is
situated; the area in which we are seeking to play a constructive role directed
towards the evolution of a peaceful, progressive and stable Asian region in which
we desire to play a co-operative part.
I hope that this Asian setting will give an Asian focus to this meetii--, g and
enable us to have full and useful discussions of the complex and important situation
in this part of the world. The continuing search for a just and durable peace in
Vietnam, which will permit the people of the South to determine in peace their ovin
form of government, and the related quest for security from communist aggressio-n
in Cambodia and Laos are among the Asian issues which the meeting might usefully
consider. I hope also that this meeting will cover a wide range of matters of importance
and not becomre too involved in any particular issue. Naturally, Aocian countries
tend to be preoccupied with Asian problems, African countries with African problems,
and the countries of the Caribbean with Caribbean problems. This is natural. But
I hope too that we can also deal with the broad political issues of the day, which
affect us all, such as the quest for security and stability.
While Heads of Commonwealth Governments will be meeting at a time when the
Commonwealth is under some strain, it has proved a flexible and durable organization
and I hope its cohesion can be preserved. a / 2 
2.
This is the second Conwmowealth Heads of Government Meeting I have attended.
Successive Australian Governments have attached importance to the Commonwealth.
So does my Government.
Naturally, we see the development in the Asian arid Pacific region of a peaceful
community of stable, developing nations as an objective of p1rimary importance for us.
But we take a wider view. The Commonwealth provides a forum for wide-ranging and
valuable contacts with other leaders.
We see the Commonwealth as a free, multi-racial association of 32 countries
representing about one quarter of the world's population; a forum with a common
language, larger than it was but still more intimate and manageable in size than the
United Nations and more broadly based than regional organisations. We see a
continuing value in such an association exchanging ideas and discussing problems
of common interest without intruding into each other's domestic policies, or seeking
to dictate courses of action to any member.
SINGAPORE 12 January 1971
( This statement is released in Singapore to coincide
with the arrival of the Australian Prime Minicter). 



FOR PRESS: PM No.. 4/ 1971
AUSTRALIAN RELIEF ASSISTANCE FOR MALAYSIA
The Prime Minister of Australia Mr. John Gorton, announced today
that equipment to the value of $ A90, 000 ($ M306, 000) would be provided by
Australia as relief assistance to Malaysia for reconstructioni following the
recent disastrous floods.
Mr. Gorton said the equipment would be in the form of two 100-foot
prefabricated transportable steel Bailey bridges which would be used to help
restore communications in the flooded areas.
The bridges would be supplied immediately by the Australian
Army in Singapore. The Australian High Commission in Kuala Lumpur was in touch
with the Malaysian flood relief authorities to enable urgent arrangements to
be made to move the bridges to the areas where they were required.
While in Singapore for the Prime Ministers' Conference, Mr. Gorton
has had talkcs with the Malaysian Prime Minister, Tun Abdul Razak, about
what Australian assistance might best meet Malaysia's relief needs.
The decision to provide the bridges followed these personal discussions.
In a message to ' Thn Razak on 6 January, Mr. Gorton had expressed
distress at reports of the floods, and had confirmed an immediate offer of
Australian helicopters and Dakota transport aircraft based at Butterworth to
support emergency relief operations.
He asked Tun Razak to let him know if there were other ways in
which Australia might be of assistance.
On 7 January, Tun Razak acknowledged this message welcoming and
expressing appreciation of Mvr. Gorton's offer of help.
In addition to the gift of steel bridges, supplies of blankets for immediate
relief have been provided by the Australian Red Gross Society.
SINGAPORE 17 January 1971 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER AT THEB
AUSTRKE 9NEGRWN99-T
IN SINGAPORE 18 JANUARY 1971
Members of the Australian Alumni:
I found the introductory speech absolutely full of interest. I listened
with great attention to the suggestion that there should be much more Australian
investment in Singapore.
But you know there is Australian investment here. I think I have heard
of the Hume Pipe Company. Perhaps, Sir, your remarks which I have taken note
of might also be directed to a number of investors in Singapore, because there
is great investment in Australia from people in Singapore. They are constantly
building buildings, buying land and indeed, I met a gentleman the other night who
had such foresight that he had invested not in Australia but he did own 90 per
cent of the brewery in New Guinea. This indicates that there is a flow of
investment and investible funds generated from Singapore, which could well
perhaps be used here if the requirement for investment is so great.
But I don't know that the requirement is so very great. I come here from
time to time, and every time one comes, one sees immense changes in the skyline,
and onle sees a city really growing and growing apace.
I don't know whether there is unemployment but I gather there is very
little unemployment, particularly as far as the young is concerned. I gather there
is a shortage, indeed, of skilled labour and unskilled labour.
I had thought of Singapore as one of the success stories not onl y of this
part of the world but one of the success stories of modern times, comparable in
many ways with Venice of old a city state, a state dependig largely on commerce,
on export and on import, situated where the trade routes of the world cross. But
with this great distinction, that it has no danger of sinking beneath the waver.. but
rather is demonstrably day by day reaching for the skies.
And this is the feeling one has of Singapore.
It is possible I put it no higher than that it is possible that Australia
itself may have contributed a small amount to the capacity which had led to this
success story. I think that you members of the Alumni are living illustrations of
what I hope will be an enduring link between our countries though we may from
time to time criticise each other, as the previous speaker criticised me and as
I propose to criticise him later on but also I hope and believe that it is an
illustration of one very successful means of international co-operation. / 2 
In the last twenty years, Australia has welcomed more than 10, 000 fellows
and scholars from Asian and African countries under the Colombo Plan and such
Government aid schemes alone not counting private students. Six hundred and
forty-two of these scholars have come from Singapore. Australia provided the
facilities for training of all kinds. But Singapore students took advantage of those
facilities with diligence, with success, so that in 1969, 96 per cent of Singapore
Colombo Plan students doing undergraduate courses in all years passed their
examination 96 per cent.
N1ow anybody who has a knowledge of the normal pass rate of Australians
and others in Australian universities would realise what an unusually excellent
result this is. We tend to have a 40 per cent failure rate i the first year, of
Australian students, and yet 96 per cent of the people from Singapore Colombo
Plan people passed their courses.
I think that this is a compliment to the calibre of the students that have
been selected by their Government to come to Australia, and I think that it is a
compliment to the students themselves that they have taken: full advantage of the
opportunities so provided. And it is clear proof that the cost of the Colombo Plan
courses, which now totals some $ 40 million, is being fully productive which all aid
schemes are not and is fulfilling the purpose for which it was designed, which all
aid schemes do not do.
As an illustration perhaps of this, I am informed that that magnificent
c-onference hall in which the Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference is now
being held was in fact designed by an architect who took his first degree in
Architecture in Melbourne, in Australia. He then went somewhere else, I gather,
to do a postgraduate course, but clearly because of his undergraduate course, was
able to design a building of such excellence.
Apart from the Colombo Plan itself Government-sponsored students, those
of whom I have spoken so far there were some 10, 000 privately-f inanced students
from Asia, Africa and the Pacific in our schools and universities and colleges last year.
I haven't got the figures on the pass rates of the privately-financed students but I do
kno v that they are not as good as the figures of the Government-sponsored Colombo
Plan students. Nevertheless they do come back and they do practice as accountants,
lawy ers, doctors, and engineers with a technical knowledge which must be and
obviously is of advantage.
This kind of operation seems to me to be one which stands high in any
attempt at international co-operation to raise the economic and living standards of the
countries of the world. For the aim of econorrc assistance, and this I believe it
is important to understand, the aim of economic assistance should never be to
provide a hand-out. It should be to provide resources, it should not be to provide
resources for consumer spending or for dissipation. Because if that were to be the
concept of international aid, then it would merely result in a requirement for a
continuing dole, and that would be as repugnant to the receiver as it would be to the
donor. And it would do nothing whatever to tackle the real problems of underdeveloped
countries. 
The realI aim, surely, ought to be to provide capacity in the form of
technical expertise, professional expertise and capital, so that industries can be
developed, or when insufficient is produced in any country for its internal
consumption agricultural production can be increased. In fact, the aim should be
to provide developing countries with the means to produce and to try to see they
have the opportunity of selling any such increased production.
VWhat better way can there be to provide the means to produce than to see
that the elite of a country, as I believe you intellectually are, have the greatest
possible training in all those fields which, if applied to the growth of a nation, can
accelerate that growth and see that it goes in the proper direction. If,' when this
has been done, when this kinad of assistance has been provided, the resulting
improvement and there-always is a resulting improvement the resulting
improvement is swallowed up by an unrestricted increase in population, then I am
sorry, but that is a problem for the country aided to solve.
It is not an argument for more and more aid from donor countries. And
there is no place in which this is more realised than in this State of Singapore where,
I do not have to tell you, measures have been taken to ensure that increased
production, that increased prosperity is not dissipated . by . an unlimited increase
In population. So when we say that t he gap between the richer and the poorer countries
shou' I be reduced and this is something I have heard a considerable amount about
in the last couple of days I believe that that means that the richer countries should
provide the poorer with the means and the opportunity of closing that gap, and it
is then up to the less developed countries to use those opportunities to close that gap
by their own efforts.
And cau you find a better example of that being don-, e thatrds evident in
this State of Singapore? As your own Prime Minister so cogently said :" The
richer countries cannot be expected to adopt the role of beinig forever their
brother's keeper". And some of those in the less developed countriec. will have to cease to
adopt the role of expecting as a right that somebody will keep them no matter
what they do. But though we may not and should not be our brother's keeper, we
must be, and we try to be our brother's helper and then it depends on the brother
who is helped what the end result will be.
So in providing the advice and the technical education which we in Australia
are now able to do, and in seeing the graduates of these courses contributing so
greatly to their countries' own advance as we see it here, we have in action a proper
plan of assistance properly used by its recipients and resulting in that economic
advance and that self-reliance which must be the real, ultimate aim of all plans
of assistance. And I believe, quite genuinely,, that I can congratulate Singapore because I
think the principles which I have enunciated have been understood and applied and that
such assistance as has been given has been used to the full and that the results of
that use can be seen all around us. So I congratulate you. / 4 
But the benefits of this kind of international co-operation don't stop there.
Thlere is the advantage to students, and let us again take Singapore, of being educated
not only in one country, not only in Australia. Some go there, some go to Canada,
some go to the United States, and some stay in Singapore. And this leads to the
opportunity for a cross-fertiisation of knowledge for people studying particular
practices with slightly different systems in different countries, and then coming
back and being able to marry the best of what they have got from each of the countries
in Which studies have taken place.
Over and above that, there is, think, the enduring advantage that people
who live in any country for a number of years come to know that country in which they
live. If they don't know a ccuntry from personal experience, they may read about it
and they may get a completely false picture. But if they have lived there, they know
it. Some don't like it. Most of them do. And knowledge of a country is the beginning
of understanding, and understanding between countries will be a most significant
"~ spin-off from the educational facilities provided.
Later, in the years ahead, one may hope for a cross -fertilisation of students
Australians coming to Singapore, Singaporeans coming to Australia, and so on.
This is perhaps, at this stage, a dream. And yet we are at the moment in the middle
of a Commonwealth Prime. Ministers' Conference where Heads of Governmenzt are
meeting to try to see if they can overcome the exigencies and exacerbations of the
present and keep together in order to have a chance of making ideals and dreams come
true. I believe that it will be useful if this Heads of Government Meeting says
what the Commonwealth is. And I hope they will say it properly and that means
they will say what I believe. I believe that the Commonwealth is an association
of free, independent nations with some common tradition,. meeting without decisions
being taken by vote there are no majority opinions binding on any member of the
Commonwealth, there is no consensus which has any binding effect whatever on an~ y
member of the Commonwealth who does not agree with the majority who have a
consensus. Rather it is an association through which people can exchange their ideas
of what should be done, and in what fields it should be done. And there has developed
during the course of this Conference clear indications of what all members of the
Commonwealth feel are the fields in which action should be taken.
Looking forward through this decade and into the -future, what are the
problems likely to face not only the Commonwealth but nations generally? It appears,
and I agree with this, that most believe that one of those problems is the maintenance
of peace in the world. Some think peace is threatened by a disparity of wealth in
countries. I beg leave to differ. I do not think Cambodia was invaded because she
was poorer than the invaders. 
I do not think that the wars we have seen since the second great war resulted
from a disparity of income. I do not think that the Five Power Pact which we Britain,
Singapore, Malaysia, New Zealand are to enter into is designed to try and protect
this'region from an attack by people who are poorer.
Rather do I feel it is an ideological urge for conquest, then that ideological
urge will be able to be met, and more importantly, more hopefully, that those who
may have such an ideological urge or nationalistic urge will see that the game is not
worth the candle. At any rate the maintenance of peace is one of the items which the
Commonwealth Association sees as significant for the future.
Anoth, 7r is the freeing of trade. I-don't . want to go into this in any great
depth because &amp; early every country is thoroughly in favour a! freeing trade and reducing
tariffs except for the commodities which they manufacture. But they can see the
unarguable principles in favour of doing it for the commodity other people manufacture.
But there still is a need to see what can be done so that new countries who
are pulling themselves up by their bootstraps, who are using the technical knowledge
they get to produce more, will have an opport unity at least of selling their produce.
And this is another matter which all those sitting around the conference table in
Singapore believe it will be difficult to solve Mks, as I thinktc it would be difficult
to solve it. But does that matter so much if the problem is first isolated and then,
difficult or not, attempts are made to seek to overcome it.
There is next the question which I have touched before, the provision of
aid between country and country. I don't think I need to add anything to what I have
said as to how I and my country approach this problem. But it is not one-sided. And
as an illustration of this, may I give you a brief anecdote of what happened this
morning during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference. ( I shouldn't
do this, I know. I am breaking secrecy but there is nothing much in it, as you will
see when I have finished.)
But it was suggested by a great friend of mine from a Caribbean country
that sometimes donor countries came to these conferences with a rather patronishing
kind of approach you know, " What can we do for you sort of thing, one that I
thoroughly understand. But it just so happened that Australia is a sugar-producin-g
country, as the Caribbeans are sugar-producing countries, and England is going
into the European Economic Community and is going to seek, I think, to look after
the interests of Caribbean sugar-producing countries, but not necessarily Australia
as a sugar-producing country.
But the Caribbeans are inclined to help us. So I was able to point out to my
friend that we didn't go there with a patronising air at all. What we went there for
really was to ask him and his Caribbean brother to help this brother within the
Commonwealth, and was able to paraphrase those remarks of the late President
John Kennedy that we do not come here to ask what we can do for Barbados, but
rather to ask what Barbados can do for us. / 6 
.6.
And this is an illustration of the tW07way traffic which can take place in
this field of trade.
Another matter which wil occupy the Conference for long is under the
heading of racism, which I think you described, Sir, as the White Australia Policy.
Heads of State are prepared to say, as I am, that racism is an unmitigated evil, and
it is. I am prepared to say and mean that we will abolish racism within Australia.
I don't think that those of you who have been there will have noticed
any racism unless you were extraordinarily unfortunate while you were livig
in my country. There is legal discrimination still in some Australian States
against Aboriginals, but my Government has told those States that those laws will
be repealed by those States within two years, or if they are not, we will move in
and repeal them. So there will be no Governmental discrimination inside Australia.
I am prepared to say that and to mean it.
I think there are other countries where racial discrimination may be
more pronounced than it is in my own. I know people always tend to talk on this
subject as if it were just a matter of Negro versus European that was involved
in the word " racism", but I think all of you will know that it is not. I think that
all of you will know that there are grave strains in a com munity when there are
two races or more each forming significant proportions of the population.
You are a lucky State. You are able, quite properly, to call yourself
a n-. ilti-racial society, and get the good feeling that comes from being able to
say that. And if one replies and says yes, but you are 90 per cent Chinese or
per cent Chinese and therefore Singapore is homogenouc" as we will keep
Australia homogenous, that nevertheless still enables you to say you are a
multi-racial society.
Well, we are moving a little bit that way. There were 6, 000 non-
European people who became Australian citizens last year we probably have a
little higher percentage of homogeneity than Singapore but there is a good deal of
similarity, I do assure you.
As far as the application of an immigration policy is concerned, I have
no hesitation in saying what I am now going to say, and I propose to make no
apology for saying it.
Looking around the world, I see social problems between Negro and
European in England, I see grave danger to normal living in the split between
the races in the United States. I read not long ago, of some riots between races
not far away from where I am standing now, riots which could easily have spread
to Singapore. I am not going to allow that kind of danger to occur in Australia. There
are racial tensions, and whether there ought to be or not doesn't matter. We live
in a world of reality. We don't live in a world which would be different if we could
shatter it to bits and then remould it nearer to our heart's desire. And in reality,
there is thought there ought not to be tension between races when there are / 7 
large numbers of different races living in one country, and terisions between peoples from
different regions. Sir, in reply to what you said, I can only say this. As far as I am concer.-ed,
any Governmental discrimination of any kind on grounds of race will not exist in
Australia. It will be abolished. I cannot say that feeling won't exist because that is
not under the control of Governments. It will take time aid education for the vast bulk
of a population to have no difference feeling whatever when they are talking to a Negro
or somebody with a different colour skin. It will take time.
At the moment, there are brighter people from any race you care to mention,
and less intelligent people from any race you care to mention. The bright ones have no
trouble, have no difficulty. They are on the same wavelength. They get together, but
it will take some time before we attain the ideal which I think I share with you in common,
where even those who are not so bright will not feel -prejudice towards people who
are different. I think that the coursa which we are following holds great chances of achieving
real racial tolerance. I think it holds better chances than, if we were to risk the ' Kid
of racial conflict that other countries have. I think that if wie build up gradually i-nside
Australia a proportion of people who are not of white skin, then, as that is gradually
done, so there will be a complete lack of consciousness that it is being built up, and
a complete lack of consciousness of difference between the raceg. And if this can be done,
as I think it can, then that may provide the world with the first truly multi-racial
society ;. ith no tensions of any kind possible between any of the races within it. At
any rate this is our ideal.
And if we are misguided in the way in which we, anre seeking to attain it, then
all I can say, Sir, is that we have got the responsibility to try and do it. We have got
the responsibility to try and explain it, and for my own part, I don't propose to
apologise for it.
Now I think I should finish where I began by sayig once again what an honour
it is for me to be here with you who have, I hope, happy memories of my Own country,
who have a true knowledge of my own country, who may assess it differently from me,
but who I hope would have a friendship for Australia, as I have got a friendship for
Singapore. When I first came here there was no wall that was not pock-marked with
, shrapnel. When I first came here, my friend the Australian High Commissioner to the
United Kingdom had close aquaintance with Changi when it was quite a different building
from that which it is now. From that time I have been here occasionally not often
enough met many people from here and steadily grown to admire and like this State.
It prcyides stability. It provide~ s a success story.
And for all those reasons I thank you greatly for this opportunity to talkto
V, 6u tonight. 



Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference 1971
" COIV'. OiPWLALTH IN T11-1' 7' EVE3' TrIES AND CoMIIYoir'JEALTH DECLARATIOil
õ p4eech by~ the Prime Minister,. Mr. John Gorton
Before I actually discuss the Commonwealth in the Seventies and President
Kaunda's Declaration which is intimately bound up with the Commonwealth in the
Seventies, there is one thing which I think it is rather appropriate to say.
I think it was Mr. Forbes Burnham who in his set speech earlier in this
conference jokingly remarked on whether Great Britain went by the name of Britain
or went by the name of the United Kingdom, which is sometimes confused, and he
thought it might have something to do with the place around the table at which the
representatives from that nation sat. I think perhaps I might add to this.
It is really quite immaterial which place at the table the representatives
of Britain occupy, because if it were not for Britain there wiould be no table at all for
anyone to sit around. We are all of us former colonies and we were, all of us, governed
by former Governments in Great Britain. We all achieved independence sometimes
given more reluctantly than at others but we all achieved independence. And having
received it, we were able to form an association which I thinky no former colonial
power -would have been able to form with those whom it had previously governed.
And as we look forward to the seventies, and as we look forward to what the
Commonwealth may do or may not do in those years ahead, we may perhaps spare
just one brief moment to look back with some appreciation of the acts which made the
Commonwealth possible.
There is undoubtedly going to be in this new decade further problems with
which the Commonwealth must concern itself in all areas. And it is because we are
at the beginning of a new decade that I thought it was appropriate for President Kaunda
to set down, as he did, statements as to what the Commonwealth was, how the
Commonwealth can operate, and what the Commonwealth saw as the major problems
facing it in this coming decade of the seventies. And I was therefore able to support
fully in principle the unusual course that such a declaration z-hould be made by this
Conference. But I would like first to express Australia's opinion of what the Commonwealth
is and as to how we think it should operate.
It is, as the proposed Declaration quite clearly says, " a voluntary association
of independent sovereign States" and it comes from the six continents and the five
oceans and it has certain positions in common and certain aims in common. It may
be that in the achievement of those aims and in the working o: Z the Commonwealth as
it meets together, there may be required to be changes of some kind in the way it
operates in future. 
But 1 believe that in other cases it is vital that there should not be changes
but there should be retention of the way in which the Commonwealth has operated in
the past. In that way the nations Of the Commonwealth come together to exchange views,
to listen to the point of view of those who come from other nations, to get to know
individuals which is of quite some importance. But it never operates in the contejt
that there should be decisions made by Commonwealth members that are binding on
any single member of the Commonwealth, and it never operates on the concept
that a general consensus of view should be in any way binding or taken seriously
and acted upon by any constituent member who does not share in that consensus.
I believe, Mr. Chairman, and I wish it to be clearly stated in the record,
that Australia believes that that principle must be retained. It is utterly essential
that there should be no attempt, conscious or unconscious, to turn the Commonwealth
into a mini-United Nations. Because as I see it, if that course is followed, then the
Commonweal th itself will tend to disintegrate. It cannot be a gathering of people
seeking to impose views on any single member.
And that goes for all those sitting around this table. Certainly that is the
concept that Australia has of the role of the Commonwealth. Those are the ideals,
those are the concepts which we seek in the Commonwealth, and I would like all to
be aware of that.
VWe ourselves do not, and will not, seek to impose our point of view on
anything on anyone else. Similarly, we will not accept the concept that there could
be an imposition on us of a point of view with which we do niot agree.
And so that, Sir, is whAt I would hope the Commonwealth would continue
to be in the Seventies a voluntary association of independent sovereign states, each
state retaining complete independence, no state, either alone or in conjunction with
others, seeking t o try to make decisions binding on any other member of the
Commonwealth. I think, perhaps, that it is not altogether a good development that we have
been so concerned with seeking to get forms of words which can meet with general
agreement. The end result of that is very often there is a form of words to which
everybody says they subscribe and views which everybody says they hold, but a form
of words which in fact does not fully set out completely the views of anybody. And
I think it is much better for the Commonwealth to operate i future without worrying
about different views being expressed. / 3 
For our part, we would be perfectly happy to be the only nation sitting around
this table who disagreed with what everybody else wanted to do or say. And we would
think none the worse at all off any other nation should they alone differ from the viewis
of others. This, of course, is an extreme example, but it ic~ put to underline v-hat
I believe to be the principles on which the Commonwealth should operate as it approaches
the . problems of the seventies. Those problems have in my view, very properly been
isolated in President Kaunda's Declaration. I would like to see them stated as: problems
with which the Commonwealth must concern itself and not go any further in indicating
how the Commonwealth or members of it should concern themselves with overcoming
thlem. But there is a value to my mind at this stage, at the beginning of this decade,
in saying what the problems are and, in the old traditions of the Commonwealth,
exchanging our views on those problems and the methods which might be adopted to
tackle them. In the Declaration we have before us, which deal-c with the Common., wealth
in the Seventies and I think the study of that and the Declaration are indivisible
there is properly first set down the need to maintain peace i the prosperity of all
Commonwealth nations is to proceed without interruption. There could be few, if any,
who would deny that this was a major task, and that this was something which vitally
concerns us all.
I don't myself believe that peace is threatened, others generally do, by
a difference in wealth between one country and another. That may exacerbate tensions,
but I do not believe that that is a maj or threat. Rather I tMA that the threat comes
from conflicting ideologies, and that, I would suggest, mighnt be recognised by all as
the major cause threatening the continuance of world peace. It was not a difference
in living standards which led to North Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia. It wias not a
difference in living standards which led to Laos being subject to military aggressioni.
It was a difference in ideology.
I would have liked this Declaration to contain within it the words that " the
Commonwealth condemns any armed attack made by any nation upon any other nation."
I cannot myself see why there should be any objection to that. If peace is to be
maintained, and there is a basic need to maintain it, there Should not be aggression by
any nat ion upon another, and more particularly perhaps there should not be any
aggression upon any small state.
It is quite properly stated later in this Declaration that the independence of
all the countries sitting around this table is of concern to all others. Any armed
attack made on any small state anywhere puts in jeopardy all small states everywhere.
I hope a recognition of that might be a contribution towards the maintenance of that
peace which President Kaunda so rightly put at the head of his Declaration. A 
The other problems which we must meet, the ones we all have, include
the question of providing international aid to countries which are developing but
still have much scope for development. May 1, for emphasis, say in regard to that,
that, comparatively, Australia is a rich country. Comparatively, if one takces other
comparisons, it is not a rich country. I don't feel that we are doing any injustice
to anybody by being a comparatively well-off country. We have been lucky we
Work hard. But I don't think that is doing any injustice to anyone, and I am glad
to see that that phrase does not, as I understand it, appear in the declaration now.
That is not to say that there is not a need for those who are better off to
assist those who are not so well off, and that is not to say that it is not to the self
interest of those who are better off to try to assist those who are still growing.
I do not see-the aim of international aid as being a handout, rather must it be a
well thought-out attempt to provide to those nations who are in need of further
development the capacity for that development, to provide the capital -for a
particular project, for industrialisation, for improving agriculture, for providing
the means by which such countries can assist themselves. And certainly, as-the
Chairman of this Conference so cogently remarked several days ago, no nation
is its brother's keeper. It isn't. But it must be its brother's helper; it can help
its brother to help himself. And in that way there can be no obligation. Obligationo
are nasty things. So I would say, in approaching the problem of aid, what is needed is a
clear understanding that what is done in this field is done to provide the capability
and the capital to the nations who are developing so they can raise themselves to an
economic position where they will no longer need such help. This will take some
time but this is the basis of the approach to this problem.
I would add one thing to my remarks on aid. This is provided, and I
hope it will continue to be provided, and we are playing our part in international
aid, but let us all listen to those other words of the Chairman of this Conference.
That is that while it is necessary to assist the growth, to assist the people of
developing countries to help themselves throughout the world, there can be no
obligation to do this indefinitely if every advance so made is swallowed up by an
increase in the population of the countries being helped. This is a matter under
the control of the countries concerned and this is of as vital interest to the real
economic growth of the countries as is the amount of aid of one kind or another
that is provided. Those statements in themselves are not enough to deal with this second
point which President Kaunda made. Supposing this is done, supposing nations are
helped to industrialise, are helped to increase production of various kinds so that
internally perhaps the standards of living may rise. Yet that will not be enough
unless we can somehow devise outlets in other countries for the products which
are produced as the result of such industrialisation. The two mtters go 
absolutely hand in hand, and -the.-two matters are ones. with which the Commonwealth
should concern itself, with which vie-. axe bappy to concern ourselves. The solutions
are not easy because there are vested interests to stop the filow of manufactured goods
not only from less developed countries but even from such countries as Australia.
These will need to be matters which we must seek to overcome in the sever-ties" and
proper matters to which we might direct our attention.
Another matter in this Declaration which I believe to be of great moment Li
the Seventies is the question of feeling between different races. It is of no use, I
think, pretending that in general there are not, in many countries at any rate, racial
feelings between people with different coloured skins. There ought not to be but there
is, and we must start from that premise. Let us try and do one thing that is-. reasonably
easy, and that is that each one of us say as I am prepared to say and mean that
we will, within our own country, abolish all governmental discrimination of any kcind.
That we can do, that each nation here can do, and that each nation here has not yet
completely done. If we could do that, and I1a m prepared to do it I will do it anyw~ ay
that would be one advance. But not enough, because that after all is onlyjr governmental
discrimination and there would still remain the areas in which governmental
discrimination was not a factor.
And can we perhaps seek to diagnose this illness of racialism? For only by
proper diagnosis can a proper cure be worked out. I think there is not a feeling
between countries when those countries contain people of different races. There is
not, I hope, a feeling against Australia by Zambia, and certainly no feeling against
Zambia by Australia. I don't believe that the people of any nation feel objections to
other nations on social grou nds. That would be my first attempt at a diagnosis of
the problem. But we see that within nations this problem is hard to eradicate and it is
hardest to eradicate if in any nation there is a large proportion of people with a
different skin colour from others. That is why, I think, we see more evidence of
racial feeling coming to the surface in a country where such a situation exists.
If that is so, how is that overcome? Well, a beginning, I think could be
made, by making sure that, if there are in any countries large groups of people ofdifferent
race, there is not, to reinforce that racial feeling, economic differences
affecting any particular race. Such differences reinforce any racial feeling that
there may be, and we must give our attention to that.
And, secondly, we should try to see, all of us, in such ways that we can,
that in the circumstances I have outlined, there should not be a reinforcing GIf racial
feeling by religious feeling because that again reinforces and makes it difficult
for this whole problem to be overcome. And perhaps in these 1970' s, we may be
able to take some steps along this road. e / 6 
It will take a long, long time -in my opinion for attitudes of the masses
completely to change. There is no such attitude among intelligent people, but it is
largely there in the masses. In the circumstances I have outlined, it will take a
long time to change, but if each of us in our own countries seeks to do what we car-,
then gradually this change will take place.
I don't think it can be forced, I don't think it can be a forced change but I
do think there should be a constant attempt, and I do think that attempt can well be
successful. We believe that the Commonwealth, as it is at present constituted, and
without any changes, is of value and has proved itself to be so. We also believe
that the potential value of the Commonwealth is much greater than at present. This
value is slightly vitiated, as we have seen in this conference, by us all spending
most of the time talking at enormous length about the things on which we disagree.
I don't say that we shouldn't talk about things on which we disagree. We should.
We should each put our point of view and others should say they agree with it or
disagree with it and then go on to something else. Something else, I would hope, on which
we all agreed and could work on with a common goal.
So we see the Commonwealth as of value, provided it operates on the
principles I have enunciated. We see it of an even greater value in the future because
it is likely that if our efforts are successful, then the areas of disagreement will
contract", the things on which we have discussions from different sides can be
reduced. If this happens, there will be a bigger opportunity to work on matters
on which we agree, and we might have more constructive results in the end.
It has been suggested to me from time to time you might have even
diplomatically hinted at it yourself, Mr. Chairman that Australia tends sometimes
to be rather an intrangisent country. But in declarations, which I hope will not
become a practice, or in resolutions, or in other matters, we do not think that we
should put our name or give our support to statements that we do not thoroughly
agree with or say we will take courses of action which we will not, in fact, adhere
to. And we will not do this. 



EMBARGO 7. 30 pm, Monday, 25 January 1971
THE COMMONWEALTH CONFERENCE
Interview givenby the Prime Minister, Mr. . JP Gorton
for ABC Television on his return from the Singapore Conference januaryj191I
Interviewer. Robert Moore
Q. Prime Minister, it seems that most of the reports that have come out on,
the Conference have been gloomy rather than optimistic. People have suggested
that it was a waste of time, if not something worse. Do you feel, as you loo~ k
back on it, that the Commonwealth has come out stronger than it went into
the Conference?
PM No, I don't think anybody could say that. But I don't see how anybody
could say it was gloomy or the reports were gloomy if not worse. The
Commonwealth Conference broke up without anybody leaving the Conference,
and before the Conference was held it was thought that some countries might
do that under certain circumstances. So far, this has not happened. On the
other hand, the underlying questions have not really been resolved. But I
would say, it was much the same as it was before the Conference.
Q. Were you disappointed in any way at the conduct of the Conference, or
the items that were discussed or the manner in which they were discussedi
PM Yes, I was a bit disappointed at the manner in which a number of items
were discussed. That is to say, a formal sitting around a large table and the
reading of formal speeches, much on the United Nations model. I was a little
disappointed at that, and I wasn't alone in this. A number of other delegations
also said they thought it would be much better to get away from this formalised
kind of sitting around and reading of set speeches, and the handing out to the
press afterwards. And also I was a little I suppose " disappointed" is the
word at so much of the time of the Conference, a very great deal of the time,
being taken up discussing this one question of Britain and the provision of maritime
naval facilities and arms to South Africa. It finished up with nobody changing
their position. It did seem to me that people could have stated their position
once, or if necessary, twice, and then said, " Well, those are our positions"
and gone on to something else. But at least two -full days was spent in going
over and over that.
Q. Prime Minister, some reports have pictured you as a " loner", as the
tough. guy of the Conference. I think one of the Singapore papers called you
" Two-gun Gorton". What were your relations with the other leaders,
particularly the African leaders? Were you so toughf Did you stand on your
dignity so much? / 2 
PM I don't think I stood on my dignity at all. But what I do believe one should
do at internation conferences or Commonwealth Conferences of this kind is to
say what one believes, is t~ o put one's point of view exactly as one sees it.
And indeed, other members of the Conference apparently had the same view.
I can see no point in using so much roundabout diplomatic verbiage that nobody
knows what you mean, and you can have a disagreement about what you meant
later. Maybe that was what they had in mind. But as far as relations with
the other individual members were concerned, I feel they were very good. I
like Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, and he did go to some trouble to come and
say goodbye especially before he left. Kaunda, in his last speech, suggested
it would be a good thing if people from Australia went through Lusaka and saw
more of his country, and if he and others could come and see more of us for
understanding. I don't think there was anything but good personal feeling
between us, although we had slightly different points of view.
Q. What was the role of Mr. Trudeau? Some people have suggested that he
was an honest broker, or mediator, or a smoother-over of troubled waters.
Did he play a big role, say, in the final draft on the Declaration?
PM Well, he played a role in it, but I don't think he played as great a role as
the Australians played, and by the Australians, I don't just mean myself I
mean myself and Mr. McMahon. There was a Declaration which was going to
be made and which all members were asked to subscribe to, and there-were
some things in that Declaration which we felt and we were not alone but we
-Ielt we couldn't subscribe to because we weren't in fact going to carry them out,
and therefore there should be changes in the original draft. Now, Mr. Trudeau
knew the African leaders ( he had had one of his aides over there speaking to
them beforehand), and he spoke to them and he got a suggested amendment and then I
put in a particular amendment saying that racialism, when we talked about it,
meant the practice of racialism within our own nation, each one withi its
own nation....
Q. Do you think it is fair to say that you pursued what one might call a hard
line at the Conference't
PM Yes, I think it is fair to say I pursued a hard line in two respects one
is that the Commonwealth Conference must operate in the way it has always
operated in the past, and that is by people expressing points of view to each
other and not trying to pass resolutions which purport to be binding, not trying
to take decisions by majority vote, not trying to reach conSen~ sus of opinion
which is expected to be accepted by those who don't have that opinion.
Q. Well, what is left then, Sir, if you....
PM What has always been there. This il~ ea that you-might adopt the practice
of the United Nations, of passing resolutions and things is completely new, as
far as Commonwealth Conferences are concerned. What is left is for people
sitting around a table, putting their point of view to each other, agreeing on
particular matters or agreeing to disagree on particular matters, and then going
on to things on which some constructive action can be taken. This has always / 3 
been the concept of the Commonwealth, and if it is to turn into a United Nations
with a majority vote, it. wilL. I am sure, destroy itself.
Q. Would the kind of Commonwealth and the kind of Conference you have in mind
allow for criticism of the policies of varbus countries by other countries?
PM Oh, yes. But not for communiques and declarations issued by majority vote
criticising. It would allow for discussion and argument and criticism the way
Commonwealth Conferences in the past have always done.
Q. But only in private meetings?
PM Yes, that's right.
Q. Well, I wonder if we could turn now to the issue of the proposed sale of arms
by Britain to South Africa. Was this issue resolved in any way at all at the
Conference?
PM, No, I don't think it was. It was the African countries, for reasons which are
thoroughly understandable, who were very upset at the concept of the sale of
naval vessels to South Africa by Britain. And they argued their case very cogently
and they said this could lead to an upsurge of feeling against Britain, and the
African countries turning to Russia and China and so on. One of the good contributions
that was made in that field, I think, was made by Mr. Trudeau, who said, well,
he Could see that and that was fine, but supposing Britain didn't sell arms, sell
these maritime arms, France was presumably going to do it. Would that mak. e a
difference to the African countries as vis-a-vis European countries, would they
not be still as angry at Europeans coming in if perhaps Portguese or Germans
or some other country would sell arms, would that not still leave the problem
just as it was before? And he went further, and said, in any case, while South
Africa exists in the way in which it exists and is governed at the present moment,
won't there always be in the African countries, the focus for turning to Russia,
or turning to China..,. will the thing be really changed merely by Britain refraining
from fulfilling what she regards as her contractual obligations, and some other
country coming in and fulfilling them. I thought that was a good analysis of -LL.
Q. Do you feel that the British Government will wait for the result of the
investigation by the so-called study group before makb-tg a decision?
PM All I can say on that is that Mr. Heath made it abundantly clear, and perfectly
clear and on the record that he was not bound in any way to wait for any decision
by this study group.
Q. Well, what do you see as the status and function and value of the study group?
For instance, would Austra hia be bound by ny findings it might make about tile
threat of the Russian Navy in the Indian Ocean? a 0 0 /' 6 
PM No, no, no. Not at all. As a matter of fact, the wording of the study group
was " to examine I speak from memory " to examine the factors
Jeading to strategic threats to the sea routes of the world". It was pretty high, wide
and handsome terms o! reference. It was then confined to the South Atlantic and the
Indian Ocean. I think it may have been in the minds o! some of those who proposed
it that if this was accepted, then Britain would say, " Well we will wait until thlis
has been carried out" but Britain, in fact, did not accept that and made it quite
clear.
Q. Do you see this study group as having any real function at all? Or is it really
just widow-dressing?
PM Well, I would like to wait until the terms of reference are completely worked
out. I don't know that it will affect in one way or another Britain's decisions.
Q. Or Australia's?
PM Australia hasn't got any decisions to make.
Q. It must be very interested in...
PM We are not selling arms to South Africa. The whole question is should
Britain sell maritime arms to South Africa?
Q. I imagined the study group took in much wider territory of trying to mak'e
some judgment on the threat to maritime trade routes in the Indian Ocean.
Australia would have an interest in that.
PM Oh, we would have an interest in it which I declared and made clear in the
Conference. But our interest is that there should be friendly ships if I can put
it that way able to lend assistance to the security o the trade router. on which
we so much depend. Those friendly ships can only operate if there are bases
from which they should operate. And we are interested in bases being available.
Now, it is up to Britain to decide whether, from military points of viewi, from1
financial points of view, she can best do this , in her own judgment, as a result a!
using the Simonstown base.
Q. Prime Minister, is it your impression that some African countries will leave
the Commonwealth if Britain does sell arms to South Africa?
PM Oh, I think we have to wait I wouldn't speculate on that.
Q. You were not able to get any insight into that?
PM I don't want to speculate on it. 
Q. It seems to many observers, I suppose, that one of the problems facing tile
Commonwealth now I think this was shown at the Corlerence is that there is
probably an irreconcilable conflict of priorities in the minds of the variou's
members. I would like to quote very very briefly to you something from President
Nyerere's background paper which seems to me to put that so-called African point
of view very succinctly. In his paper, President Nyerere says the Africans do
not expect all Commonwealth countries to have the samne order of foreign policy
priorities. And now here I quote " But we do expect that they will have South
African racialism on their list of priorities even if it is not at the top. Now is
South African racialism on the list of our foreign policy priorities?
PM In the sense of taking action against the South African Government, no, it
isn't. And this is one of the reasons why we couldn't go along with the Zambian
Declaration. The original Zambian Declaration suggested that all countries should
seek every means of combating racialism every means and deny all regimes
which practise it any assistance which could consolidate or strengthen them.
Now this means, or could be interpreted to mean undoubtedly, that you would break
off trade relations with any such country, and -you wuld break off diplomatic
relations, and indeed, if you take it seriously that you would use every mean-s
you could be required to go to war against them. Now, we are just not going
to do this.
Q. To come back to President Nyerere's point of view.... South African racialism
is not a foreign policy priority for us?
PM it is some thing which we deplore publicly and say we don't agree with. We
don't agree with the way it is applied but it is not something which we propose to
take international actio-n to combat.
Q. The African countries seem to want you to say, or the Commonwealth to
say not just that racialism is bad but that it is the worst thing in international
relations or human relations.
PM Yes, I think that the African countries, when they speak of racialism, don't
completely have in their minds racialism as practised in countries all over the world.
I think to them racialism means South African domination. I don't think'.* they are
at all concerned with disagreements, racial practices such as an African nation
agaist Asian citizens or perhaps the problems that we have seen in England or
in America or in other countries. -That comes into it partly, but basically I
believe whether they know it or not when they speak of racialism they really
mean South African and Rhodesian domination.
Q. Is there really any hope of countries which disagree so violently and
emotionally on their priorities in foreign policy, any hope that these countries
can live together as a Commonwealth for much longer? / 6 
PM I would think that there was and there ought to be because while oin may
disagree as to priorities, nevertheless there should be and there is, within
a numube r of foreign policy objectives, or economic policy objectives, thinirgs or.
which these countries can and do agree. Now that ought to bind, and people ought
to be able to say, " Well, these other things, we don't quite agree, but let's
go on to the ones we do agree about".
Q. In the weeks leading up to the conference, our p osition on the sale of British
arms to South Africa wras often described as being neutral. Now, in whtat sense
was it neutral? What could we have against it?
PM What could we have....
Q. Against the sale of arms to South Africa to make us neutral?
PM Well, we had to consider two things : One, the feelings of other people i the
Commonwealth to some extent; secondly, that this was, ba: 3ically, a British
Government's decisioin. We did not we, as I said before, we want to see that
the Indian Ocean trade routes are protected, particularly since there is now a
growing Russian interest in the area. There have to be bases from which these
ships can operate. I have a belief that if Simonstown were in Tanzania, if it
were not in South Africa, that everybody would say, " Yes, of course, this is the
place for a base and this is where these things can best be done".
Q. Could I put it to you, then,, if the same security arrangements could be rra de
in another way, would you prefer arms not to be sold to South Africa?
PM I am afraid that wie have taken the view, and I think1c that it is the correct one,
that we are interested in the protection of the Indian Ocean trade routes. If
Britain in her judgment feels that any action she takes contributes to thle protection
of the Indian trade routes, that is her decisioin, and the results of that, as far
as the Indian trade routes are concerned, would be iii Australia's interest. But
we don't urge or condemn.
Q. Well, put it in another way, then. Is a strong South African essen-tial to our
security in the Indian Ocean?
PM I wouldn't want to comment on that. After all, we are talking simply about
whether the base which Britain occupies, which she monitors, under which there
is an agreement, should be continued to be used by her for the protection of
naval routes trade routes. I can only repeat that we think it is her decision
on this, and we don't propose to condemn her for mal-zing any decision she makes
or protest against any decision she makes, or urge her into making any
decision.
Q. But you wouldn't rather have the security if another base could be f. Lound and
not have the arms sold to South Africa? Wouldn't that be a kind of compromiie.... o. / 7 
PM I would like to leave this to Britain's dec tsion.
Q. What precisely is the degree of threat now, of the Russian Navy hi the hidian
Ocean?
PM I don't think it is great I don't think it is great at all. It is comparatively
you Imow, ships deployed are comparatively small. But there is a new element
that has been introduced. Russian ships in the past have come into the Indian
Ocean and gone away againi. But there is clearly a much greater degree of
interest, a much greater period of time during which Ohips df the Russian Navy
are in the Indian Ocean, a clear greater Interest and greater act ion to sustati
that interest. And this is comparatively new.
Q. You allow that the Russians do have some kind of legitimate interest in the
Indian Ocean
PM I suppose that all countries really have an interest in tKl oceans, but I agree
with Briain that when there is a new element introduced 4r:: o a situation, the.-, you
have to take cognisance of that new dement.
Q. Is the threat really to the trade routes or is it so. i-iing else?
PM didn't say there was a threat, you know. I just L., d there was a new
element that had been introduced and that this, therefore, had to be taken care
of. And I don't suppose that we would have been acti2ng as we are, to provide
naval facilities in Western Australia, if we didn't fee. t
Q. Why is the study group then looking at the security of maritime trade routes
in the Indian Ocean if there isn't some kind of hypothetical, I suppose, threat
from somebody?
PM I think that this was something that was put up by somebody at the Conference
I think I told you this before perhaps in the expectation that if it were put up
and adopted then it would delay Britain making a decision. But Britain made it
quite clear that this was not so.
Q. Well, can I put it this way. If Russia were to be a threat in the Li-dian Ocean,
would it be through its effect on our trade routes or would it be somethi-ng else?
I mean, what could it do about the trade routes?
PM Well, I don't think that in talking about the Commonwealth Conference and
what occupied the Commonwealth Conference, I want to go into kind of Defence
Papers on what the effects of a new presence in the Indian Ocean might, from
a defence point of view, be, other than to say as I have said before, we are
interested in maintaining a trade route. Britain is particularly interested in
maintaining her trade routes; there is a n. w element introduced; Britain and
ourselves feel that we need to take more interest in it ourselves. T" hat's all. / 0 
8.
Q. Now, Prime Minister, we will leave that there. Could I turn now to another
subject which arose not at the Conference but while you were i nSingapore.,
our immigration policy. In your speech to the Australian Alumni Association,-you
were quoted as saying, of Australia, that " it may provide the first truly multiracial
society, with no tensions of any kind possible between any of the races
within it. At any rate, this is our ideal". Now, did you see that as a major
statement of new policy?
PM No, I didn't.
Q. What did you mean by multi-racial then, a multi-racial society?
P.) M I meant a society in which there are people with different coloured skins, of
different racial extraction, such as in fact we have in Australia at the momenit.
We have Australians, we have aboriginals, we have Australians of Chinese
extraction, of Japanese extraction, of a variety of races. You see, Sinñ gapore
I was speaking in Singapore and speaking to the Singapore Alumni people
Singapore says, " We are a multi-racial society" and so they are. They are
Chinese, Malays, Indians, Europeans, Eurasians, but they are also a homogeneous
society. I don't know the percentage, but I would thinkL'-90 per cent at least are
Chinese. They are homogeneous, but there are many races. And there are
also tensions there between the races from time to time. And as far as Australia
is concerned, I believe we must remain homogeneous. I believe in the present
application of our immigration policy, but under our present immigration
rolicy, people of other races can come in and be assimilated. I feel there is
little or no racial feeling in Australia towards such people. And this being
continued could lead to a multi-racial society in the sense that there wiere a
number of different races, without racial tensions which exist in almost every
other country of the world. But can I perhaps make it more clear by reading
some sentences of what I said.... because one of the speakers had spoken about
our immigration policy. I said,
" As far as the application of an immigration policy is concerned, I
have no hesitatio-n in saying what I am now going to say, and I propose
to make no apology for saying it. Looking around the world, I see
social problems between Negro and Asian in some parts of Africa,
I see tensions between Negro and European in England. I see grave
danger to normal liing in the split between the races in the United
States, and I read not long ago of riots between races not far av ay from
Where I am standing now,, riots which could have easily spread to
Singapore. I am not going to allow that kind of da:ñ-ger to occur in
Australia.
Q. Prime Minister, if I could just come back to that, you also did mention
that Australia might become the first truly multi-racial society in another part.
I doin't want to bandy words with you. Now what you are saying there is that to
the extent we become a multi-racial society, it won't be so much through
deliberate policy as through accident or stealth 0 / 9 
PM '/ eli, I think it will be through deliberate policy in that we are not propos,: ing
to change an immigration policy in order to allow large numbers of other races to
come in, because that would create racial tens ion. Can I quote the words that
you are quotin~ g?
Q. Yes.
PM/ " I think that the course which we are followtog" that is our present
immigration policy " holds great chances of achieving real racial tolerance.
I think it holds better chances than if we were to risk the kind of racial confl-icts
t hat other countries which I believe we would risk, if we abandoned
our present policy. " I think if we build up gradually inside Australia a proportion
of people without white skins, then there will be a complete lack of conscious-ness
that it is being built up" and that we will arrive-at a state where we vi 11
have a multi-racial country without racial tensions and perhaps the f" irst in
the world. The key to that is that we do maintain our present policy.
Q. wouldI fy tohue rper ewfeerre an osto cteientsyi ownhs ich nwo arsanc'ita hl otmenosgioennse ou[ i sba umt uwlhtii-crha cinia fl acsto cdiiedt yh ave
great diversity of race, of language, religion...
PM You are asking me a question that if there were no racial tensions, and
wherever I look in the world, I can see no instance where there aren't racial
tensions
Q. Whiat I am really asking is is a homogeneous society a preferable ideal to
a very diverse society?! It seemed to me you were hinting....
PM If you look at ideals as distinct from realities, of course an ideal is something
that one must ultimately strive towards, but it is not something which can be
applied in a world of reality.
Q. Well, if Australia goes on. being so relatively free from racial tellsions,
given the limited amount of non-European immigration, would you like to see,
or would you expect to see a gradual increase in the number of non-European"-
migrating to Australia?
PM I would want to see Australia remaining homogeneous, overwhelminigly
homogeneous, as I think that is the only way one can avoid racial tensions. There
are racial tensions and I am quoting aghin " There are racial tensioins, and
whether there, ought to be or not, doesn't matter. We live in a world of reality.
We don't live in a world which mo uld be different if we could shatter it to bits
and remould it. And living in a world of reality, I believe that if we were to
abandon our restricted immigration policy, that we would get tensions that wie won't
get if wie continue with the liberalised policy we have now got. *.* 0/ l13 
Q. Of course, it is often suggested, and I am sure you have heard this, that
our policy is a racist policy people of other countries sometimes say this,
often not looking at their own policies, I agree. But one of the things, of
course, that they do beat us with now is the fact that we don't grant assisted
passages to non-European migrants not so much the number, but we distinguish
on that ground. Do you feel that it would be worth removing that charge?
PM No. No, I dont.
Q. Why?
PM Because I believe that what we apply, and what almost every other country
I can think of applies, is a racist immigration policy. If it were not, then ai-,,; body
from anywhere could come in equal numbers and this simply doesn't apply.
But what I believe is that the racial implications of abandoning our present
policy would. lead to the kind of trouble that we have seen in other natio-ns, and
not only European natiorB.
Q. Prime Minister, now when we look ahead after the Conference, where do
you see the Commonwealth in our overall foreign policy? How big a part does
it, or will it, play?
PM It is a very hard question to answer. You say " in our overall foreign
policy". I don't quite know how to fit one concept into another. I would say,
-for example, quite clearly Indonesia, in relation to our foreign policy, is far
more important to us than many countries in the Commonwealth are far more
impoitant. So I don't think the Commonwealth impi:-nges on that area of foreign-r
policy at all. But perhaps where it impinges is that one can, or one hopes in
the future, meet around the table, a group of people from different countries
in the Commonwealth and explain to each one of them one' s own fo reign-policyt
and perhaps reach things on which one can agree and which one can ao-operate,
Q. , Prime Minister, I suppose tIe worst cynics suggest there won't be another
Commonwealth Conference. Will there be?
PM I can't tell you. I would be surprised if there were not. The Commonwealth
is not going to aisappear because if the worst came to the worst, and some
nations in it decided not to be in the Commonwealth.... it would depend on hoyl
many nations still wished for there to be a Commonwealth, how many nations
wanted to go to a Commonwealth Conference. And I think there would be quite
a number. Prime Minister, thank you very much for talking to us. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 5/ 1971
A USTRALIA DAY MESSAGE 1971
From the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
T his is the first Australia Day of our third century.
We should regard it as a landmark for new endeavours
to make Australia stronger and more self-reliant. I ask all Australians
to treat it as a national day in the real sense...,. as a focus for what we
are as a people and what we do as a nation.
We move into our third century with a great many
advantages denied to others. We are the only continent in the world
inhabited by a single nation and we have in recent years discovered
great wealth in our national resources. We have a steadily-increasing
population and full employment.
Although we are facing some economic challenges at the
present time, we have an economy growing more varied every ) ear.
This holds much promise for the future prosperity of our nation.
But we must not forget that there is still a pioneering
job to be done. We are taking on new responsibilities in our region and
we have great tasks at home to tackle. This is not a time to be content
with past achievements or to look for more leisure as a primary
industrial goal It is a time to work to make sure we come to grips with
current problems and to sustain our growth as a nation. It is a time
to press ahead with development and expansion to eliminate poverty,
to improve the quality of life, to take a more active interest in
protecting our environment, and to support and promote our own
Australian culture. If Australia Da y helps to gi us an awareness of all
this, then it is a national day in the real sense.
CANBERRA, January 1971 



TRANSCR IPT PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE NATION
( NATIONWIDE RADIO AND TELEVISION)
THE ECONOMY 2.9 JAN~ 19,11
You have all read much lately on the problemr, of inflation..., the problem
~ f ent rises in costs and prices and the prospects fo the future, In some
ways the matter has been a little over-diamatised perhaps, but there is nevertheless
a very real problem for discussion.
The disc-ic'sioi1 itself has resulted from two developments. First, tile
rise of 1. 9% in the Consumer Price Index during the last three months of-1970
the largest rise for some fourteen years. And secondly the likely effects on the
economy-of the Arbitration Commission's award of a 6% increase in wages an~ d
salaries a much greater increase than anyone had thought possible.
Cabinet has met this week to discuss the problem and I want to tell you
briefly how we see the present situation, and the approaches which we believe sh-ould
be made to attack the root causes of inflation. But first let me refer to tile rise
in the Consumer Pr ice Index.
We believe that too muc h has been made of this single quarter's f igures.
Much ofi the rise was due to the once-and-for-all inclusion of cost increases due to
indirect taxes imposed by the Budget on such items as cigarettes, wine, petrol and
so on. Without them the Index rise would have been about 1. 1% or a little more.
So the real rate of increase was not nearly as great as the figures suggested.
But, having made allowance for that, the rate of increase was uncom~ fortably
high and reflected a too rapid underlying rate of price increase. Now, in that
situation, of a too rapid underlying rate of price increase in that situation we are
faced with a 6% wage and salary rise which will add perhaps $ 900 million a year
to wages and salaries arid therefore purchasing power in a full year.
We will not, at the present rate of production, produce sufficient additional
goods and services to be exchanged for that additional money at constarnt pricec. It
would be fine to give buyers an extra $ 900 million a year if we were going to produce
$ 900 million worth of extra goods to sell. But we are not. Therefore, unless some
action is taken, there will be a boost to inflation. And growing inflation is one of
the worst ills from which a nation can suffer.
In considering what action should be taken Cabinet sought first to discover
the areas in which demand seemed to be growing most strongly. It appeared that
consumer spending was not growing strongly. A high rate of growth in demnand has not,
at any rate as yet, shown up in this field.
The areas in which demand is growing strongly are in the public sector
that is spending by Governments in private investment in new plant and machinr~ ery
and fi non-dwelling building construction that is on. such things as the new blocks
of offices now growing up in such profusion in twe cities of Australia. / 2 
We therefore believe our first line of attaclk should be to ensure
not only a restraint on Government expenditure but a reduction in Government
expenditure this financial year.
Before I went to Singapore I issued instructions to all Departments and
to the Public Service Board that action must be taken to restrain the growth in the
number of public servants.
We are now working out reductions in the Government's budgeted
expenditure in other directions. Implementing these reductions will be
uncomfortable. Australians will not get as much as they had hoped to get
in the way of new public amenities of various kinds. But the reductions are
necessary. By reducing the demand of Governments, more is mrade available to
meet the demand of private persons.
Secondly we believe that the rate of growth of new private investment
in plant and equipment and machinery should be reduced.
And thirdly the rate of growth, and the demand pressures of new nondwelling
building construction must also be reduced.
A considerable proportion of this latter demand is said to be due to the
inflow of overseas capital for the specific purpose of building such buildings.
The Government wishes it to be known that it would prefer overseas investors
who are considering financing non-dwelling construction of this kind not to do so
until they have first discussed their plans and the dates on whichi they propose to
b . gin construction with the Treasury.
We have considered taking monetary and fiscal measures at this time.
That is restricting credit or raising interest rates still further or increasing
taxation. We do not believe that the present situation requires a lift in interest
rates, already high, and we would prefer to look forward to a future time
necessarily indefinite when other measures we take might permit a reduction
of such rates. Nor do we think that the present situation calls for a rise in taxation.
I have already said that the rate of growth in consumer spending is
not growing significantly as yet.
To increase indirect taxes at this time would therefore be to further
increase prices in an effort to reduce demand in an area where demand is not
excessive, and by adding to the Consumer Price Index it would quite possibly
stimulate an inflationary psychology. 
To increase income taxes at this time would, again, be to tackle demand
in an area where demand is not now excessive. It would not strike at the root of
the tzouble, and its financial effects over a quarter of a year would be minimal.
We do not reject these economic weapons and say we will not use them
at some future time if it is necessary. If it is necessary, and useful in tackling
the problem, we will use them however unpopular that may be. But we do not
believe that to use them now would be of help. And we do not believe indeed that
at any time the use of this-Tclassic weapons against inflation would of itself and
alone solye our problems.
Having said this, and having indicated some of the actions the
Government will be taking to reduce demand in the sectors which are growing too
rapidly, I come to what constitutes the major threat of inflation.
No matte: what action a Government takes no matter how severely it
taxes or how ruthlessly it cuts Government spending no matter how it seeks to
redirect resources if that is what it wishes to do it will not be able to beat
inflation if wages and salaries rise more quickly than production. Demands for
over-award payments, for extra holidays, for additional holiday pay, for shol-ter
hours can only be met in one of two ways. Either the amount of goods and
services producei is increased sufficiently to enable these requests to be met
without inflation or the requests are met at the cost of inflation which ultimately
destroys the benefits sought and leaves us all worse off.
Price control, imposed by Governments, is no answer to this problem.
It is superficially appealing, but in fact all our advice is, and our beliefs are, that
it is not an answer to the problem. There is a limit to the extra costs which
et: . ployers can absorb before passing on cost increases by increasing prices. The
inexorable fact is that if we try to pay higher wages without providing an
equivalent increase in production we will have inflation. And yet this course is
the one that Australia has been following and this approach is the real inflationary
threat to Australia. Given our present Arbitration system and State Wages Tribunals, control
of this situation is not now entirely in the hands of Governments. Yet Governments
can do something to combat the over-award payments now being negotiated by
employers. At present, employers are able to buy industrial peace by conces * sions,
the cost of which they know they can pass on to the consumer. it can be made more
difficult to pass on extra costs.
Increased internal competition wouild help. And internal competition can
be increased if the High Court upholds the validity of the present Trade Practices Act,
both interstate and intrastate. If it does uphold the validity, the Act can be
strengthened and lead to more internal competition. If the Court holds the Act in part
invalid, then we will have to consider approaching the Australian people and asking
them to give us more power to make the Act wholly valid.
Further, external competition with industries in Australia when internal
prices rise unduly in those industries because of costs, due to over-award payments
and other concessions negotiated by employers in those industries, will have to be
considered. 
And now I sum up. There has been a tendency to over-dramatize the
present inflationary situation. But there is a real threat of inflation inherent in
the underlying demand and in the recent Arbitration Commission Award, in State
Wages Tibunals Awards, and in increased over-a-ward payments which might be
expected to flow on from that.
We propose to take action against demand inflation by reducing
Government spending, by encouraging postponement of private investment in
plant, by discouraging the present rate of construction of non-dwelling
construction such as office buildings and by other ancillary actions of lesser
importance which we have in mind. We will seek to increase internal competition
and to examine cases where competition from external sources might be justified,
so as to make it more difficult for employers to concede union demands.
We are prepared in the future to take any further action which may be
considered necessary to play our full part in beating inflation. But unless wage
fixing authorities, unions and employers, also play their full part, our actions in
the future by the classic weapons of taxation and reducing demand could impose
more hardship than would otherwise be necessary and not have the oorrective
effect -which they would otherwise have. What we seek in Australia is production
which increases yearly and wages and salaries which also increase yearly but not
faster than production, so that there can be a real increase in living standards.
In the present employment situation full employment with the
growingr public demand for more Government services, it will be'uncomfortable
tc achieve this. Many things for which an admirable and persuasive case can be
made out may have to be postponed. But in the long run we will all be better off.
We all have a part to play in attaining that goal. And for its part, within the
Lirnitations the law imposes on it, the Government will play its full part. 



FCR PRESS: PM No. 6/ 1971
CONGRATULATIONS TO NEW C. P. LEADERS
Commentby the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
My warmest congratulations to Mr. Anthony on his election
as Leader and to Mr. Sinclair on his election as Deputy Leader of
the Country Party.
Mr. Anthony is a worthy successor to Sir John McEwen, and
I am sure that under the new leadership there will be a continuation of
the special relationship that has been a feature of the coalition for so
many years.
CANBERRA 2 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM Nio. 7/ 1971
SUSPENSION OF INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE OW PLANT
AND EQUIPMENT usED IN MANUFACTURING
Statement by the Prime Minister, _ Mr. 12! ha GrtoIn
Parliament will shortly be asked to approve legislation suspending,
as from today, the investment allowance on manufacturing plant and equipment.
The income tax law at present permits a special deduction of 20 per*
cent of capital expenditure on new plant and equipment used in manufacturing the
dedIuction being made from the income of the year in which the plant is first used
or installed for use. This investment allowance is supplementary to the normal
deductions for depreciation; over the scheduled life of the plant or equipment it
results in total deducations for taxation purposes of 120 per cent of the installed
co. 9t of the plant and equipment concerned.
The investment allowance for manufacturing was a concession introduced
in February 1962 at a time of declining employment and slow economic activity.
It was one of a series of measures designed to stimulate demand and it was
particularly directed to encouraging expenditure on equipment and re-equipment
of manufacturing industries,, then at a low ebb. The allowance was extended in
1963 to plant and equipment used in primary production.
In current economic circumstances, with heavy private investment in
non-farm plant and equipment rising at a rate in excess of 20 per cent, it is
inappropriate to continue this special incentive for investment in manufacturing
plant and equipment. Accordingly, the Government has decided to suspend as from
today the operation of section 62AA of the Income Tax Assessment Act which provides
the investment allowance on manufacturing plant and equipment. The decision will
not a-fect the allowance for plant and equipment used in primary production, which
will still apply. The legislation will include some provisions of a transitional nature to
cover plant acquisitions straddling the suspension date. The Government feels
that some transitional provisions should be included to cover expenditure on plant
where the contract for the supply of the plant was entered into on or before today.
Details of the transitional arrangements will be announced later.
CANBERRA 3 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: PMA No. 8/ 1971
MD\ TISTRY CHANGES
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, this evening
announced the following Ministry changes
*. Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Trade and
Industry
*. Minister for Primary Industry
*.. Minister for Shipping and
Transport Minister for the Interior
CA NBERRA
3 February 1971 Mr. J. D. Anthony
Mr. Ian Sinclair
Mr. P. J. Nixon
Mr. R. J. D. Hunt 



FIFTH COMMONWEALTH EDUCATION CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, ACT 3 FEBRUARY 1971
2n~ ing LA : S bthfe~ Prnim Miite, Mr. L h~ rton
Your Excellencies, Honourable Ministers, Mr Secretary-General, Ladies and
Gentlemen It is an honour for me to be opening this Conference and to be welcoming
to Canberra so many distinguished educators from so many parts of the world.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I extend a warm welcome to our
overseas guests and to our owfl State Ministers and leading educators from within
Australia. This is the first time a Commonwealth Education Conference has been held
in Australia and there will be stimulation and benefit for mainy of us in what you discuss.
I am sure that a sound basis of co-operation already exists among all those present.
In many ways, this F ifth Commonwealth Education Conference is a more
accurate reflection of the benefits of the Commonwealth of Nations than the recent
Heads of Government Meeting in Singapore. It is the co-operation that takes place on
the practical level in education and in countless other fields that gives this unique
free association of nations its durability and its strength.
It is not realistic to expect thirty-one diverse nations to be able to reach
a consensus of opinion on highly controversial political issues, nor is it realistic
to assume that if they do reach a consensus it in any way affects those who are not
part of that consensus. But 1. would further say that unanimous viewpoints and attitudes
are not necessary for a successful Commonwealth reiationship.
Unftortunately, though understandably, it is the periodic Heads of Government
Meeting and the inevitable political stresses and strains that attract most publicity.
To many people these summit gatherings are the Commonvwealth. Well, they are
certainly important and I suppose they represent the ultimate in the Commonwealth's
political activities. But it is the many practical strands running beneath the surface that form
the basic fabric of the Commonwealth. And that is why I am particularly glad to be
here, because this Conference, less than two weeks after Singapore, helps to put the
whole concept of the Commonwealth in perspective.
It is in the field of education among others that a great deal has been done
which has been of mutual advantage for Commonwealth members. And this Conference
is a tangible demonstration that the Commonwealth of Nations does work, that it is
of practical value, and that when we get together, our meetings aren't always political,
but are often designed to come to grips with issues of common concern, such as the
education of our various peoples. 
After all, so much of the future of all our countries depends on education.
When we remember that one in every four people in the world today lives in a
Commonwealth country, it comes home with dramatic force, I think, that the
Commonwealth of Nations as a free assembly can do much for the common good by
such exchanges of views and experiences at practical levels as will take place here
during this Conference.
In that particular field of education, the Commonwealth has a really
worthwhile role to play. It is an activity which goes on year in and year out, important
to all our welfare as individual countries, and to the Commonwealth itself, concerned
as it is with democracy and liberty.
And liberty is more than the freedom of the market-place. Liberty of
the mind is perhaps ultimately the key to our survival. And to allow liberty of the
mind to have a full flowering is the-task, the ideal of the educator in all countries,
for education is the great liberator, and from properly educated minds flows
understanding which is the basis of co-operation and progress in so many other
fitelds. We I4ave our problems in Australia, as you have yours. There is in this
country, an endless pressure on our education systems. More of our people are
wanting more education, and more are wanting higher education, and more of our
young people are staying at school longer. In fact, the number staying on beyond
the compulsory age has doubled in the last decade.
There is a ceaseless demand for more teachers, and for teachers w~ ho are
said to require much higher qualifications are said to require. And on top of it all,
there is a questioning of old methods, and a searchin-g for new ones, as our society
at all its levels recognises great changes resulting from technological progress and
from different attitudes of mind, particularly among the younger generation different
attitudes of mind, different desires as to what will provide a good life, a questioning
of whe ther purely material things are as important as perhaps they were thought
by past generations. So no longer are the old methods and the old standards good enough. The
times are too demanding. The challenge is real. We are constantly endeavouring
to match needs to resources which I note is your theme at this Conference but, at
any rate in Australia, we also have to bear in mind the need to match resources to
needs and this may not be quite so easy or lead to quite so quick a progress as we
would like. But we have made a lot of progress in expanding our education systems
in Australia. Under our Federal system, the prime responsibility for educations ic
with State Governments, but the Commonwealth Government is deeply involved,
directly and indirectly. And I have considerable first-hand knowledge of this
involvement for I was the first Minister for Education and Science in the Commonwealth. o / 3 
We are spending on education more than fIive times as much per head of
population as we were spending a decade ago. It has gone up from $ 4-2 per head of
population to $ 25 per head of population.... a much bigger population.
This year, just over four per cent of total Federal Government expenditure
is specifically for education, while on top of that, the Australian States are now
committing about one-third of their total revenues and loan expenditure to this field.
They have more than doubled their expenditure per head of population in the last
decade. So while there are always newspaper headlines which tell us there is
a " Crisis in Education", we are, I believe, making progress. We don't measure
progress simply by the increased amount of money. It is how, where and why it is
spent that matters. And here the need for flexibility is, I think, of very great
importance. None of us can freeze old systems of education in a world in a ferment
of change. So here in my country, we are seeking new ways of co-operation with
Australian States. With them we are looking at the standards of the curriculum in
our schools, to see where jointly we can do things better. Wie have looked, and hellped,
in science education and in technical education, and in the building of teacher colleges,
in such things as the teaching of Asian languages, and in other fields. This is goixng
on all the time. It is not goi:-g on as quickly as educators would like probably not
nearly as quickly. It is perhaps not going on nearly as quicly as the population would
like, but it is going on, and improvements are made year by year.
At the tertiary level, we now have here colleges of advanced education as an
alternative to universities not as institutions which provide a lesser brand of
education, but as institutions which are alternatives in that they provide a slightly
different approach to studies in tertiary fields. They are geared more directly to
the specific needs of industry and commerce, and I think they will prove to be a most
signicant development in tertiary education in Australia in this decade.
And for ourselves, -we have in our Budget this year to assist in
Commonwealth educational co-operation, a sum of some $ 890, 000.
Now, Sir, I think I have said quite enough. You will no doubt hear much
more of these matters from the experts here as your Conference proceeds. And
so all that remains for me to do is to wish good luck and success to the Conference
and to declare it open. 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 9/ 1971
EXPORT OF MERINO RAMS
Statement-by-the Prime Minister, Mr. john Gorton
On Ist February '. 970 the Government, acting on the
recommendation of the Australian Wool Industry Conference, partially
lifted the embargo on the export of merino rams.
The original embargo had been imposed by executive action
and lifting it did not require legislation or Parliamentary sanction.
Subsequently the A. C. T. U. placed a ban on the export of these
rams, and trade unions have refused to refuel a foreign aircraft chartered
by the overseas buyers of the rams.
The Government cannot permit a situation in which Australian
exporters are prevented from honouring their commitments in
international trade.
To do so would be to allow industrial action, undertaken for
political purposes, to interfer with overseas trade and damage Australia's
good name in the eyes of the world.
This we will not permit.
The Government has therefore taken steps to ensure that the
rams will be delivered to those who bought them in good faith. Air Force
facilities are being made available to enable the aircraft concerned to be
refu. 1-led, load the rams, and depart for its destination.
CA NBERRA
4 February 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 10/ 1971
FLOOD ASSISTANCE
The Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton, today sent the
following telegram to the Premier of Victoria, Sir Henry Bolte
" ON BEHALF OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT
I EXPRESS SYMPATHY WITH THOSE AFFECTED BY THE
FLOODS IN VICTORIA. WE HAVE NOT RECEIVED ANY
REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE BUT ARE READY TO JOIN WITH
YOUR GOVERNMENT IN THE USUAL WAY IN FINANCING
SCHEMES FOR THE RELIEF OF PERSONAL HARDSHIP AND
DISTRESS IN THE AFFECTED AREAS.
Mr Gorton also sent the following telegram to the
Premier of New South Wales, Mr Askin, but the text of this telegram
is embargoed until 9 pm ( unless released before that time by Mr
Askin) ' WILL YOU PLEASE CONVEY DEEPEST SYMPATHY
ON MY BEHALF AND ON BEHALF OF THE COMMONWEALTH
GOVERNMENT TO ALL THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN SO
GRIEVOUSLY AFFLICTED BY THE FLOOD DISASTER. I
HAVE ARRANGED FOR TWO SENIOR COMMONWEALTH
OFFICERS TO CONFER WITH YOUR OWN OFFICIALS IN
SYDNEY ON THE MAGNITUDE OF THE DISASTER AND THE
STEPS WHICH WE MIGHT JOINTLY TAKE TO OVERCOME ITS
EFFECTS AS FAR AS POSSIBLE.
The Commonwealth has already agreed to provide
000 to the New South Wales Government, on a dollar-for-dollar
basis, to assist with personal hardship and distress in the New
South Wales floods.
CANBERRA, 8 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: PI_ 1o. 11/ 1971
VISIT OF THE HEAD OF STATE OF BURMA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
At the invitation of the Governor-General, the Chairman
of the Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma, accompanied
by Madame Ne Win, will pay a visit to Australia in March.
There have been warm and cordial relations between our
two countries since the foundation of the Union of Burma. We welcome
this visit as an opportunity to underline our interest in the progress
and welfare of the Burmese people.
Consultations will now take place to prepare a programme
of engagements for the Chairman's visit, and an announcement of
these details will be made later.
CANBERRA 9 February 1971 



FOR PRESS PM No. 12/ 1971
VISIT BY THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
The Duke of Edinburgh has accepted the following engagements
for his visit to Canberra from 30 March to 2 April 1971
Tuesday 30 March
Afternoon Ceremonial Arrival at RAAF Base, Fairbairn
Met by the Governor-General and the
Prime Minister
Artillery Salute of 21 Guns
Inspection of Guard of Honour
Evening Dinner at Government House
Wednesday 31 March
Morning Declares open the extensions to Australian
War Memorial
Lunch Attends Parliamentary Luncheon at Parliament
House
Evening Attends Air Board Anniversary Banquet
Thursday 1 April
M-_ orning Visits RAAF Base, Richmond and presents
Squadron Standards to Nos. 36 and 38 Squadrons
Afternoon Visits Staff College at RAAF Base, Fairbairn
Attends Meeting with Outward Bound Memorial
Trust at Government House
Evening Attends Air Board Anniversary Reception
Dinner at The Lodge
On Friday 2 April The Duke of Edinb urgh goes to Sydney to open the
Royal Easter Show, and the following day he will leave Sydney by air for London.
CANBERRA 9 February 1971
NOTE: The programmes of engagements for The Duke of Edinburgh's visits to
the Territory of Papua and New Guinea ( 17-23 March), Soutii Australia ( 23-26 March)
and Western Australia ( 26-30 March) are being released separately in the
respective capital cities by the T. P. N. G. Administration and the Premiers of
South Australia and Western Australia. 



FOR. PRESS: PM 13/ 1971
FLOODAID FOR NEW OUTH WALES
Statement I y the Prime Minister, Mr. lohn Gorton
The Prime Minister announced today that, following discusscions held
between Commonwealth and State officials at the request of the New South Wales
Premier, the Commonwealth Government stood ready to provide additional assistance
to the New South Wales Government in financing relief measures required as a result
of the major flooding in the State.
The Commonwealth Government has already made available the services
of the Defence Forces to help with rescue operations and it has announced a grant
of $ 50, 000 as a contribution to the cost of providing, on a for basis, with the State,
relief of personal hardship and distress to those affected by the flood.
The Commonwealth would, the Prime Minister said, provide further funds
as required for this purpose.
Apart from immediate relief of distress, such assistance is available for
meeting essential repairs to houses and for repairing and replacing essential items
of furniture and personal effects to the extent required to provide reasonable living
conditions for those in necessitous circumstances.
The Prime Minister said that, in addition to sharing the cost of relief of
personal hardship and distress, the Commonwealth would assist in financing certain
other fLood relief measures where the cost of this would impose an undue burden on
the State's finances. The Premier of New South V/ ales has indicated that, as the State was already
committed to expenditure of arou ' nd $ 4 million on other natural disaster relief measures,
it would have difficulty in n-eeting additional ex-penditure in 1973-71 for flood relief. In
these circumstances, the Commonwealth Government had agreed to meet all expenditure
in 1970-71 on natural disaster relief in excess of $ 5 million. In practical terms, this
means. that the State's contribution to flood relief other than the relief a! personal
hardship and distress would be limited to about $ 1 million in the currenit financial year.
Under this arrangement agreed between the Commonwealth and the State,
assistance will be provided in addition to relief of personal hardship and distress, for
Carry-on loans at concessional interest rates to farmers
affected by the floods who are in necessitous circumstances
and who are unable to obtain additional credit through normal
commercial channels. / 2 
2.
Restoration of certain State and. Local Government
assets damaged-by-theifloods.
The New South Wales Premier, Mrz. Askin, had pointed out that it was difficult
-to-be-precise as to the amounts required at this stage simply because Ouch a large part
of the floo-d iffccted areas worc still1 under water..-However, flooding i both the northwestern
areas of the State and the south coast o! the State had been most severe and
quite clearly substantial amounts would be needed to remedy the chaos which the floods
had created and to assist those in real need. Preliminary estimates suggested that an
amount in excess of $ 10 million could be involved. This would, of course, be additional
to the substantial expenditure on restoring flood damage that would be financed through
private insurance. Details of the terms of Commonwealth assistance to the State were still being
worked out. However, the New South Wales Premier had indicated that relief forms had
been issued to-all Police Stations and Councils in the flood affected areas while farmers
needing carry-on assistance should make application through the nearest Branch of the
Rural Bank.
CA NBERRA
9 February 197i1 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 1971
PROPOSED INCREASE IN DOCTORS' FEES
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON
Dr. Forbes announced last night that he was concerned at the size
of the fee increases recommended by the State Branche s of the Australian
Medical Association. He also stated that he could not accept their recommended increases
as reasonable. Speaking for the Government I now say that we are more than
concerned at the size of the increases. We are appalled that in the
circumstances in which Australia finds itself such great increases in fees should
be even considered by the A. M. A.
The result of these increases would be to present a Bill of $ 32
million to the Australian people and this cost would have to be borne either
by the patients of doctors or by the taxpayer..
I hope and believe that individual doctors in the profession, as
good Australians would be more resp',-nsible than to endorse the stand taken
by their representatives. The Government believes there is no justification whatever for
increpses of this size. We do not believe that any profession should be able to
fix their fees at any level which appeals to them when they are supported by
public money. If agreement cannot be reached between the Government and the
A. M. A. on reasonable increases we believe the matter should go to Arbitration
and .: ot be decided by unilateral action on the part of the A. M. A.
If the A. M. A. refuses to accept this course then the Government
is duty bound in the interests of the Australian people and of the fight against
inflation to take all m6esures open to it to combat the proposed rise.
I have asked representatives of the A. M. A. to come to Canberra to
discuss this whole matter with me on Friday.
CANBERRA 9 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 15/ 1971
MR EGGLETON'S APPOINTMENT TO THE
COMMONWEALTH SECRETARIAT
Statement by the Prime Minister, _ Mr. Iohn Gorton
The appointment of my Press Secretary, 1Dfr. Tony
Eggleton, as Director of Information for the Commonwealth is
announced today.
At the request of Mr. Arnold Smith, the Commonwealth
Secretary-General, I have agreed to release Mr. Eggleton to
fill this significant post with the Commonwealth Secretariat in
London. Mr. Eggleton is his sixth year as Press Secretary
to the Prime Minister, and during that time has created a record
by serving three Prime Ministers. He has been a loyal and
valued member of my personal staff, and I arn sorry to lose him.
But I am sure his experience in the media and information
fields will enable him to make a real contribution to the work of
the Secretariat, and it is a compliment to Mr. Eggleton that he
should have been invited to fill this new post.
CANBERRA February 1971 
TONY EGGLETON BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
. Born Swindon, Wiltshire, England 30/ 4/ 32
. Educated at King Alfred's College, Wantage, Berkshire.
Entered journalism with the Westminster Press Group 1947.
. Migrated to Australia 1950.
Reporter with the " Bendigo Advertiser" 1950-51.
Australian Broadcasting Commission News Service 1951-1960
( Director of News Coverage, ABC-TV Melbourne 1956-60).
Director of Naval Public Relations 1960-65.
. Press Secretary to the Prime Minister 1965-71
( Sir Robert Menzies, Mr. Harold Holt, Mr. John Gorton).
. Press Co-ordinator for the 1970 Royal Visit to Australia.
Appointed a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( CVO) 1970.
Awarded the Public Relations Institute's First Award of Honour 1968.
Foundation President of the National Press Club, Canberra.
Married. Three children. 



FOR PRESS PM. -No. 16/ 1071
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statemnentb th e P rime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Ministers met today with representatives of
industry and commerce and the consultations will continue tomorrow.
Today's discussions were with representatives of
national organisations in three separate groups representing primary
industry, manufacturing industry and commerce. Discussions will
be held tomorrow with the Export Development Council, the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the Australian Council
of Trade Urions. Against the background of the problem of
inflationary pressures in the economy, today's consultations have
been particularly useful in informing Ministers of the way in which
those directly engaged in industry and commerce see the present
situation, the measures already announced by the Government and the
prospective developments. A list of those who participated in today's talks
is attached.
CANBERRA, February 1971 
NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED AT
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
February 1971
Primary Industry Group
Australian Mining Industry
Council President Mr W. M. Morgan, CMG
Australian Farmers'
Federation President Mr L. R. Forrester
Australian Wool Growers'
and Graziers' Council President Mr B. A. Wright
Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation President Mr R. V. Sewell, OBE
Australian Wheat Growers'
Federation Senior Vice-President Mr L. M. Ridd, MBE
Manufacturing Industry Group
A s sociated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia President Mr N. N. Herford, ED
Master Builders' Federation
of Australia President Mr R. S. Prentice
Federal Chamber of
Automotive Industries Vice-President Mr N. W. Lawrance
Commercial Group
Associated Chambers
of Commerce of Australia President Mr G. M. Hastie, OBE
Australian Bankers'
Association Chairman Mr T. B. C. Bell
The Australian Council of
Retailers President Mr E. L. Byrne 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 17/ 1971
MEETING WITH FINANCE CONFER] ENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister,. Mr. John Gorton
The Prime M1iister, Treasurer and the Governor of
the Reserve Bank today met with representatives of the
Australian Finance Conference.
The object of the meeting was to discuss ways by
which the Finance Companies and the Government could
co-operate should it be necessary to a-ct in the future against
possible inflationary consumer demand.
Consumer demand is not at present significantly
contributing to increased prices.
It was agreed that information would be exchanged
regularly between the Reserve Bank ari-, d the members of the
Conference, so that a month by month watch could be kept
on developments, and so that, if it were necessary in the
future to take any action, the Conference and the Government
would meet to co-operate in such action.
CA NBERRA
11 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 18/ 1971
WAGE RESTRAINT TELEGRAM FROM VICTORIAN
The Prime Minister, Mr. Gorton, today received the following
telegram from the Executive Board of the Victorian Automobile Chamber
of Commerce " FOR URGENT ATTENTION EXECUTIVE BOARD VICTORIAN
AUTOMOBILE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE COMMENDS YOUR
CALL FOR WAGE AND PRICE RESTRAINT IN THE NATIONAL
INTEREST IN ORDER TO AVOID HARMFUL EFFECTS OF
COSTPUSH INFLATION NOW THREATENING AUSTRALIAN
ECONOMY STOP VACC LARGEST TRADE ORGANISATION OF
ITS TYPE IN AUSTRALIA WITH SOME 5000 PROPRIETORS
OF BUSINESSES EMBRACING SERVICE STATIONS NEW AND
USED CAR DEALERS MOTOR BODY REPAIRERS ETC ETC STOP
EXECUTIVE BOARD ADVISES YOU THAT COMMENCING FORTHWITH
ALL DIVISIONS OF CHAMBER WILL BE SPECIALLY URGED
TO USE UTMOST RESTRAINT IN SEEKING PRICE INCREASES
DESPITE INCREASING COSTS GREATLY AFFECTING
PROFITABILITY STOP SOME APPLICATIONS INCREASES
ALREADY REJECTED STOP WE WILL USE CUR BEST EFFORTS
TO KEEP PRICES DOWN ACROSS RETAIL MOTOR INDUSTRY
AS LONG AS POSSIBLE IN AN ENDEAVOUR TO ASSIST YOUR
GOVERNMENT RESTORE ECONOMY TO BALANCED GROWTH
ACCEPT MY OWN PERSONAL PLEDGE OF COOPERATION IN
NATIONAL INTEREST STOP VACC CALLS CNY BUSINESS GROUPS
PROFESSIONS AND COMMUNITY GENERALLY TO JOIN VA'IH YOU
AND YOUR GOVERNMENT IN THIS NOT INSURMOUNTABLE TASK
WITH ALL GOOD WISHES.
ATHOL H KELLY EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT.
CANBERRA 11 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM No. 19/ 1971
TALKS WITH AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATICiI
Statement by the Prime Mijister,_ Mr John Gortor
The Minister for Health and I today had a useful
discussion with representatives of the A. M. A.
The Government made its position clear and the
representatives of the A. M. A. are now going to have further
consultations with their members.
CANBERRA 12 February 1971 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 20/ 1971
NEW SOUTH WALES ELECTIONS
Comment bythe Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
It will be some days before the picture in New South
Wales is entirely clear, but there is every indication that the
Liberal/ Country Party Government has been returned for a third
term of office, The Liberal/ Country Party administration has provided
six years of stable and progressive government and my congratulations
to Mr Askin on what would appear to be his new mandate.
I look forward to continuing to work closely with Mr
Askin in the best interests of New South Wales and of Australia.
CANBERRA, 14 February 1971 



YOUNG-LBERALCONVENTION,
CANBERRA, ACT FEBRUARY 1971
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity-of making a short
apetoch , nt the beginning of the Convention.
It is greatly hea rtening to a Party to see 200 delegates of Young Liberal
organisations from all over Australia coming here to Canberra to discuss those matters
which they feel are of importance to the Party now, and which they believe will be of
importance to the Party in the future. They are matters which, in the short term
comparatively short term they believe, as I do, will lead to a Liberal victory in
1972, and in the longer term, will be of great benefit to the people of Australia in
the decade ahead.
So it is significant and important that this meeting chould be taking place.
But having said that, Sir, I confess to a little disappointment at some of the motions
which are to be discussed by this gathering from all over Australia perhaps more
disappointment at what is not down on the Conference agenda than at what is.
There are many suggestions that taxation in one form or another should be
reduced, that death duties should be abolished, that other taxes should be , looked at, but
there are few constructive suggestions I hope you will forgive me for saying this thetare
few constructive suggestions for really tackling the major problem which faces
Australia now, and yet this is that which above all else I thin:: should be engaging the
minds of Young Liberals.
There can be no doubt that what Australia must do first is to beat the threat
of inflation which now faces it. I don't think that it faces us in a stark way as yet, but
as I said when speaking to the nation, the underlying rate of growth shown in the
last Consumer Price Index, coupled with the large wage and salary increases we can
expect as a result of Arbitration Court and State Wages Tribunal decisions and
over-award payments, make it necessary to ensure that the underlying threat does not
become a real threat. For if it does, then we inside Australia will be the poorer, all
of us. We will not be able to build the number of schools, the number of hospitals, the
number of public amenities which we otherwise would be able to build.
-For if you have a school which is estimated to cost let us say, half a million
dollars and because of direct wage costs and because of indirect costs then the same
school, the same size, the same quality, turns out to cost $ 700, 000, we wilt not be
able to build the same number of school and tht is self-evident. Unlress, of
course, we so mulct, we so ax iL.-private sector in Australia that it loses all incentive
to produce those things on which ultimately the public sector depends. So this inside
Australia is an immense threat to u3; outside it threatens . hat export programme
which is now so well under way in manufactured go. Ils. It poses ' ragc choices to the
primary producer and it bears down immediately and heavily on the pensioner, on the
retired man who is not a pensioner and who is too ofaen thought about too little. / 2 
So this, I believe, is one of the significant the most significant first task
which we have before us. I hope you will discuss this, and I hope you will put your
views as to how this should best be attacked at the root.
There are some things which one can do which ameliorate, which take away
some off the causes, some of the causes in some of the areas where the pressure of
demand is growing most. But what we need is a community agreement of those who
earn wages, who earn salaries, who pay wages, who pay salaries, who consume that
while there is a need and a requirement to increase the living standards of all by
increasing the true wages of all, and that while that must and will be the requirement
of a Liberal Government, yet if one seelks to go too fast and raise wages at a greater
rate than production, then one is self-defeating and doing no good to anybody in
Australia. Well, as you know, we are talking steps in this direction, not the least
being steps let us call them self-denying steps in reducing tile public sector
expenditure that the Commonwealth is to make, And we are also taking steps to see
that State expenditure also does not grow and is reduced.
You often hear this is by way of a parenthesis you often hear attacks
on Commonwealth spending. You read it in leading articles ( Interjection It is
on the agenda:) Well when the matter on the agenda is being discussed, I do hope
that there will be many here who realise that Commonwealth spending at least as
to approximately one-third of the total is not Commonwealth spending at all but State
spending, because it is reflected in the grants, the reimbursemnent grants made to
the States and by the direct purpose grants made to the States.
Too often, and this is really the only point I wish to make, people forget
when talking of the volume of Commonwealth spending, and how it has grown, that in
fact a third of it is not actually Commonwealth spending at all, but the sort of spending
that so many State branches so often say should be increased. The figures, no doubt,
you will all have at your fingertips: But in both these areas, steps are being taken
now. And on the question of reducig the amount which the Commonwealth would
otherwise have spent for its own purposes not for State purposes in this year, there
will be an announcement very shortly showing a significant reduction in what would
otherwvise have been spent. I emphasise " in what would otherwise have been spent"
b ecause while we brought in a Budget at the beginning of this year, we have since
been faced with an increase-of approximately $ 110 million as a result of wage and
salary determinations by the Arbitration Court and by the Commonwealth Public
Service Board. We have been faced with the decision of one of the Houses of Parliament
that during this year the money for the States Receipts Tax should be made available
to the States without there being a tax, and various other costs rising as a result of
increases in costs of materials. / 3 
But that being so, there-will stll-be a very considerable. reduction in
Commonwealth spending, and this has., 1 believe-two advantages, I hope you would
agree with me. One, it does show that we are in; earnest when we talk about the
need to tackle this problem, and, two, it does leave for the private sector more
chance-to get labour and materials for the purposes of the private sector which
again and let us not forget it is that sector from which public spending ultimately
must come. So these will be matters for your concern and your recommendation
and your advice. And other ira tters pale into Borne insignifican~ ce until this is dore
But I hope that we will not let ourselves be swayed by what I think is the
entirely fallacious argument put forward by the ACTU. That is, that wages and salaries
have no effect, or very little effect at all on rises in prices. fLaughter). The
only I know it is almost laughable, but it is seriously put. The only way in
which that could ever be true would be if the additional cost to a manufacturer of rises
in prices and salaries were entirely taken out of the profits that manufacturer was
making. That is the only possible way in vii ich this could happen.
Yet manufacturers and our big firms are not making. excessive profits.
We look at a newspaper and we see a profit for BHP, let us say, which is an enormous
aggregate amount of money. But when you check what the returns on the funds invested
are, you will find, in the form of that company, it is about 6_ 2 ner cent. And you
cannot expect people to invest in this kind of growth in this kin~ d of company at much
less than 6 per cent, If they have saved it, then we believe they should get a proper
benefit from investing it. While I wouldn't undertake to say exactly what a proper
benefit is, I am quite sure that if you look at the returns of our major companies
on funds invested, you will not think they are excessive. And, indeed, if some
organisations, some opposition were to seek to attack these further, then I believe
the danger to Australia would be that people would stop investi-ng in such companies,
that they would look for an easier way to earn their money, that they would go into
tertiary industries, service industries, some other way which ira de it easier and less
destructive and less distracting.
So these are again all matters for your consideration. They will be, I have
no doubt, debated at great length in the Parliament when it meets, and I hope wAth some
benefit. But in overcoming, we will do as we have already done, one or two unpopular
things. I hope that all the Liberal Party and all the Young Liberals will realise
the necessity for such unpopular things and will realise that a transient unpopularity is
as rnflhing compared wm the popularity which would flow to a government which
successfully overcame the problems now before it and,, more importantly than t hat,
is as nothing to the benefit which would flow to the country from such action by such
a government. Sir, you told me to speak for ten minutes or so, and this I have done.
You did indicate that you would like me to speak on the Commonwealth Conference
at Singapore, but there is little more to say on that. I think you have all read about
it and heard . aebout it, may have seer. me speaking on TV about it. It would be
rather a rehash, I think, if I were to sliend any time on this other than to say one
thing. / 4 
The Commonwealth of Nations, in my view, wilil only survive if all those
in it accept the fact that it is not an organisation which can pass any resolutions
binding on all its members, that it should not try to do this, that it should not claim
a consensus binding on all its members, but should continue to be a loose voluntary
organisation, spending most of its time on those areas in which it can agree, rather
than seeking to become a small United Niations. This 1 have said before, ard this
I think I will not labour now.
So, Sir, having put before the Young Liberals what I think the major
problem in Australia is today, I now leave them to debate. May I make this plea?
If people are to come from as far as you have come, many of you, if you
are to debate motions of significance to Australia's future, then it is essential
that you should debate them with knowledge and with facts and Seek to arrive at
a conclusion through discussion, not seek to impose a conclusioin through having
made up your mind before you start. J say this because,, again, in this agenda, there
are matters such as people saying that Australia has not attempted tozaise an
Army by other than National Service. This is not so. 1 am sure there will be people
here who will know it is not so and will be able to argue about it. And, similarly,
there are other matters of the kind.
But looking at the second point on the agenda
" That his Convention calls u~ ion the Federal Liberal Government
to emulate the policies of the British Conservative Government to
substantially curb public expenditure"
I'm not sure about the social services, I will put that aside,,-
" and limit expenditure to all Government Departments to stop the
uncontrolled growth of bureaucracy"
I can only say, Sir, that I must have had a little prescience before this was put
on the Agenda. This was something likze the prescience I apparently had when I
got a telegram from Bert Kelly saying " We urge you strongly to export the rams"
and they went that night!
Sir, I now declare this Conference of tie Young Liberals to be open. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
REDUCTIONS IN COMMONWEALTH
GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 16 February 19711
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
by leave-Mr Speaker, I recently spoke
to the nation on the state of the economy
and on the likely inflationary effects of the
Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission's award of a 6 per cent
increase in wages and salaries. I said then
that in order to decide what action should
be taken now, Cabinet had sought to
discover the areas in which demand seemed
to be growing most strongly. One of those
areas is the public sector-spending by
governments-and we believe one of the
first lines of attack on rising costs and prices
should be to restrict what is being spent in
that area.
When our Budget was introduced last
August it was estimated that total ' Commonwealth'
expenditure would be $ 7,883m.
I should say here, I think, that although
called Commonwealth expenditure, this
amount included $ 2,708m for reimbursement
grants and other payments to the
States. Indeed, such payments made up
more than one-third of the Commonwealth
Budget. The total increase was 11.2 per
cent more than the year before. But since
that Budget was formulated the Government
has been faced with significant additional
expenditure. The national wage case
decision and other wage, determinations are
estimated to add directly, in the rest of this
financial year, S88m to the Commonwealth's
own wage and salary bill in 1970-71. In
11791/ 71 addition, those wage determinations,
because they have led to an increase in
average wages greater than was expected,
will require the Commonwealth to pay an
additional $ 20m to the States under the
formula between the Commonwealth and
the States. In addition, we will need to pay
some $ 58m to the States in this financial
year to recompense them for the loss of
the receipts duty tax on which they had
budgeted. Mainly as a result of these two
outlays, payments to the States are now
expected to exceed the Budget estimates by
some $ 83m, and emergency payments
associated with recent floods will doubtless
increase the outlays required.
Other additional demands on our
resources since the Budget was brought
down include the provision of $ 12m as a
capital advance to the Australian Wool
Commission, and we believe some $ 6m will
be required this finanicial year for rural debt
reconstruction and farm adjustment. We
must also expect increases in costs of the
material used by the Government. So all in
all, it is estimated by the Treasury that the
net increase in expenditure since the Budget
was prepared would amount to approximately
$ 242m, if departments were provided
with the sums they have asked for.
This is the background against which wve
have decided that we should make reductions
in what would otherwise have been
spent. 
Having made a complete and detailed
survey of Commonwealth expenditures, we
propose to reduce the amounts which
departments have sought by some $ 75m in
the remaining months of this financial year.
These reductions are made across the whole
range of Commonwealth departments, but
they do not involve any reductions in our
payments to the States. Our object has been
to effect reductions in the Commonwealth
expenditures for Commonwealth purposes.
We have not sought to achieve this at the
expense of the States. A dissection of the
reduction of $ 75m as between the main
categories of Commonwealth expenditure
is provided in a table which,* with the
concurrence of honourable members, I
incorporate in Hansard.
REDUCTIONS IN ESTIMATED COMMONWEALTH
EXPENDITURES Reduction on re-
Budget Revised vised Latest
measttie-measttie-measttei-measttei-
Smn Sm Sm Smn
Defence Services .1137.0 1,170.6 21.5 1,149.1
P=~ n to or for the
Saeand Works and
Housing Programmes 2,7081 2,791.6 .2,791.6
National Welfare Fund 1,472.9 1,475.8 0.7 1,475.1
RearainSrie 313.5 317.6 1.8 315.8
Debt Charges 103.9 99.0 99.0
Decartmental Running
Expenses 510.3 551.0 8.8 542.2
Territories ( excl. Papua
and New Guinea) 96.3 103.1 2.5 100.6
External Economic Aid
( inc. Papua and New
Guinea) 166.2 168.4 3.8 164.6
Commonwealth Payments
to Industry 271.5 285.4 8.5 276.9
Other Expenditures 412.6 426.2 5.9 420.3
Advances for Capital
Purposes--Post Office 240.0 262.0 10.0 2.52.0
Other 203.1 221.8 3.7 218.1
Other Capitalorks and
Services 247.3 252.2 8.3 243.9
Total Expenditures 7,882.7 8,124.7 75.5 8,049.2
Further details of the various reductions
will be provided as necessary by individual
Ministers. These reductions are spread right
across the board, but it will be observed
that the areas where the more substantial
savings have been made are defence, capital
works and capital advances, and departmental
running expenses. We were particularly
anxious to effect economies in
administrative expenditures, including the
overtime and salary expenditures of Commonwealth
departments. At the same time
we have endeavoured to avoid reducing
expenditures on essential development activities. In more general terms we have
sought to reduce the contribution of Commonwealth
expenditures to total demand
and to curb the Commonwealth's demands
on the labour market.
Thus the reductions in departmental
expenditures will involve restraint on Public
Service employment. The Public Service
Board reported to me that a routine
statistical projection made prior to my
instructions indicated an increase in
1970-71, in full-time employment under the
Public Service Act, of 4.6 per cent on the
numbers employed as at 30th June 1970.
In 1969-70 the comparable increase was 4.8
per cent, whilst the increase in total
civilian and defence forces employment in
the community was 4 per cent. The Board
advised me that my instructions for
restraint on establishment increases could
benefit the health and soundness of administration
in the Commonwealth Service, and it
suggested that a limitation should be placed
on the increase in Service employment.
The Public Service Board has now
reported to me that in its discussions with
departments, it has stressed the Government's
policy of restraint but has not
endeavoured to impose arbitrary cuts in
employment in particular directions. The
Board's recommendation, which has been
accepted, was that departmental increases
in employment, which will be kept to the
minimum, should not exceed at 30th June
1971 an overall increase in the Service of
3.4 per cent as compared with numbers
employed under the Public Service Act on
30th June 1970. This is a reduction of
about 25 per cent on the projected increase
in employment disclosed in the Board's
earlier survey; or put another way, the
Board's original projection was that the
Service would grow by 10,534 in 1970-71.
This growth has been cut by 2,735.
The Commonwealth has, I believe,
moved quickly and firmly in the area
available to it. It is necessary to do so. For
as we see it, the best interests of the community
require that inflation shall be overcome,
and one of the first steps to this end
must be action to restrain our own
expenditures. I present the following paper:
Reductions in Commonwealth Government
Expenditure-Ministerial Statement, 16 February
1971.
Printed by Authority by the Government Printer of the Commnonwealth of Australia 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER TI-E
RT1. H. GON. OR M P. 1. IN THE
HOUEOTKrV 16 FEBRUARY 1971
ECONOMY: REDUCTIONS IN GOVERNMENT EXPE1ITlURE
I recently spoke to the nation on the state of the economy and on the likely
inflationary effects of the Arbitration Commission?' s award of a 6% 0 increase i wages
and salaries.
0 I said in order to decide what action should be taken now Cabinet had sought
to discover the areas in which demand seemed to be growing most strongly. One of
those areas is the public sector, spending by governments, and we believe one of the
eOfnir stht alti naerse ao. f attack on rising costs and prices should be to restrict what is being spent
Vflnen our Budget was introduced last August it was estimated that total
" Commonwealth" expenditure would be 883 million. I diould say here, I think, that
although called Commonwealth expenditure this amount included 708 million for
reimbursement grants and other payments to the States. Indeed such payments mrade
up more than one third of the Commonwealth Budget.
Th-e total was 11. 2 per cent more than the year before. Since that Budget
wa s formulated the Government has been faced with significant additional expenditure.
WIhe National Wage Case decision, and other wage determinations is estimated to add
directly, in the rest of this J. inancial year, $ 88 million to the Commonwealth's own
Wage and Salary Bill in 1970-71.
n II addi i , W~ j wag~ jtp-i inat ions, because they have led to an increase
in average wages/ I/ f requi~ fbimonwealth to pay an additional $ 20 million to
the States under the formula. In addition we will need to pay some $ 58 million to the
States in this financial year to recompense them for the los-, of the receipts duty tax
on which they had budgeted.
Mairly as a result of these two outlays payments to the States are now
expected to exceed the Budget estimates by some $ 83 million. Emergency payments
associated with recent floods will doubtless increase the outlays required. Other
additional demands on our resources since the Budget was brought down include the
provision of $ 12 million as a capital advance to the Australian Wool Commission, and
we believe some $ 6 million will be required this financial year for rural debt
reconstruction and farm adjustment.
We must also expect increases in costs of the material used by the Government
All in all it is estimated by the Treasury that the nett increase in expenditure, since
the Budget was prepared, will amount to approximately $ 242 million, if Departments
were provided with the sums they have asked for. This is the background against
which we have decided that we should make reductions in what would otherwise have
been spent. 
Having made a complete and detailed survey of Commonwealth expenditures
we propose to reduce this by scwu--$ 75 milUoi!
in the remaining months of this financial year. These reductions are made across
the whole range of Commonwealth Departments but they do not involve any reduc tions
in our payments to the States.
Our object has been to effect reductions in the Commonwealth expenditures
for its own purposes. We have not sought to achieve this at the expense of the States.
A dissection of the reduction of $ 75 million as between the main categories of
Commonwealth expenditure is provided in the attached table.
I ask leave to have the table incorporated in Hansard. Further details a! the
various reductions will be provided as necessary by individual Ministers. These
reductions are spread right across the board but it will be observed that the areas where
the more substantial savings have been made are defence, capital works and capital
advances, and departmental running expenses. We were particularly anxious to effect
e economies in administrative expenditures, including the overtime and salary expenditures
WOf Commonwealth Departments. At the sanre time we have endeavoured to avoid
reducing expenditures on essential development activities. In more general terms,
we have sought to reduce the contribution of Commonwealth expenditures to total
demand and to curb the Commonwealth's demands on the labour market.
Thus the reductions in departmental expenditures will involve restraint
on Public Service employment. The Public Service Board reported to me that a routine
statistical projection made prior to my instructions indicated an increase in 1970-71,
In full-time employment under the Public Service Act of 4.6% 0 on the numbers employed
at 30 June, 1970. In 1969-70 the comparable increase was 4. 8% 7 whilst the increase in
total civilian and defence forces employment in the community was
The Board advised me that my instructions for restraint : on establishment
Sin creases could benefit the health and soundness of administration in the Commonwealth
WService and it suggested that a limitation ahould be placed on the increase in Service
employment. The Public Service Board has now reported to me that in its discussions with
Departments it has stressed the Government's policy of restraint but has not endeavoured
to impose arbitrary cuts in employment. The Board's recommendation, which has
been L.-cepted. was that Departmental increases in employment, which will be kept to
the minimum, should not exceed at 30th June, 1971 an. overall increase in the Service
of 3.4% 0 as compared with numbers employed under the Public Service Act on 30th Junie
1970. This is a reduction of about 25% 0 on the projected increase in employment
disclosed in the Board's earlier survey. But another way, the Board's original
projection was that the Service would grow by 10, 534 in 1970-7 1. This growth has been
cut by 2, 735. The Commonwealth has, I believe, moved quickly and firmly in the area
available to it. It is necessary to do so. For, as we see it, the best interests of the
community require that inflation shall be overcome and one of the first steps to this
end must be action t o restrain our own expenditures. 
REDUCTIONS IN ESTIMATED COMMONWEALTH EXPENDITURES
Defence Services
Payments to or for the States
and Works and Housing
Programmes
National Welfare Fund
Repatriation Services
Debt Charges
Departmental Running
Expenses
Territories ( excl. Papua
and New Guinea)
External Economic Aid ( inc.
Papua and New Guinea)
Commonwealth Payments to
Industry
Other Expenditures
Ad' 7ances for Capital
Purposes -Post Office
-Other
Other Capital Works and
Services T otal1 Expenditures BudZEL
Estimt mill.
1,137.0 708. 1
472.9
313.5 103.9 510.3 96.3
166.2 271.5 412.6 240.0 203. 1
247.3
7,882.7 Revised
Estimat mill.
1,170.6 2,791.6 1,475.8 317.6 99.0
551.0
103. 1
168. 4
285.4 426. 2
262.0 221.8 252.2
8,124.7 Reduction
on Re Vised
Ttitemill, 21.5 .7
1.8
8.8 2.5 3. 8
8.5
5.9
10.0 3.7 8.3
75 5 Latest
Eitlrnate mill.
1, 149. 1
2, 791. 6
1, 475. 1
315.8 99.0
542. 2
100. 6
164.6 276.9 420.3 252.0 218. 1
243.9
8,049.2 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 21/ 1971
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ABCRIGINES
The Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton, today made
the following comment on reported remarks by the Premier of
Queensland about aborigines in that State
" The Commonwealth, and not the States, has the
paramount responsibility for aborigines, as a result of
a decision made by Australian electors at a referendum.
The MVinister for Aboriginal ANairs has been
working closely with State Governments and leaving
the administration of policies to the States. But it
still remains a Commonwealth duty and responsibility
to ensure that discriminatory racial laws do not persist
in Australia."
CANBERRA 19 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 22/ 1971
NEW PRESS SECRETARY FOR PRU. ME MINISTER
The Federal Political Correspon'ident for the
Adelaide " Advertiser", Mr. Reg MacDo,_ nald, has been
appointed to succeed Mr. Tony Eggleton as Press Secretary
to the Prime Minister.
Mr. MacDonald has been in the Federal
Parliamentary Press Gallery since July 1970. Previously
he served in London as a member of the ' U! M'elboutne " Herald's"
European bureau and is a former columnist for the Adelaide
" Advertiser". He will join the Prime Minister's personal
staff next month. Mr. Eggleton will leave for London in
April to talke up his appointment as Director of Information
at the Commonwealth Secretariat.
CANBERRA 19 February 1971
Background Note
Mr. MacDonald was born in the Western Diatrict of Victoria
in 1935. He attended Melbourne University. He is married
w; th two children. 



FGR PRESS: PM i1-o. 23/ 1971
MEMCRIAL SERVICE FOR THE LATE LORD SLIM
A Memorial Service for the late Lord Slim who was Governor-
Gsneral of Australia from 1953 to 1960 is to be held at St. John's Church,
Canberra, at 12.00 noon next Wednesday ( 24th), and will be attendd by
the Governor-Ge-. eral and Lady Hasluck.
The Right Reveread K. J. Clements, Bishop of Canberra and
Goulburn will preside and the Right Reverend R. G. Arthur, Bishop
of Grafton, will preach at the Service which is to be conducted by the
R -ctor, Archdeacon F. M. Hill.
The Prime Minister, Ministers and Members of Parliament
will be among the congregation.
The Service will be amplified to the Church grounds where
additional seating will be available.
Flags will be flown at half-mast from all Commonwealth
buildings from 8.00 a. m. until 1.00 p. m. next Wednesday.
CANBERRA 21 February 1971
Background Note
Lord Slim died in London on 14 December last year. 



FOR PRESS PM. No. 24/ 1971
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ELECTIONS
Comment by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
There has been a swing away from the Government
in Western Australia, but the final results will not be known for some
time. Further, I am informed that it appears the Government has
definitely lost two seats and there are others in doubt. Whether or
not there is a change in Government will depend on the results in
those seats. Whatever the outcome, I think it true to say
that Sir David Brand has demonstrated himself to be an outstanding
Premier of Western Australia and has contributed greatly to that
State's progress.
CANBERRA, 21 February 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM io. 25/ 1971
VICTORIAN FLOODS
Stateme, t by the Prime Minister, Mr_ John Gorton
The Prime Minister announced today that he had replied to
the Victorian Premier's request for Commonwealth financial assistance
with relief and rest oration measures made necessary by the recent
floods in that State.
The Commonwealth Government, being naturally concerned
at the extent of the floods and sympathetic to those afected, has already
offered to join with the State, on a dollar for dollar basis, in financing
schemes for the relief of personal hardship and distress in the affected
areas. As to other relief or restoration measures, it is established
Commonwealth policy that the financing of these is primarily the
responsibility of State Governments. However, where the disaster is on such
a scale that very large expenditures are required, the Commonwealth is
normally prepared to assist.
The Premier has been informed that the Commonwealth is
prepared to meet all natural disaster relief expenditure ( other than the
State's share of expenditure on relief of personal hardship and distress)
on eligible relief measures in excess of 5 million in 1970-71. Assistance
is thus being offered on a similar basis to that for Hew South Wales where
the Commonwealth has offered to meet all natural disaster relief expenditure
in excess of $ 5 million in 1970-71.
CAH BERRA
22 February 1971 



FOR PRESSIssued from the Office of
the Press Secretary to the
Prime Minister.
POSTPONEEPENT CF VISIT BY GENERAL NiE . IN
The Australian Government has lear.-ed wi. t. regret
of the sudden illness of General Ne Win, Chairman of the
Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma.
His visit to Australia planned for March will now
be postponed until a later date.
CANBERRA 23 February 1971 



~ CR PRESS: 11. No. 26/ 1971
MEETING BETWEEN THE PRIME NMflII1STER AND GENERIJL DALY
Statement bLLhe Prime Minister, Mr. john Gorton.
An article in The Australian today purported to report details of a
conversation between General Sir Thomas Daly and the Prime Minister.
Allegations in the article that General Sir Thomas Daly criticised the
Minister for Defence are untrue.
On Monday 1 March I learnt that Otories were circulating Lithe Press
Gallery alleging that serious criticisms of the Army were being made by " Defence
sources". Those criticisms were to the effect that it had been necessary to call in
J. 1. 0. to report on the Army's activities, that the Army was Seeking to' " sabotage" ci~ tl
action, and that the Army had operated outside Ohuoc Toi Provu-ce without proper
permission. According to press rumours General Sir Thomas Daly was named in
these reparts. On hearing this, and on hearing that a newspaper proposed to publish
these rumours the next day, I rang Sir Thomas Daly and asked if he hiad heard of
these canards. Sir Thomas said he had not and I asked him to call at once.
The purpose of this was to warn Sir Thomas Daly o~ f what was being said.
It was also to make three things clear.
The first was that all there was to go on was rumours in ths-Press Gallery
and there was no indication as to whether there was any truth in the stories that these
rumours had originated from Defence sources.
The second was to make it clear that I knew the allegation~ s against the Army
were false, that I had the utmost confidence in the Army and its commanders and
that I wanted Sir Thomas Daly and the Army to ' know this.
And the third was that if these false allegations agaist the Army appeared
publicl:.' they would be denied at the highest level. We did not propose to allow
servicemen to be subjected to such unjustified criticism without fully defending
them. This has been done, unequivocally, by the Minister for DefEence, and by
a joint statement issued by the Chief of the General Staff and the Minister for Defence.
At no time did Sir Thomas Daly " denounce" the Miniister for0-Defence or
accuse him of disloyalty to the Army or to the Army Minister.
CA NBERRA
4 March 1971 



FOR PRESS: PM N! q. 27/ 1971
NON-DWELLING BUILDING-CONSTRUCTION
Statement by te Prime Minister Mr. John Gorton
The Treasurer and I met this morning for discussions about the growth
in the private non-dwelling building construction area which, as I indicated in my
address to the nation on 29th January last, is one of the matters we have under
examination in our attack on threatening inflationary growth.
The meeting was attended by Mr. 1. K. Campbell., Chief Executive, Hooker
Corporation Ltd., Sydney; Mr. W. M. Leavey, Managing Director, Lend Lease
Corporation Ltd., Sydney; Mr. R. C. T. Baker, Managing Director, Mainline Corporation
Ltd., Sydney; Mr. P. Strasser, Managing Director, Parkes Developments Pty. Ltd.,
Sydney; Mr. E. Graf, Managing Director, Stocks and Holdings Ltd., Sydney;
Mr. T. C. Whittle, Chairman and Managing Director, Whittle C. Holdings Ltd.,
Canberra, and Mr. J. D. Lewis, Managing Director, Concrete Constructions Pty. Ltd.,
Sydney. W~ e were informed that the value of office blocks on which construction
commenced in 1969/ 70 was $ 263 million.
This very high rate of commencement was still in evidence in the quarter
ended 30 September 1970 the figures for which even indicated a slight increase, namely
an annual rate of $ 271 million.
Office block construction of this value, we were advised this morning,
is capable of producing a gross area of office space of approximately 14 million sq. it.
Reduced to a lettable area this would be approximately 11. 2 million sq. ft.
Those representatives of developers and builders with whom we talked this
morning said that this area, 11. 2 million sq. ft., is significantly greater t ha n the annual
demand for new office space throughout Australia, and construction cannot continue
at this rate if a serious over supply situation is to be avoided. We were also told that
a responsible re-assessment of the estimated value of building construction commencements
in 1971 suggests that the lettable areas arising from these commencements in
1971 will be approximately 8 million sq. ft.
It was confidently felt by the developers and builders present this morning,
who would be in part responsible for these commencements, that this figure of
approximately 8 million sq. ft. of lettable space vo uld have to be significantly reduced
becau of the apparent levelling off which had already occurred in the market demnand
for office space. They said that their revised estimates cor~ irmed a most certain
over supply position if the rate of commencements indicated in 1970 continued into
1971 and 1972 / 2 
In view of this advice we concluded that no direct action is required by
the Government at this time to reduce the rate of commencements of new office
buildings. However, the Treasurer and I agreed to arrange regular quarterly
meetings between the Treasury and representatives of those with whom we conferred
this morning so that the matter can be kept under examination. After the first
of these meetings, when the estimated value of new buildings commenced in the
December quarter 1970 become available, the Government will review again the
need for further action by it in this area, and will be prepared to take action if
the forecasts given to us this morning turn out to be not fulfilled.
CANBERRA March 1971 


