
OPENING OF YOUNG LIBERAL YEAR 1968
BRI SBANE
18th January, 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
I don't think that it is possible for me really to
communicate to you the great warmth of feeling that rises
within me by having you here and by having such an undeserved
reception from you. But I can say this, that though I think
that as of now this reception is undeserved, I will promise
you that as far as it lies within my power, I will try in the
years ahead to make it deserved.
One of the things that has been worrying me since
the party elected me to be Prime Minister and the reception
that I feel that this has had throughout the country is the
feeling pressing in on me a little that there are great
expectations of dramatic changes, of sudden variations in
direction, of immensely exciting things happening all at once.
They can't happen that way in the field in which we are engaged.
You can't all of a sudden, in the middle of a financial year,
in the middle of a particular course, have pyrotechnic displays
which change everything in one moment. But that doesn't mean
that we cannot start on new courses, that we cannot think in
new directions, that we cannot, with increasing momentum,
although that momentum may take eighteen months or two years,
but with increasing momentum, set the goals before you and
the people of Australia, indicate what is required to reach
those goals, call on you for the effort needed to achieve those
goals and in that, way, perhaps, meet these new challenges that
you expect us all together to meet. So if there is no drama
immediately, bear that in mind. If there is no sudden
pyrotechnic, bear that in mind. This does not mean that there
will not be for you and us together, new paths to follow which
you may help to indicate to us.
You, Sir, spoke of an Australian national anthem
" God Save The Queen" and " Australia". It reminds me of
somebody who, I think, went to Canberra with their small child
and saw the House of Representatives beginning as you remember
the House of Representatives always begins with a prayer.
The small child said, " Are they praying for the Members of the
House of Representatives" and the mother said, " No, they are
looking at the House of Representatives and praying for
Australia". Actually, that was first told against the American
Senate. But you did speak of a National Anthem. While, of
course, " God Save The Queen" is the over-riding anthem for
Australia, and I regard this as of some significance in a
growing country, I must tell you I am a " Waltzing Matilda" man
myself. I know that song may have originated during the
Marlborough wars somebody once told me that was true, I don't
know. I don't think it matters. i/ hat I think matters is that
it was first sung when this country was first discovered and
first developed. And not beyond the bounds of this country was
it known for some while, but then it began to be known, and
those who went from this country in the 1914-1918 War spread
" Waltzing 1vatilda" and marched to " Waltzing Matilda" and it
became known a little in Europe and other countries of the
world. 
2.
In between times whenever two or three Australians
might be gathered together in some foreign country, sooner or
later, somebody usually with a frightful voice would begin
to sing " Waltzing Matilda" and it would become even more known.
I remember myself during the Second World Wat we were in England
and stationed in London and wearing a different uniform from
the RAF, a dark blue RAAF, and walking into nightclubs, because
in those days, they were still interested in nightclubs. and * 1
that was relatively early, and the band when we walked in would
begin to play " Waltzing Matilda". There was a warm feeling
spreading through one at that just as there was when the slouch
hat was hauled to the peak of the flag pole above Bardia to
the strains of " Waltzing Matilda". I think this song is so
integrated into Australia that whatever a government might do,
whatever an ABC might do and, of course, ABC's are far more
important than governments in relation to this " Waltzing
Matilda" will never be able to be taken away from what is the
ethos of the Australian people. Have your anthem, Sir, but
please do not ever allow this song to fall into disuse.
I remember once I went into Taiwan, and the leader
of our delegation was a very distinguished gentleman called
Sir John Latham who was the Chief Justice of Australia, and
he confided to me on the way that the one song he hated above
all others was " WValtzing Matilda", and I said, " Why?" And he
said, " Viell, I am a lawyer, and it is absolutely ridiculous
that a swagman would jump into a billabong and drown himself
merely to escape a charge of stealing a jumbuck, which would,
at the utmost, mean about five days in gaol." 1 So I had great
pleasure when we arrived in Taiwan in persuading all the
Chinese authorities that the one song that the leader of our
delegation liked better than any other was " Waltzing Matilda",
and it would have been thoroughly successful except that they
had played it in Chinese music and he never knew what was being
played, and neither did I! But it is, I think, a part of the
blood of this country of Australia.
mean, what Haavo inweg tonu. i jathoen m th avjñ~ eng auasses, o ng9 6awlayt rtehea lliyn podroet ant thing
atth e afnuyt u'rgei, ve na mnod mewnhta t inc ahni wset ordyr awi sf rwohma-tt haer e pawset . g-otoi nHge ltpo ubsu iltdo for
build the future. I think that here in this country we
have a great deal to draw from the past and a unique opportunity
for the future. Just use your imaginations for a moment
forget that you are living in a capital city in the Australia
of today, in which you were born, in which many of your parents
were born, which is your country, and think what it must have
been like at the beginning when to these shores came people
from England, from Scotland, from Ireland, from the United
Kingdom. Think of them living in some loneliness, fairly
isolated from the countries which gave them birth, pushing out,
further out into the country with the women isolated from
contact with other women to gossip ( which women always like
to do) living alone, clearing the land, raising a family in
strange surroundings, in unusual circumstances, in loneliness,
calling for effort, calling for fighting against drought and
flood and fire and famine, and of the steadfastness which kept
those people there and which, over the years as this country
developed, built it first in the hinterland, and then as a
result of the riches grown there because of the years of effort
put in there, built the cities which in turn provided the
technological and other advances required. Think for a moment,
just for a moment of that history, where you depended on bullock
trains for transport, where you depended on horseback or buggy
for travel. That is not history for which any country need have
anything but pride. It has enabled us to reach the stage we
have reached today. From it we can draw some inspiration for
what it is we wish to reach in the future. But what is it that
we wish to reach in the future? 
3.
Very largely, this is in your hands. It is in the
hands of your leaders, but your leaders will be swayed by the
feelings that you have as to what it is you wish this country
to stand for, as to the paths you wish it to follow.
I am sure and I now talk politically in the best
sense that what you would want to see in this country for the
future is a continuance, and perhaps a refinement of that
political freedom that we have today, that you would be prepared,
as at some time you might have to be prepared, to fight against
some doctrine of absolute and autocratic rule from the top, that
you would be prepared to see that it is impossible for a society
to live in anarchy, and that you would seek to find between that
autocratic rule from the top and that anarchy from the bottom,
some arrangement by which the general will could prevail, giving
freedom to all but not allowing that freedom to extend where it
became licence and threatened the freedom of others. This, I
am sure, is the political base on which you would want to build
our future country. But having given that political base, then
what do you want to see?
Of course, and this is simple, you would wish to see
the material capacities of this country, the material rewards
to those who are living in it, growing, This is obvious, this
is simple, this is easy, this is not, ultimately, important.
But you would wish to see that happen, I am sure, and you would
seek to see that it did happen. But that alone, that alone
couldn't make this a great country, couldn't allow us to take
the chance, the unique chance that we have here to build and
show that a democracy can provide in the world a country better
than any other system can provide. I say " unique" because they
must follow their own talents to the top of their bent, whether
they lie in the field of painting, whether they lie in the field
of music, whether they lie in the field of business administration.
wherever it may be, there is inside each human being, in this
and all other countries, a desire to express themselves, and the
way they can express themselves is by taking the talents that
are inside them and using them and they can only do this if the
opportunity is provided, if the education is provided, if the
material well-being is provided.
There is, I think, some quite meretricious cynicism
in this country today, at least some meretricious cynicism
reported in the papers of this country today about the youth
of Australia, that they have thrown away the values of the past,
that they question the values of their parents. Of course, they
should question the values of their parents and I think they do.
I don't think they throw them away. I don't believe, and I
think you are some living examples to justify my lack of belief,
that there is in the youth of Australia a cynicism. I believe
there is in the youth of Australia a desire to build. I believe
there is in the youth of Australia a desire to give, I believe
that the youth of Australia would respond to other words of
President Kennedy's, " You ask what yo ' ur country can do for you.
Ask rather what you can do for your country". And it is to a
man like me, standing in a place like this tonight, of such
enormous importance that there should be in this room from all
over Queensland so many young people who are taking an interest
in how their cauntry shoula be governed, in the paths their
country should follow, who are prepared to give themselves to
see these paths are followed, their country outside of themselves
is made great. It is of~ such importance to a man like me standing
here, it is of such importance to our country, it is such a
refutation of this cheap charge of cynicism so often levelled
against the youth of Australia. -4 
It will not be long, in the way in which the lives
of nations are mentioned, it will be little less than the
blinking of an eye before some of you here in this room are
called to do the same kind of work that my colleagues and
myself do now. You are preparing yourselves for it, and I
only hope, and I believe that this will be true, that when
that time comes you will be buttressed, you will be supported,
you will be given the spiritual courage which we are given
now by having you here with us.
I haven't much more to say to you. I don't propose
to talk on details of politics or details of policies some
other time. This is the first speech that I have made since
becoming Prime Minister, and I wanted to make it to young
people. I wanted to make it not on what the rate of taxation
should be, or what the rate of excise should be or what there
should be given to this or to that, but rather on the motivating
forces, on the real wellsprings of a nation which alone will
keep a party great, which alone will keep a country great, and
I believe that I see here before me living examples that that
spring is in this party and is in Australia.
I will finish as I began, that I will do my utmost
to be worthy of the support of people such as you, and together
we may see, we may attain more than Henry Lawson thought of,
not only " the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended
and at night the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars", but
in those sunlit plains are people, happy, arguing, working,
building, and by effort, because by effort alone these things
can be attained, making a country great materially and great
spiritually for the people who live in it.
This conference is open. 



CONF3RENCE OF THE PRSIDING OFFICERS AND CLERKS
OF THE AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTS
-8 FE196823RD JANUARY, 1968
peech by the Prime Minister, Senator John Gorton
A
Mr Speaker, Mr President I'm not quite sure which is the correct form of
address at this moment in this Chamber.
This as has been pointed out, quite like old times to have
a chance to stand in this place and to talk to a distinguished gathering, but
it has one difference. Those on my left are not Opposition; those on my
right are not Government,, rather all are independents gathered together to
discuss how better to make a Parliament work, and If this Is the last speech
that I male In this place, as it may well be, I can think of no better audience
to which to make such a speech, itor any better subject on which to address
you. This is, as the President has pointed out, as the Speaker
has pointed out, the first occasion In Australia when you have all come
together to discuss the duties you have to your various Parliaments, and
through the Parliaments, to the Austraian people. That In Itself, I suggest,
is pregnant with value for the future of Parliaments throughout Australia.
Presidents and Speakers are most Important people. Indeed, to ordinary
Members of Parliament, as you will have noticed, they have some of the
attributes of Ben Bolt. Do you remember that old poem about Ben Bolt,, in
which sweet Alice trembled with fear at his frown? That Is what we at
any rate In this Chamber do with respect to our President, and I am sure
that Presiding Officers in other Chambers find the same reaction from
Members sitting in those Chambers. If they don't they ought to, and I am
sure that after this Conference they will.
Because one of the important jobs of Presiding Officers Is
to keep In order Members of Parliament who occasionally get a little unruly,
not infrequently get off the point and sometimes get a little difficult to
understand, Presiding Officers have to keep them in order and keep them
talling about the subject before the House. This Is a great necessity for
the conduct of parliamentary business.
But over and above that is a duty not laid down anywhere,
not to be found in any manual, but nevertheless something which Is the
oil which helps the wheels of Parliament to turn, and that Is to sit in the
Chair, no matter from what party the man sitting In the chair may come,
and inside the House act with complete Impartiality, and outside the House
to take every opportunity to make the Members of both sides of the House
mingle together in a social sort of a way, and so get to know each other
as men and as human beings, so that when battle Is joined inside the Chamber,,
it Is joined with the knowledge of the personality and the honesty of the
person towards whom that argument is directed. This is a very significant
part of the duties of a President and a Speaker.
Of course they do have other matters which are sprung
upon them suddenly and upon which, too, they must be judged. When
something boils up in Parliament and points of order are taken, it Is
suggested that somebody Is out of order and ought to be thrown out or at
least subdued when this turbulence suddenly comes to the surface, this
too has to be quelled by the President or the Speaker. How often have we 
-2-
seen them sitting in their Chairs, and seen the officials with whom I haven't
yet spoken, wandering ur with perhaps an occasional word of advice because,
of course, every President and every Speaker knows his Standing Orders
completely and utterly and doesn't really need any advice. Nevertheless,
one sees them going up and perhaps suggesting a nuance here or a nuance
there before, ex cathedra, comes the final decision. I am sure, from my
own observation, and I think you would all agree with me, that this little
suggestion, this little reinforcement of what a President and Speaker was
going t'o do anyway, by an official, is also of immense importance to the
running of a Parliament. I think there is only one other thing I wish to say.
Presiding Officers still, particularly in the House of Representatives, but
I suppose in all Parliaments, when they are appointed to their position, by
tradition are taken by the arms by two of their supporters and dragged,
struggling and unwilling to the Chair. Since in most cases they have taken
a certain amount of pains to make sure that they do get elected to the Chair,
this occasionally surprises some people. But it has a very valid historical
reason, as of course you all know, and it is a reason which needs to be
remembered and needs to be applied, because you will recall initially that
the Cpeaker was the man who spoke. Now, of course, he doesn't. He
never says anything except " Don't say that" or " That's out of order:' but
initially he was the man who cpoke for the House of Commons to the King,
and said " You can't do this". " You can't impose that tax." " You are
overstepping the law there". The position of Speaker in those days was a
very dangerous occupation for a commoner to have. More than one Speaker
suffered seriously as a consequence of speaking for the House over which
he presided. That is why, originally, there was some real regret, there
was some real opposition to being taken to a seat which in modern parlance,
we would call a hot seat. ;' ell, that doesn't apply now, but what does apply now
is still a necessity to speak for the House in the House, rather than speak
for the Government in the House, or speak for the Opposition in the House,
to speak for the institution of Parliament as opposed to the parties that make
it up or the executive which depends upon its support. These are the reasons
why you all are so honoured in the occupancy of these positions, and these are
the reasons why we are so honoured that you have gathered here in Canberra
to discuss how better, if it is possible to be better, to carry on the functions
of Houses over which you preside and the business which comes before them.
As I make what I hope will be my last address in
this Chamber, particularly if the electors of Higgins support me, I am
mindful that I will be changing from a President I know to a Speaker I do
not know. Without stating the exact quotation because it mig t not sound
proper or appropriate, let me say that I hope that the Speaker I do not know
will be better than the President I know but he will have to be pretty good to
fill that niche. It is with some regret that I leave this place. It is
with pleasure that I see you ci tting here to make it, and all your Parliaments,
a better place than it was before you came here.
And that is why I have pleasure in declaring this
Conference open. Thank you.
L 



\% STER IS
FOURTH ' S'UMMEER SCHOOL OF P? CF-ESSIONA( L ~ 8 FEB 1968
JOURNALISM N
Held in the Haydon-Allen Building, Australian
Na~ tional University, Canboerra 2ND FEBRUA. RY, 1968
Theme: " COMMUINICATION KEY TO. GOOD GOVERNMENT
O-pening Speech by the Prime Minister, the Hon. John Gorton
Mr Chairman and Ladies-and Gentlemen:
There are -Perhaps three things I'o ught to say to you befcre I
really get launched into opening this Conference,
The first one is that I have spent a great deal of time over the
last two or three years in openin~ g things like science blocks and things like
technical schools and things of that kind generally, and It has been an experience
of mine that at the end of having delivered the address that always goes along
with these activities, one is so delighted to have got through, one is so relieved
at having finished, that one tends to forget entirely to open whatever it is that
one came to open. If this should happen on this occasion, would you please
remember that at the very beginning I indicated that the object of this was to
open the conference, and just take It as read If I forget, which I hope I won't.
The second thing that I would say to you is that I understood
that tonight this was not a " heavy" night, this was not a night of real work for
you such as will occur when people read you the carefully-prepared papers on
various aspects of communications which you will then, in the course of the
seminar, discuss and dissect and agree with or disagree with. This was, as
far as I was concerned, more an opportunity to come along to speak for perhaps
twenty minutes or so, not deeply, but as a mark of respect for the work which
you do I won't say for each one of you but for the work you do, and perhaps
to put forward some few views of my own on its importance.
The keyn ote of this, I gather, is " Communication the Key to
Good Government"; this is what the seminar is about. I don't know that this
is a sufficiently accurate title because of things which I will now endeavour to
develop. It is possible to have good government without communication,
but it Is far less likely that there will be good government without communication,
but of course it Is possible to have very bad government with very efficient
communication. You will remember that one of the first things which any
totalitarian government seeks to do, whether it be of the right or of the left,
is to control communications, and having controlled communications, having
controlled the media of the press and television and broadcasting, then the
most lavish technical facilities can be poured Into communications so that they
will permeate the whole of a society and will allow only those views and only
those arguments which a government in power wishes to allow, and that they
will suppress all dissident opinion and prevent views which the government in
power does not wish to have presented.
Well, then, you can have and have had examples of communication,
but they haven't been the key to good government because they haven't been
uncontrolled communications. So I would define a little bit the theme of this
. Io.* 9/ 2 
-2
conference and say and I may even be a little wrong in this perhaps we
should say " Free Communications: The Best Insurance Policy to See that
Good Government Continues", and with that I would have no quarrel whatsoever,
an insurance policy to see that it continues.
I did query a little the suggestion uncontrolled communications
because there Is a tendency, or it seems to me that there is occasionally
a tendency for a certain lack of control In communications, just as It seems to
some of those who don't agree with me politically on occasions, that there is
a certain lack of control. I am not speaking now of the reporting of political
matters, but there are some papers which, of course, one wouldn't dare to
name, but there are some papers who occasionally tend to be verging on the
uncontrolled, particularly wihen they make the best af both worlds by taking
a high moral line on how extemely bad vice and violence and things of that kind
are and in order to drive home the point of how bad they are, they fill half
their pages with careful reporting of the particular things. This of course, I
am sure, on the behalf of the owners is designed to attain a moral end!
But occasionally it might seem to be verging just a little on the uncontrolled,
so that Is why I chose the word " free".
Well, how are we going to get free communications, and
how ought those free communications to be used by you, because there is a
responsibility on government to see that information is supplied to enable
free communication properly to function, and there is a responsiblity on
Journalists and on the owners of newspapers and on the editors of newspapers,
and, not particularly, but also on those who write the headlines for stories
and cut out the middle of the story from the people who wrote them, there is
a responsibility on them to see that that information is properly presented In
a balanced way. Well what is the responsibility on government? I think it is
pretty heavy. I believe that governments ought never to seek to suppress
news or Information, whether those governments feel it is for the moment
to their advantage to do it or not to their advantage to do it. I not only
believe that this is useful to enable free communication to functlon but I
believe it is a sensible policy and one which Is to the advantage of the government
which uses it. Now, I remember my present Press Officer joining me when
I was first In the Navy and we put this to the test. It's a long while ago now
and -you won't remember, but we had two naval ships steaming along, one of
which was firing at the other with such good effect that it hit it, and a shell
went through it fortunately, it was a non-explosive one just above the
water line. Well this is an unusual occurrence in a well-run Navy, and tie
question arose of what one should do about it so of course what one did
about it was immediately call a pre-ss conference and tell everybody and send
them down there and they could interview everybody and they could see the
hole and they could take pictures. After they decided that there it was and
there was nothing to hide, okay, the story was there and there was no more
speculation. And similarly we did it in other things that happened.
This Is not only In my view a prop~ er way but a payable way
for a government to behave, and therefore there is not only a rspnsbility,
but if it has got any sense, a government behaves In accordance with that
responsibility. Now there must be some limitations, to this. There are some
fields of information which are tied up possibly with national security. There
are some areas of information which it Is not desired to make public for ./ 3 
3-
perhaps another week or so for various reasons because negotiations are
going on and haven't reached a point of complete fruition. These kinds of
things, where there is a particular reason, I think one Is justified In not
announcing, and In fencing if one Is asked about them. But those are, roughly,
the only reservations that I would have.
It is therefore, In my view, the purpose of a Government Information
Officer attached to a Minister or to a Department, not to protect his Minister
or his Department In the sense of protecting him by stopping the dissemination
of Information for which his Minister or his Department can be criticised, but
rather to protect him his Minister or his Department by going along and
saying, " This has happened" or " Some r-eospaper Is interested In this"....
" These are the facts. These facts ought to be made publc and so
protect him in that way. Then It is up to the Minister, and if he has got any
sense, he will make those facts public.
Before I leave this area of where I think Government responsibility
lies,, where it should be used I would like to touch on something which has
been a matter of discussion from time to time, and that Is the dissemination
of Information by public servants as opposed to the dissemination of Information
by governments, by Ministers, by people working as journalists In Departments
or for Ministers. You have all seen It suggested that, really, public servants ought
to be able to make pronouncements on policy, ought to be able to make
announcements as to fact.* I find this Impossible to accept, You have public
servants who are there to carry out a policy decided on by a government or
decided on by their Minister. Quite often, before that policy Is decided upon,
If tt Is a properly-run Department, the Head of It, or the second In charge
of It or third Is~ charge of It will be talking to the Minister, and he will say,
" Look, I don't think you ought to do that. I think you are quite wrong. I
think you are an absolute clot If you do this. You shouldn't do It. Sometimes
he writes it on a piece of paper and sends It in. Then, again, If It Is a
properly-run Department, most of the time they are right. But not always,
and so a Minister will say, " Well, all right. I have taken into account what
you have put to me. I have thought about It carefully. I think you are wrong.
I don't accept your advice, and this is the policy I want you to carry out.
And in a properly-run Department, then a public servant accepts that and carries
It out. If you had a situation arising out of those sort of circumstances
where that public servant would immediately rush away and say publicly, " I
think the Government or the Minister is quite wrong. I told him he was wrong
at the time, and these are the reasons I put forward to him," well, It would
be a very good news story, but It wouldn't be very conducive to good government,
and It wouldn't be very conducive to the stanfflng of public servants. One of
the safeties that public servants have Is that they do carry out a policy, either
devised or accepted by their political government, and if mistakes are made In
policy or In practice, It is their political government and their political head
who takes the blame, even though they may not necessarily directly be
responsible, and that they, themselves, as public servants are not to be
subject to criticism, because If they are, then they must have a right to
answer and It Is better that they should follow the course of not entering Irto
public controversy and therefore na bcig teto beheld responsible and
attacked in public. For those reasons, although I know there are arguments on the
other side, I do feel that in the discharge of a responsibility to provide e 6 / 4 
-4
information by a government, that It Is the government and not its servants
who must accept that responsibility.,
Well, what about the responsibility that then devolves on those
who work for the communications media, those who take that Information
either freely offered or ferreted out and then disseminated through the
country? This is of vital Importance, of just as much Importance, of just
as much responsibility as lies upon a government to make the Information
available. I don't speak only of Information as to fact. That Is fairly
simple. Almost any course that Is adopted In a country such as ours Is
a course which Is arrived at as a matter of choice. There are a number of
things a government can do, and there are quite valid arguments in favour
of all those things. If you walked up on to a hill here in Ca~ nberra, and you
looked down from Red Hill, and yoi saw spread below you the myriad
twinkling lights of this city, and you said to yourself, " Each one of those
lights, or nearly ev~ ry cm of those lights is a light In the window of a house
where an Australian family lives. What do they want? You would have
to answer yourself in this way. They would want to have a perfect system
of education; they would want to have a system of defence which would make
this country so strong that not even a major power would attack It; they
would want to have development proceeding apace not only in the country
but In the city; they would want to have x per cent of GNP spent on providing
scientific advancement; they would want the States and the Commonwealth
each to be able to do all that they feel that they would like to do; they would
want taxation to be reduced. They would not want a deficit because with a
deficit there tends to be too much Inflation. In fact they want everything
which is quite reasonable because as individuals we would all like to have all
these things we would want to have too. But you can't have it all and ne ither
can a country so in spite of the fact that valid arguments can be made for
every one of these and a myriad other things, you come down to making a
choice priority which Is the most Important, which of things that are needed
shall we take. Then It Is necessary to explain, for a government to explain why
they regard these things as the ones of most Importance. What arguments
have led them to say, " Well, we'll take this field rather than that at the
moment. Vie will defer this until some other time". There will always be
arguments for and arguments against, and It Is essential for a well-informed
community, a community that can make a proper judgment on whether to
retain or dismiss the government, that these arguments should be presented
first by a government and then presented In a balanced way by the communications
media throughout Australia. If they do that, if they don't make a
snap judgment, If they don't make a biased judgnent criticise of course
but present the arguments for and against say " These i-re the arguments
which are advanced for It; these are the arguments which are advanced against
It", then whether we are Individuals writing a column or whether we are a
newspaper or whether we are broadcasters, we say we don't agree with what
Is being done for these reasons, at least the debate has become public, and
become public in a way which enables a democracy to form an Informed
Judgment. This Is the ultimate test of whether you gentlemen and ladies are
doing your work properly: That an Informed judgment can be formed by
the public. Well, I know the immense difficulties that you are under In
doing this, particularly those who work for newspapers. You have a deadline
for one thing. I have always believed, I have been told it Is true, I don't 9 e 9 9 
know; you can Inform me if it Isnt; that one of the cries of the editors of
all major newspapers Is " You've got to get It on by a certain time; you've
got to get It Into to us by five o'clock. If you car;, get It right, but if you
can't get It right, at least get It written". That, I think, shows up, neces arily
shows up because there isn't time. This is a difficulty which one understands.
It seems to me there are also difficulties some times with those who happen
to own newspapers because they happen to have particular beliefs In one ' W'ay
or In another and they may be prepared to publish matter which supports the
particular beliefs or policies which their paper Is at the moment advancing,
and not report anything which Isn't supporting that or at least slant itono-way
or another. This is, I think, a bad thing. I am not saying this Is on any,
one particular side of politics. It Isn't. It Is on both sides, but I do think
It is not a proper use of communications.
I am not so disturbed about it really, because If It goes on
long enough, then people say, " All right, -that paper, X, we know what it Is
like, what line it is going to take on any particular matter. That paper, Y,
we know what line It is going to take on any particular matter" and It doesn't
have a very great effect on forming public opinion. But that Is another
difficulty that you, as working Journalists, have to overcome. You can
overcome it, even when the unforgiving minute doesn't allow you to devote all
the time and all the arguments that are necessary on a particular matter.
There are always special articles that can be written If your editor can provide
you with the space. There are special talks which can be made over
broadcasting networks, There are a number of smaller publications In which
these things can be discussed in a more leisurely way, weekly publications and
things of that kind. And so the way Is there though It may be difficult.
However difficult it may be, It is necessary If we are
properly to use the media of communications, for a government to do what
I have said it ought to do, and for those who then take that information to use
it or to attempt to use it In the way that I have suggested to you I think It
ought to be used. There is only one other thing, I think, that I wish to say,
and that Is that though It seems to me it is occasionally being lost sight of
today, there Is also a need In using the media, particularly the written
media properly, for some consideration to be paid to the use of good English.
It is not always apparent that this Is happening.
I do remember reading In a newspaper I am not making this
up a story that was written that so-and-so saw Mr Smith " standing there
being sick in his underpants". Now, they didn't mean he was being sick in
his underpants any more than he was being sick In his hat. What they meant
was he was wearing smalls while he was being sick. This may seem a small
point, and it is In that particular context! But that lack of complete precision
can lead to quite serious misunderstandings from time to time.
The stories in military history where tbis kind of bad writing
has led to disasters are legion. There was the Charge of the Light Brigade,
for example. It was a complete mistake and came about because the general
at the time used bad English when he wrote the order which was carried down
to the Light Brigade. I could go through many other military despatches which
were written with such conciseness that they were quite unable to be understood
and therefore everybody did the wrong thing. I am not suggesting that you should
do that, but I am saying the English langunge can be a method of expression so / 6 
-6-
which probably embodies the greatest precision of any le~ nguage since Latin,
and I include French. Or it can be a really sloppy sort of language which
doesn't really mean anything from which Smith can draw one inference
and Jones can draw another.
I really ought to apologise for talking to you so long about
this, but It does seem to me that allied with what I said to you and It is
not often I get a chance to tell the Press what they ought to do; it Is nearly
always the other way round allied with what I have said to you of the
proper use of the media Is the really proper use of English. It probably
means going back to learning parsing in the schools, but I don't want to get
into trouble with the Education Department at the present moment.
Sir, I told you that this address was not one that was going
to go deeply into matters, and It doesn't. It was an address designed to
indicate the importance which I attach to your deliberations and more
particularly to your work anid the way in which you carry it out. If I have
touched upon some feelings. of my own about how a government ought to
provide information, how those charged with disseminating It ought to use
the information that Is used, I have done It because I feel it is of vital
Importance to the proper running of a democracy4 It Is easy enough for a
political party and indeed we all tend to do It In the House to argue to a
brief, to put forward only the good points In favouir of some course, and to
ignore the bad, not mention them or try and pretend they don~ t exist. I hope
that thic will not grow In the political field. I hope it won't take root at all
in those who disseminate it, because It is essential when cases are put, all
the good points in favour of it should be put and all the bad points against It
should be put If a balanced Judgment Is to be made.
You are the people who will enable a balanced Judment to
be made by the community. It is a heavy responsibility and I am sure you
will discharge it well. I declare this open,: 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
B Town Hall, Sydney, NSW FEBRUARY, 1967
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr President, Mr Osborne, Mr Premier, all those gathered behind
me and all those in this hall
I begin to make the first speech that I have made as Prime
Minister, dealing with political affairs. The speech that I am going to make
to you is the first of many because there seem to be elections coming thick
and fast in the immediate future. Firstly we have the election to choose once
again Mr Askin as the Premier of New South Wales, then on the same day
we have an election which, I sincerely hope, will choose me as the Member
for Higgins. Early in March, there is an election in South Australia, and
soon after that one in Western Australia.
It is my hope and my belief that you here will see that on February
24, this Stat e sets an ex ample for the rest of Australia to follow by choosing
once again that man, whom I think you will agree, has led this State since
19.65 with distinction, with vitality and with success. Certainly it is an h-rtour
and a pleasure for me to stand here with him on this platform today supp'i.. ing
him at the time of his election, not only because of what he has done in tl_-' s
State, but also because of the meetings I have had with him in the last mco . th
or so, meetings where it became perfectly clear that what he ha(, done he
had done against difficulties, in that he had to take over the running of this
State at a time when one of the greatest droughts Australia has Iknown hit the
capacity of this State to look after itself as it has hit the capacity of other
Eastern States, and that in spite of that handicap, he has been able to do what
he has done. I can assure you of this, ladies and gentlemen, that he has proved
himself to me to be a most persuasive and a most dedicated advocate for the
State which he represents and has provided all the arguments concerning
drought and other disabilities which could be put on behalf of this part of
Australia. Therefore it is a happy augury and a rieasure for me to be with
him, beginning what I hope will be a continuing partnership with ourselves in
the Federal sphere and Mr Askin in the State sphere and other Liberals in
other State spheres, so that together we can, each according to our fashion,
each according to the Constitution, see that Australia is developed as a whole,
and that each part of it is run by those nearest. to the people in that part of it.
I don't mean by this, ladies and gentlemen, that in such a partnership
and it will be, I know, a close partnership there will not be from
time to time differences of opinion as to priorities, differences of opinionas
to proposals. This is inevitable in any partnership if it is to run properly, it
is inevitable in any Federal system, and particularly inevitable in a Federal
system in which one or two States have much greater development, much
greater population resources than have the other States of a nation. But while
these matters in the future can be the subject of discussion, can be the subject
of initial disagreement and then of resolution I would go on to say this that
if those discussions are family discussions, as they would be between us in
the Commonwealth and Mr Askin in New South Wales, if they are discussions I2 
between governments having the samye ' general eamplexion-and the same general
approach as to the place of the individuial Jn. s ociety, then those matters will be
more susceptible of resolution, more susceptible of amicable arrangement than
could be possible were there to be a different complexion of government in this
State, or indeed in others.
I have spoken of possible differences of opinion not to emphasise
it but as a lead-in to problems which face both a Commonwealth Government and
a State Government in the years ahead, for this much is certain. Neither a
Commonwealth Government nor a State Government in the years immediately
ahead will have the resources to do all that they would like to do, or to do it as
quickly as they would like to do it, because consider what it is that people in
Aua tralia really want.
Imagine yourself on the top of some high hill, looking out over a
populated valley where the lights twinkle below you at night, and thinking each
one of those lights is a light in the home of an Australian family. What is it
they seek to build their country into; what is it they wish for them selves, and
how best can we try to achieve what they wish for themselves and what they
wish for their nation. You can imagine yourself in that position. You would
answer your question in what is perhaps a contradictory way.
You would say, I think, or I would say for yo6u: What Australians
w ant is to see that the aged needy, the ill needy, those really suffering from
unfortunate circumstances through no fault of their own, should be adequately
proAded for by the nation, but that this should be done without destroying the
incentive to save, and without destroying the incentive to self-reliance. r~ his,
in itself, requires I think, some rethinking of our policies in these matters,
and requires some significant effort from Governments and from the people
from whom Governments gain their revenue.
And they would say, we want in this nation the capacity for every
individual to be able to develop to the utmost his own inherent capacitijes
through education, whether it be conventional, or technical, or whatever it
may be. And that requires enormous resources.
And they would say we want defence for this country, we want
defence sufficient to make sure that we are true allies of those whom in the
ultimate our future may depend, our future existence may depend, that we can
help those countries nearest to us towards stability, that we can save In our
own country sufficient in the future to take the first shock of any attack that
might ever be made upon us in the future, until such time as the allies whom
we have supported and helped could come to our help, as I am sure they would.
And that requires enormous resources from the people.
And they would say we want development of this nation. We want
to see resources which now lie unused be utilised so that throughout the whole
of this country we will have not only employment opportunities, not only new
industries, but the new industrial muscl'es which they will bring to us, and which
in their turn will build us into a great material nation, and help, in their turn,
the development of ourselves towards the future which is possible if we reach out
to grasp it with sufficient effort. And this requires enormous resources.
And they would say, and rightly say, while we want these things,
we also wish that the burden of taxation upon individuals in this nation should
not be raised to such heights that the incentive to produce, that the incentive
to strive, that the incentive to save is removed from those individuals in the
private sector, upon whom' " in the last resource, the final growth of this nation
s. 3 
must depend. wish t, 6 see not only-tkiAñ hese -national
objectives I have outlined are -t tT-VZ&amp;. us parts of Australia those
Governments more directly in touch with the peoplo-should have resources
to carry out the responsibilities directly laid upon them by the Constitution.
I could go on, I could go on expanding this list of that which you
r equire, of that which our nation requires, but I thinkc I have said enough,
have I not to indicate that all these things cannot at once be done, that they
are to some extent contradictory, and that therefore th~ ere must be a choosing
of priorities, a decision as to which of these progranres it is that will most
advance this nation and most provide a happy existence lor the inhabitants of
it. And so if there is to be a choosing of priorities in'these fields, as there
must be, then that will be a choosing of priorities taker I hope and believe,
by a Commonwealth Government which is a Liberal/ Country Party Government,
by a State Government which is a Liberal/ Country Party Government, and
while there may be discussions as to the relative importance of particular
priorities, at least it will be a ' s I have said before, a famiiy discussion, and
one between people with the same ultimate objectives.
And these objectives, apart from those goals which I sketched,
and sketched so briefly to you this afternoon, are objectives which we feel
that we must reach within a certain framework. We do not think that we can
attain those aims I have set beforeq you by handing everything over to a
government and to officials and say: " You attain this. We will bow out as
individuals". We feel, and it is undoubtedly true, that a government must
create the climate for the achievement by individuals of which I have spoken,
that in many fields the government must take social action for the good of the
community as a whole.
~ let me expand a little on that social action because we hear a
lot, and sometimes an unthought lot, I think, about socialism and how bad
socialism is, but we have got to define what, we mean by this before we come
to any meaningful conclusion. After all, it is not so long ago since the
participation of government in any field was classified as socialism, and yet
who here would object to the Governme~ at entering into the field of providing
railways or roads or electricity. or Water supply for irrigation, or water
supply for a city, or many of t fiese other public utilities. So while
governments must enter these fields, it rhust~ always be the aim of a Liberal
Government to see that they enter only thote lields where it is necessary,
that they leave within the framework they lay down the greatest amount of
possible area for individual achievement, unhampered by bureaucratic
intervention. PAnd that having done that, having cre ated that climate, they
can then look with confidence, as I believe they cqn, to the men and women
of Australia, to make use of the opportunities provided by the Government
according to their own bent, according to their own iiate) igence, according
to their own effort, according to their own will, and that if men and women
do that, they deserve any reward they get as a result of what they have done.
This is a common approach, and this is an approach upon which, I think, will
be built a great nation.
We have got facing us at the moment grievous and hetavy burdens
in overseas affairs. You will have seen sorre thing that I have said in relation
to Viet Nam, perhaps the most grievous burden we now have to bear. You
will perhaps have noticed that I said we feel that we as a nation of 12 million,
a small nation, a nation with a population of Greater London or Greater
New York, and with enormous calls upon us in these other fields I have
mentioned, are doing all that can reasonably be requized from us. I want to 
-4
elaborate on that. I want to make this.-clear. You will forgive me, I hope,
if at this point I read a little, so that what * I say to you will be what I have
written to say to you and to others outside this-ball.'
On this problem, one which is the heaviest facing Australia,
our own policy is clear. We believe that the late President Kennedy sent
United States troops to South Viet Nam to help the Government of that country
to resist armed attacks upon it and that those attacks were instigated, controlled,
supplied and maintained by the North Vietnamese Government which supplied
regular troops to assist and command the insurgents.
Since that time more and more North Vietnamese regular army
troops have been deployed in the South and the fighting has assumed the
character of an invasion of South Viet Nam by the Government of North Viet
Nam. We believe the United States, under President Kennedy, was right
to take, and is right to persist in its resistance to this aggression not
because it is communist aggression but because it is aggression, and such
aggression, whatever the reason for it anywhere in the world, is a threat to
the ultimate peace of the world. If it is successful, it is likely to be repeated
again and again until, as we have seen in our own lifetime, it eventually must
be stopped at a cost of pain and blood' and treasure infinitely greater than if
it were stopped at the beginning.
Because of that belief, and because of our adherence to and
reliance on the United States alliance, we are pla~ ng our full part in assisting
the military resistance to that aggression not only by providing ground
troops, tanks, aircraft and naval vessels, but by bearing the full cost of
arming, maintaining, munitioning, supplying and provisioning all those forces
which we send to assist the alliance.
We shall continue to do this for as long as is necessary to attain
our objective of preventing aggression's success. At the same time, we have
always realised that the military effort in Viet Nam is, although absolutely
necessary, only one of the components required to win this kind of war.
The other component is the raising of standards of everyday living
in the areas where military forces provide a shield for the civilian population.
And so, from the beginning, one of the tasks of our Army has been to provide
civil aid in the area in which they serve to provide not only money -and
materials but man power to assist in the villages in providing grass roots
assistance medical aservices of a medic kind, schoolrooms, wells, small
bridges and culverts, and matters of that nature.
To sum up, our objective is to prevent, or to make increasingly
difficult and costly, the operation of enemy troops whether regular or guerrila
and steadily to improve the living conditions of the villagers and townspeople
in the area. Whether this is successful or not will depend on the will of those
engaged. But it can be successful, and our will to play our part towards this
objective is firm,. continuing and will not be changed. But wit h such a mighty
choice befcre our country, with that being what your Government seeks to do,
I believe the time has come when an alternative policy ought to be advanced, if
it is going to be advanced, by an Opposition.
What the Opposition' s alternative policy is I do not know, and I
doubt if anybody knows. The governing body of the Labor Party has laid down
a policy which requires specifically 
That all bombing of supply routes from the North. should immediately
and unconditionally be stopped.
That allied troops in Viet Nam should remain in their present
positions and cease fighting except to repel attacks upon
themselves and this was described as a holding operation; and
That if the United States or the South Vietnamese will not agree
to these conditions, then we must immediately abandon the United
States alliance and withdraw Australian troops from Viet Nam.
That is the official policy of the Opposition, and one I believe they are bound
at present to carry out. But it is one which the Leader of the Opposition has
sought to blur, and to conceal from Australians so that we hear vague talk
and unspecific suggestions from the Leader which appear to slither away from
the policy by which he is constrained.
Ladies and gentlemen, don't you think the time has come when
Australians have the right to know exactly what the Opposition policy on Viet
Nam is, and the Opposition have a clear duty to explain specifically what it
is, that there should be no more attempts to deny or conceal or misrepresent
it, nor further examples of different spokesmen advancing different policies.
We have a right to know what the alternative choice is, and we have a right to
know now, and I ask that we should be told now on this matter of such great
importance. Lord knows, ladies and gentlemen, the one thing that I find grievous
is that we should, at this point of time, according to our own judgment of what
is right, be rcquired to expend so much upon an insuranc~ e policy, upon defence,
when there is so much required to be done for our own people and in our own
country. Don't think because I have spent some time on this matter that I
regard it as of more importance than our own growth and our own development,
and the care of our own citizens. I do it because it is a matter which strikes
to the root of Australia's survival, and we ' Ought to know what alternate parties
think. Having thought that, then we hope that having achieved peace there, we
can turn to an examination of these other matters I have raised with you, and
that having made this exami,~ ation, not we, the Federal Government, not Mr
Askin the State Government, but our Governments with you. We, in that sense,
can attack and overcome our internal problems, and together build that nation
which I know it is in our capacity to build and which I know it is in our destiny
to achieve. 



HIGGINS BY-ELECTION CAMPAIGN
OPENING SPEECH BY THEE PRIME MINISTER, N BR&gt;
JOHN GORTON
Caulfield Town Hall, Melbourne 13TH FEBRUARY, 1968
Mr Ch~ airman, Mr Premier, Wr Anthony, Mr McMahon, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I come before you tonight as a candidate for t he seat of.
Higgins, seeking the endorsement of the electors of Higgins, and asking
them to place me In that situation which was previously held by a great
Australian who led this country for two years. This is, in essence, a
by-election, a request to the electors of Higgins in particular that they
should think me worthy, as I hope they will, to fill that place so tragically
vacated by Mr Holt. I would try and fill it as well as he did.
I must say to the electors of Higgins tonight, and to those
people In Australia who may be outside this hall or outside the electorate
tonight, the attitudes which I would adopt, the approaches which my Government
would adopt, towards the future progress of this, our joint country. But
there is something I must say to you at once, and that is that this is not
tonight, this speech, and I think it ought not to be, a policy speech in the
sense that policy speeches are made at general elections. This is no
time at a by-election, being held two-thirds of a way through a financial
year for which a government has budgeted, for which it has struck a rate of
taxation, for which it has assessed expenditure and income, to launch out
into new promises involving new expenditure, and either new rates of
taxation or increases in deficit.
Indeed, I think that a mini-policy at this time could well
be held to be irresponsible. Rather, I think, is this a time to express to
the electorate and to Australia, our approaches to the needs of Australia,
the goals which we will set ourselves to try and attain as and when we can,
the course on which we will seek to steer our country towards the future
years of greatness which lie in store for us.
And so I shall talk to you tonight of the settled policies
which we have adopted and will continue to adopt on defence, on foreign
affairs, on relations with our neighbours, for on these things, indeed, may
depend in the ultimate our capacity eventually, acting as a free people, to
work out our own destiny and to decide what our domestic progress will
indeed be. Having spoken of these th ings, this touchstone which may
decide the future of Australia as an Independent nation, then I shall seek to
put before you certain domestic matters, and the approaches and the emphasis
which we would put on these domestic matters.
First let me talk to you on the question of Defence.
I have said that on our efforts here may well depend our capacity in future
years to decide our own destiny and to run our own affairs. This calls now,
In the state of the world as it is at present, for a significant and an onerous
effort from the Australian people, and an effort which all of us would wish,
were circumstances different, could be put not into an Insurance policy but
into the kind of development for which our effort in defence could do so much. ./ 2 
-2
However great the effort we make In defence and it is
becoming great In no future that I can foresee can we In Australa rely
on ourselves alone, or remain secure without alliance with some friendly
and significantly powerful ally, having the same approach to life as we
Australians have... ( Interjection " The same old line") and a true old
line and a line on which Australia has depended for more than a century
and a half, from the United Kingdom.
For us, though we can look to, and though I am sure we
would in a crisis be given military assistance in time of need by the United
Kingdom, who for over a century and a half has been our shield and our
buckler, and to whom, if blood be the price of protection Lord God, we
have paid in full, but who has for that period of time protected us, and to
whom we could still look for protection, yet the changing years have
ordained that In the ultimate, the security of this small nation now depends
on its alliance with the United States, and on protection from the United
States. No small nation such as ours can, in the world as it is today, I
suggest to you, iive with happiness and security and safety without
protection of that kind.
This Is a fact which places on us, as I believe, a duty of
being an ally, when we think the United States Is right, in the fullest sense
of the word, of being prepared to contribute, as we have been prepared to
contribute In the past, and not merely to receive and give nothing In return.
That, as a basis for a defence policy for Australia is, I believe, essential
for our future security. That is why the expenditure on defence In this
country has risen until it is this year 118 million, and with commitments
we have already entered Into and which will flow from the commitments
we have already entered into, will in the two years ahead Increase above that
figure. It is not a sum which alone can afford us security but It Is the
smallest sum which, I suggest to you, we can with honour expend, and as
a result of it, expect that protection which may be necessary for our future
progress. ( Interjection " Not for my son, Clive)
Well, I don't know where your son, Olive, is sir, but there
are a number of other sons of a number of other Austraan s in the past, now
and in the future who no doubt would be prepared to back what I have said
for the sake of their country.
That, Mr Chairman, leads me to a discussion on the
position which past governments have taken up and which this government
will sustain on the matter of our involvement In Viet Nam. I believe our
policy In Viet Nam, the policy of the Government, ought to be stated, or
rather, re-stated clearly, and I shall try to do this.
Firstly, we believe that the United States was right, uni er
President Kennedy in the later half of 1961, to accede to the South Vietnamese
request for military assistance to counter a military Incursion from the
North. And we believe the United States Is right, under President Johnson,
to have continued and to continue the courg-efirst mapped by President
Kennedy in this matter. We believe that when the original decision was made armed
attacks were being made on South Viet Nam, and that those attacks were
Instigated, controlled, supplied and maintained by the North Vietnamese o 9 / 3 
-3
which provided regular troops to assist and command the insurgents. We
believe that in spite of the terrorist activity carried on since that time,
local support has so fallen off In South Viet Nam that more and more North
Vietnamese regular armed troops have been deployed in the South, and that
the fighting has assumed the character of an invasion of South Viet Nam by
the Government of North Viet Nam, just as there was previously an Invasion
of SoUth Korea by the Government of North Korea.
It is true thts is aggression by a communist govenment
seeking to Impose its rule by force, but the prime reason for preventing
It succeeding is not because of its source, not because it stems, as it happens
to In this case, from a communisat country, but because it Is aggression.
That Is the reason for opposing it.
For I believe, and I suggest to all you Australians that
what best promotes our national security and the national security of other
small States, what best guarantees our national survival, along with the
survival of other small powers as truly Independent nations, Is that we
should havo a world in which aggression by one nation or part of one nation
against another is shown to be unsuccessful and does not succeed In whole
or in part. For if it is seen to succeed, then It Is likely as our history
has shown " as the history In tbe lifetimze of inumy people in this hall
has shown -if it Is seen to be successful, then It Is likely to be repeated and
repeated and repeated until eventually it must be stopped at a cost greater in
de~ truction, In pain and in loss of life than would have been required had it
been stopped at its Inception.
That is why Australians fought against the aggressions of
Hitler which succeeded one another until they had to be stopped... ( Cheers)
Sir, If you are prepared to cheer Hitler, I am not, any more than I am
prepared to cheer a communist dictator or any other governing power which
seeks to impose its wish by force upon some other independent nation.
That Is why Australians fought with the United Nations in
Korea against an attack on South Korea by North Korean naked aggression.
That is why Australians opposed the militant expression
of confrontation between Indonese-a and Malaysia, opposed it In conjunction
with the United Kingdom. And that is why we are right, as I believe, to
help our ally, the United States, In South Viet Nam.
We shall continue to take the action we are now taking
for as long it is necessary to help attain the objective of preventing the
success of North Vietnamese aggression. At the same time, we have always
realised that the military effort In Viet Nam, although absolutely necessary,
is only one of the components required In this kind of war.
The other component is the raising of standards of everyday
living in the areas where military forces provide a shield for the civilian
population a shield which can, of course, be pierced but which can prevent
the destruction of what Is sought to be done to raise living standards.
Let me, ladies and gentlemen, at this time, put to you an Illustration of
what I mean by that. I', t one stage, I was in charge of running the Colombo Plan 9 / 4 
-4-
for Australia, and in an attempt to help the people of South Viet Nam, quite
some years ago, we sought to take over we did take over a tract of land
of a kind which was not being used in that country because it was thought that
it could be in no way productive. By the introduction of special kinds of
legumes, of a manurial programme, we were able on that land to grow and to
show surrounding farmers there could be grown pastures on which cattle
could be grazed, and were able to set up a dairy farm at Ben Cat which provided
for the first time in history for the children of Saigorl pasteurised milk groyni
in that experimental farm and sent to the city.
This was an illustration to the people of that region of what
could be done. You can, from your own minds, Imagine what would have
happened there to inlcrease living standards had this been permitted to succeed,
but it was not permitted to succeed. It was not permitted to succeed because;
that farm was attacked, those cattle were slaughtered by the Viet Cong
regulars who did not wish living standards to be increased, because if they
were so increased, then it would show that we were able to provide a better.
standard of life than they themselves could do.
This is why there is a need for this protection of this civil
action. An d that is why from the very beginning, our army In Viet Nam has
been provided with money to carry out its own civil aid programme in the:
villages, to help with the medical treatment of the villagers, to help in the
small matters which mean so much to them the construction of a school.
house, the construction of a small culvert, the construction of a small
infirmary and the provision of village industries. These are the things which
go hand in hand with what we are trying to do, and the things which must.....
dyooue s suagnygbeostdiyn gd itshaagt rtehee? s e Itsh itnhgesr em suosmt en omt buer mduonr e, o f tdhiasta gwree emmuesnt t? n ot sAereek* to
build up the living standards of the villagers and the townsfolk? Because if
you do suggest that, then I can understand why you would oppose the policy
which we adopt. But If you dont, if you believe these should be built up and
should be shielded while they are being built up, then you must support what
we have done. To sum up our policy, Mr Chairman: We believe it right....
( interjections) Oh, yes, I think these policies should be summed up, don't
you? There has been a marked reluctance to sum them up In some quarters
on this matter. We believe It right to maintain the elementary right of the
South Vietnamese people to determine their own future, as they showed in.
recent elections they were capable of doing. We will continue to provide,
as we are providing, significant and effective military assistance to the
allied effort to achieve this aim, and we will provide it for as long as we are
called upon to help achieve this aim.
We will support, as we have supported, the many efforts by
the United States and the United Nations for discussions seeking a negotiat ed
end to the war and a settlement which provides the South Vietnamese with a
just and an enduring peace under which they can determine their own future.
The United States has amply demonstrated Its desire for such discussions,
the United Nations has sought to help the United States to obtain such discussions,
but so far every such proposal has been rejected, whether it came from the
United Nations or the United States, by the North Vietnamese.
But, TMr President, there is one thing we will not do. We will
I 
not urge on the United States that there should be discussions designed
solely to negotiate methods of surrendering the South Vietnamese to thie
rule of the North, which Is a course which sometimes seems to be suggested
in this country. Nor will we urge on them that bombing designed to. impede
the flow of men and materials to the South, as distinct from bombing on a
civilian population men and materials travelling down to kill Australian
ca~ d Ameri1can troops -should be ectopped as a condition Imposed by the Viet
Cong for possible talks with no compensating conditions as to holding up the
sending of such men and material.
We will, insofar as we can, continue to seek to Improve the
economic lot and the living conditions of the villagers in the area In which
our troops operate, for we coneider this to be a vital and necessary task and
one which must, as soon as possible, be tackled through out the whole of
South Viet Nam. We will do it by continuing and expanding what we are
already doing.... ( Interjection If you hadn't Interjected you would have heard.
I will repeat It: By providing to the villagers the simple medical treatment
there required, by building school houses in the villages, by fostering
co-operatives In the villages and providing fertilisers so that their crops
can be yi by providing wells for pure water. Not by vast overriding
ioV% 49ab~ n approaches, but by getting down to the grass roots,
as we have been getting down to the grass roots In our area. That, sir, is
how we will do It, and that, sir, Is something I believe the people of South
Viet Nam understand and will appreciate, now want, and will want In the
future. I was seeking to spell out, before I was diverted, a policy
which we are going to implement, and I have sought to spell it out In simple
words, and words which can be understood by all, as I hope they will have
been. But this thing that I am discussing Is one of moment to the present
and to the future of Australia, one of moment to the association between
this nation and the United States, and therefore It is a matter of great public
concern. That Is why I have sought so carefully to try to put before* you,
whether you agree with It or not, what we are doing and what we will continue
to do. I bd ieve that on matters of this moment clear statements of
policy ought to be made.
But I do suggest this. Australians are denied or have so far
been denied any clear statement of policy on this matter by the Opposition.
It is true that last year the Federal Labor Confcrence, by resolution
( Interjection) adopted a policy which you clap which requires that the
United States should cease bombing North Viet Nam e~ n conditionally
( Cheers' Fine, fine, you express your opinion. This is what the Federal
Labor Conference adopted, and no doubt those who applauded agree with it,
as Is your right. They adopted a policy that the United States shctild
recognise the National Liberation Front the Viet Cong as a principal
party to negotiations ( boos... I don't know who you are booing, but I takce
it you are booing the Viet Cong. They adopted a policy that the United
States should transfcrm operations In South Viet Nam Into holding operations,
which means staying where you are and repelling attacks and allowing attacks. to
be concentrated and mounted against you and just pushing them back but not
doing anything to prevent them from materialising, or to move out Into
country surrounded by the enemy.
Now that is the policy that was adopted, I agree, by the
Federal Labor Conference. A further policy adopted was that If the United
States-did not accept this ultimatum on all these three points, then the / 6 
-6
Australian Government must withdraw Its armied forces' ( Interjections)
which, of course and those of you who clap, if you are Intellectually
honest must admit this means abandoning the expression of the United.
States / Australian alliance In Viet Nam.
Now these were resolutions adopted at the 1967 Conference
of the Australian Labor Party, and the Rules and Standing Orders of that
party state " The Federal Conference shall be the supreme governing
authority of the party.. : XInterjector " Hear, hear")
Well I think there is at least one man in Australia who disagrees with you,
f I heard him properly on
0 and its decision shall be binding upon every member and
every section of the party.
So it would seem, would it not, that this policy of presenting an ultimatum
and withdrawing all Australian troops, if It is not accepted, is the policy
of the Opposition, one would think.
But the present Leader of the Opposition refuses either to
confirm or to deny that this is the policy by which he is bound and which he
and his supporters are bound to carry out, and indeed, has Indicated that
no matter what the Federal Conference says, he is supreme and not bound
by It. I don't know whether that is true or not, but the people of
Australia ought to be told whether it Is true or not, because I think it fair to
say that there is an attempt here to blur the issue, to slither away from
questions and to be evasive. And further, I think it fair to say
( Interjector " Where Is your policy?) Where's my policy? I stated
it in explicit terms we are continuing to do what we have decided to do
because we think It right. Now that is clear, explicit and cannot be
misunderstood. I think It fair to say that if the Leader of the Opposition
is bound by the official policy, as I believe he Is, then carrying out that
policy would severely damage our relations with the United States and would
weaken, If not destroy, that Australian/ United States alliance on which our
future security could so much depend, and which the Opposition policy pays
is so important that they are going to withdraw Australian troops unless
the United States accepts an ultimatum in order to maintain the alliance
they regard as so important.
There is, therefore, I do believe, In the Interests of
proper ly-informed democratic debate, an obligation on the Leader of the
Opposition clearly to state whether he is inund to adhere to official Labor
policy, and whether he will do so, and if not, how he can avoid doing so,
assuming he wishes not to do so. And that ought to be a question which
could be answered In as simple terms as I have spelt out our policy tonight,
and is a question to which the Australian people have a right to an answer,
when forming a judgment, even In H-glns where there is an opponent
adopting some sort of policy I don't know what against the Government.
They ought to know precisely what that policy is if they are to form a
considered judgment in the way a democracy should do so.
Mr Fresident, moving on from that particular matter, I come
to another area which is of great import ance to this nation and to the future / 7 
-7
of this nation, and that is the effect of what Is happening now, or what
Will happen in the future, in Malaysia, in Singapore, countries so close to
us; indeed, the closest countries to our shcv., s, I think, except that of our
closest neighbour, Indonesia.
In this field, there are questions of maintaining a military
presence in Malaysia and Singapore, and of assistance in raising the
economic activity and helping the economic progress of that region.
Why? Because we hope that by assisting the economic progress of that
region we will see, and we must see if this assistance Is to be fully
effective, that that assistance leads to an incmiase in the standards of
living of the people In the villages, the hamlets and the towns of those
countries. That is the end result that we are seeking.
On the military side, Great Britain has for long maintained
In Malaysia and Singapore naval, air and ground forces and the bases from.
which they can operate, and has maintained them as a stabilising force'In
that area. They have been Intended to prevent, and they have prevented
with Australian forces participating, local armed insurgency and attack~ s by
one country in the region on any other. And so they were Instrumental
in preventing the communist insurgency Irn Malaysia when it took place,
supported at the time by many of the people who now support the same sort
of insurgency elsewhere, and the Australians helped In that. They were
able, If not to stop it, to discourage it to the extent that It ceased, the
armed expression of confrontation of k1donoin against Malaysia.
Now for some time, It has been planned that these forces
should be run down, and should be withdrawn at the end of 1975, and we
in Australia knew that and planned on that. At that time, it was envisaged
when these plans were made, that British ground troops would have left the
region by the end of 1975 but that there would be still instantly availa1le
and earmarked for the purpose, a British Air and Naval capability able
swiftly to return and to bring back ground troops should a situation require
i t. But more recently, on what I understand are economic
ground, it has been decided that the withdrawal of British Forces will be
completed not by the end of 1975 but by the end of 1971, some four
years earlier. At the same time as this decision was made known, the
swift availability of that naval and air capability which was previously
planned is clouded by doubt, and we do not know what its composition will
be, what its capacity to fill the role previously planned for it will be,
what time will be necessary for it to be available, and whether it would
indeed be available on the decision of the United Kingdom alone.
This has put into this situation entirely new matte is for
discussion which were unknown to us until the recent visit of the British
Cabinet Minister. There has therefore been not merely a quite cons ider able
alteration of the date by which withdrawal Is to be completed but also
what appears to be a significant difference in planning for the situation
which will obtain after withdrawal.
It is clear to everyon e, of course, that Australia and New
Zealand cannot step in and fill the role which Britain has vacated. But the
Prime Minister of Singapore and the Prime Minister of Malaysia have both
indicated a strong desire that there should be some continuing Australian
military presence in the area after 1971. They wish this, they have asked
e a / 8 
8-
for this. They see it as a contribution to stability In their region, and
their wishes must, of course, have great weight with us.
For these reasons, the Minister for External Affairs has
recently been on an exploratory mission to Singapore and Malaysia to discuss
In more detail what those countries are able to do to help thernselvqs, what
contribution they see Australia making, what role they see for a contribution
Australia might make, and matters of that kind. This will be followed by
further technical military discussions and Five Power discussions at a time
to be arranged. Many of the military factors in this matter are as yet unknown.
They are not known clearly enough for final decisions to be taken now, but
it is clear that the rulers of Malaya and Singapore have indicated that they
wish a continuing Australian presence after 1971, and It Is the feeling of my
Government that these wishes having been so expressed, we should seek
as far as possible, according to our own resources, to fall in with them.
We have, of course, provided other aid to these countries.
We have provided already, and earmarked funds already, to provide
million in aid to Malaysia and to Singapore to enable them to help
defend themselves. But still the matter does remain that it will be there
a different situation than that which existed before, that in that situation
we are asked by our neighbours to contribute, and that we must pay attention
to the wishes which our neighbours so put forward.
But it must be made clear, and it has been made clear,
that any Australian military presence In these countries is not in any way
directed against Indonesia, that other great country In our immediate region
and our nearest neighbour. Indeed what we would lik1e to see and what we
would seek to bring about, insofar as in our power lies, is a closer and
closer association of Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and New
Zealand not necessarily militarily, but In the fields of economic,
co-operation, technical assistance and common action on regional grounds.
This is an objective we should like to see attained and which we shall do
all in our power to see attained. ( Sustained applauset
These are two of the important matters facing this piation
In the years ahead, but of course, again outside our borders before I turn
to problems Inside it, are matters not military but matters of helping
insofar as our resources and requirements permit, the world comm~ unity,
and particularly that part of that community which is in our region and
closest to us. That is the provision of economic assistance, of technological
training, of what we can do to help to build the economies of those countries
outside of this. We will this year, as Australians, contribute in foreign
aid, including aid to New Guinea, something like $ 143 million or about
$ 12 per head for each Australian. ( Interjection) Well If you don't think it
is enough, give me another dollar and I will see it goes there.
In the field of helping to develop the trade trade as
distinct from aid of less developed countries, a field which in the long
run can be of more significance and more assistance than mere aid we
have as a country, taken Initiatives through the Department of Trade, and
through Mr McEwen, which have been acknowledged and appreciated
greatly by those less developed countries which seek outlets for their trade
because they wish to help themselves and can only do that in this way. / 9 
9-
We shall continue our efforts, particularly in aid directed
to the countries In our region and to other Asian countries not directly In
the region, for we are not only in, but of, a region where all our neighbours
are Asian neighbours. The aid should be designed, except during disaster,
not for consumption but for capital formation anft the imparting of skills arid'
knowledge and technologies which permit the end benefit of the original aid
provided to be many times multiplied in those countries in which those sk is
and technologies and efforts are expended.
This we must and will contin ue, but here, as In the field Of
Defai ce, we should balance proposals for the growth rate of such expenditur e
with proposals for the growth and development of Australia Itself. What we
are doing, and what we are committed to do in the fields both of Defence-and
of Foreign Aid, is a clear indication that we are no isolationist nation, 4n d
we will not be, that we will not withdraw into ourselves and let Defence ' and
Foreign Aid take care of themselves. But the level of what we are doing,
and the rate of growth of what we are doing in both these fields must be
regarded In the context of our own resources and our own needs, again and
all the time, and the requirement so to grow ourselves that we will be able
In the years ahead to be able to provide more and yet more into our own
protection and into the development and help of the countries so close to us.
I have spent some time on these matters of great Importance
to this nation in Its place In the world. We are, I think, providing all that
a nation of 12 million, a nation with a population not Mch~ i greater than tINt of
Greter New York or Greater London can be expected to provide towards
Defence and towards Foreign A-ssistance.
We will continue to expand what we are doing in these fields,
as indeed we must, but we will test each proposal against the requirements
for the peaceful development of our own nation and the production of
industrial musci s in our own nation to enable it to become great, to do yet
more In the world in which it finds itself.
I turn now to questions which are more domestic. What Is
it don't all answer, please, because I am going to tell you the answer
what is it that Australians throughout this nation would want to see done in
the domestic field. I will tell you what I think it is they would want to see
I believe that what they would want first to see is that there
should be maintained, as has been brilliantly maintained for 18 years for
Australians, the opportunity for full employment of all those who are willing
and able to work for the advancement of their nation. And if I may say so
to somebody from the back who called out something which sounded to me
like " Our Henry", in no State has there been more jobs provided and les s
unemployment than there has over the years been in this State of Victoria.
This, I think, is what Australians would want to see maintained and maintained
with it, I suggest, they would want to see that rates of taxation already
significantly high should not be so increased, that the incentive to work
harder or better or to earn more should be reduced, because not only would
that be bad for the Individual but bad for the nation of which the individual
is a living part. And they would want to see, I suggest, that rates of
inflation were kept to a level where they could be absorbed without d~ s comfort i/ 1c. 
ic
and without leading to that kind of bust and lack of employment and industrial
chaos which can occur if they get out of control. These are the frameworks,
I believe, that Australians hawe had and would want to keep, and these are
constricting frameworks.
( Interjection " What about ccwz~ icting profits?")
Do you really want to restrict profits If somebody makes it legitimately?
If somebody invents something which benefits the community in which he
lives? If somebody discovers a better way and a cheaper way of producing
something, and is able to introduce that into a factory and to give to the
people of this country something at a cheaper ; rice while yet he makes
higher profits? Do you want to stop him making profits so that this better
article at a cheaper price is not a vailable? Because that is not Liberal
philosophy. That is the direct antithesis of It. ( Applause)
But this background which I have put to you which It is
essential to keep and which the people of this country would want to keep,
I think is restricting when we consider all the things that need to be done
both by Commonwealth and State and local governments throughout
Australia. There Is a tendency to suggest that the solution to this Is just
to make more money available here, there or the other place, and yet you
know even you who are Interjecting know If you put your mind to it that
this is true If you have your manpower fully employed, and if you have
your materials and resources fully employed, then injecting further amounts
of money does not get more things done, it only gets either a smaller amount
of things done or the same amount of things done at a greater price, unless,
of course, you take action to prevent some field of activity from continuing.
And so these are restricting matters, but within the levels
of those restrictions I should put to you what my Government will seek to do
as and when it can In these fields, and indicate the matters we think of
significance in this all-embracing word " development". I have used this
be fore, of course, " development", and It has been rightly pointed cut that
this Is a word which covers a vast area of Australia's activity. Too often
It Is assumed to be merely that kind of development which takes place In
country areas by the building of dams or the building of beef roads or some
other activity of that kind. Essential as these forms of development are,
they are not the only meaning of development even in that kind of context,
for we have here developing in Australia, cities which are going to be at
least twice as large as they are now, and cities In which the congestion of
traffic Is going to pose really vast economic problems In the future and the
beginning of studies by Commonwealth and State Governments which I would
hope would take place, which I would seek to see did take place, Into this
mater and how it could be overcome, must take Its place with development,
alongside the development of areas outside the ci ties.
This is governmental development, of course, but side by
side with It must go, as we have seen happening lately so much, development
which takes place because of private initiative, because of individual
willingness to risk, because of willingness to go out and seek and find and
develop which we have seen happening, and which Is happening now for the
benefit of all of us throughout the whole of Australia. Again, It is necessary
to see that the public sector of development, necessary though It Is, is not
so expended that no Incentive is left, that no ability Is left In the private
sector to take their share in development which ultimately Is the basis of
a nation's life. But these are material things. These are the developments 
11
of industrial muscles as I have said before, and these are not in themselves
enough to make a nation great. But no nation can be great unless It seeks
not only materially to progress but also to take care of the weaker within
it, the aged within it, the ill within it.
Now this, too, must be a goal for any nation seeking to
attain greatness, and this will be the examination of these problems,
one of the first matters to which my Government would direct its attention.
Indeed, it has begun to do so already in the field health, and i-ndeed there
has already been some indication of that in announcements just recently
made. Wle have here, and I expand on this matter only as an
example of the way in which we would approach these problems, we have
here in Australia a health scheme which is good, which is amongst the
best in the world, which permits choice by the patient of the doctor,
which does not ration hospital or other accommodation. But it is a heafth
scheme which still suffers from disabilities. It ic tending to become rather
too dear for many people for them to be enabled -Lo insure themselves for
all the benefits which they should be able to achieve.
And It suffers from the further and I think crippling
disability that It does not cover those who have long-continuing illnesses
br a year or two years or three years, and does not prevent the fear not only
of that illness but the fear of the economic hardship, indeed in some cases
the economic ruin which can flow from such long-contin ued illness. This
will be a first matter to which we shortly will be directing our attention and
which wle will seek, and I believe successfully seek, to overcome.
( Cheers and applause). Mr President, I have sought at this by-election to put befcre
the people of this electorate and those who may be listening in, unequivocally
our approach to the problems of Defence, of our involvement in Viet Nam
and Malaysia, of the course we would seek to follow in Foreign Aid, and I
have Indicated, and only indicated by example what it is we would wish to
see happen at home. I cannot tell you, and no politician of any party standing
here could tell you exactly when and exactly how quickly these goals we've
set before us will be achieved because there are so many unknown factors.
We don't know what those things we produce will be sold for abroad. We
don't know what rate of capital inflow there will be. VWe don't kiow what
is going to happen in many other fields. But we do know this that t! l ase
things, as a government, are cf importance to us, and that we wffIL, i.-ying
attention to the constricting things which I said to you at the beglin:, seek
to overcome them and the first amongst them, areas where there is
injustice I won't say Injustice areas where there Is need, real need
amongst our people. This is not simple, even in the field of health of 1'. r I
have spoken to you it is not simp' e. VWe don't yet know and i. i~ c 11eve
nobody yet knows exactly what area of geriatric treatment ought*. to be
provided in existing-type hospitals, exactly what would happen we sought
more to provide visiting nurd ng assistance for the aged aa eldclerly so
they could stay in their own homes.
All these things are matters which the Department of 
12
Health and the Minister for Health has been examining for weeks, and
is examining now and about w hich you will hear from us as soon as may
be. There will always be left areas in which we are not able to
provide what we would wish to provide, and you are not able to get what
you would wish to get. Right now, we are in what I call the tantalising
years. We can see coming into this country 1970, 1971 and thereafter
huge revenues from tae mineral and oil resources, and other resources
which have been discovered and which will by then shed their full benefit
on the people of Auctralia. But they are not here yet; we can see them
coming. Even when they do come, while we will be able to make great
advances, I think it probable, that as has been the case In every nation
throughout history, neither the central Commonwealth Government nor
any State Government will ever have the capacity to do all the things It
would want to do as quickly as it would want to do them and still leave
In the hands of individual citizens that which should be left in their hands.
But we are moving towards it and we will move more rapidly
towards It, and we can see coming up a time when great movement in
that direction can be made.
May I, Mr President, mention one more matter? Somebody
called out about, I thinkc, and that Is the question of education. I mention
it, of course, because it is something with which for some years I have
been personally quite concerned, and a matter for which, should you wish
to do so, I could be properly blamed if you thought it right, or I could be
accepted if you thought it right.
I want to put before you, both as an indication of what has been
done and as an earnest of what could be done in the future because of
what has been done in the past, as an Indication again of the approach of
this Government, what has gone on In this field, a field traditionally
that of the States.
I was first appointed as the Minister Assisting the then Prime
Minister In Education and affairs in the financial -year 1963/ 64. In that
year, we were expending from the Commonwealth $ 57 million. The
next year that went up to $ 94M. In 1965/ 66, it went up to $ 104 million.
About that time, I became a full Minister. In 1966/ 67, it went up to
$ 127 million, and this year, ladles and gentlemen, it has gone up to
$ 175 million. ( Interjection " Not enough"). Of course, someone wiV
" tnot enough", but in four years from $ 57 million to $ 175, with -S3tate
contribution Increasing too, with a doubling of enrolments In univ:; r--il-es,
with the introduction of colleges of advanced education, with the buil-t-n1g
within this electorate in some cases of secondary bvel technical schools
such as the one at Caulfield, these can be seen as monuments, they don't
have to be heard just as words from a platform, they don't have to be just
listened to as monetary figures. They can be seen as monuments throughout
this State and throughiout this nat ion, and I believe that if you w. 1l support
me in Higgins and I have the backing as I have the backing of the Coalition
parties to this Government that there will be throug-. out Austr alia
more and more monuments in more and more fields to the benefit of the
people of Australia, and built by co-operation between the Commonwed th
Government and the various State Governments as we have seen happen 
13
in the field of education.
No promises. No specific promises.......
( Interject ion " Why not?"
I have told you why not. But you will be able to judge by what we do
between now and the next elections. You have an indication of our
thinking and of our goals,.
Perhaps there is one specific promise that I can give you.
I will ask from you for all that you can give towards building this State
and this nation, and I will in return pledge to you all that I can give and
my colleagues can give for a joint effort to see that together we can
open the door of the destiny that lies before us. 



LIBERAL PARTY SPEAKERS' GROUP DINNER
Southern Cross Hotel, Melbourne 27 FEBRUARY 1968
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, M4R JOHN GORTON
Mr President of the Speakers' Group, Mr President of the State Division of
the Liberal Party and Ladies and Gentlemen:
You know, Bob, when you spoke, you reminded me a little
of " old forgotten far-off things and battles long ago". Remember when you
were speaking of the time you were thrown out of the meeting and I was
quite unable to give you any assistance; It brought back to my mind an
occasion I think it was the Communist Dissolution Bill or the Banning of
Communists whatever It was way, way In the past when much the
same thing happened to me. But not quite the same because I remember
vividly in the middle of an Inspiring speech by the former Prme Minister,
Sir Robert Menzies, somebody was Interjecting rather annoyingly and I
was much younger than I am now and I remember approaching him and
saying I'm not going to say that I said this, but the newspapers next
day said I said this " Would you like to have It In here or outside, you
yellow rat! Whereupon I was grabbed by an enormously large policeman
and frogmarched half-way to the door, and the Prme Minister Interrupted
h is policy speech to say " Hey, you can't throw him out. He's one of my
lot" And he had much more effect than I had on you. But still 1 think the
spirit was the same in both cases In yours and in mirke.
You did say something very pleasant Indeed, too, about
my wife, and she has one enormous advantage. Most of the speeches that
she makes are made in Indonesian, and nobody five years later, or even
five days later because they don't understand them is able to say, " Yes,
but five days ago, you said this or you said that". At least, very few people
can, and probably those who really do understand It would not be able in time
to translate It and drift it back to Australia. This is something that most
politicians must regard as a promised land, where you don't get things
thrown back up at you things which I remember being thrown up to
me the television Interview with the ABC, that marvellous undertaking
which we finance but do not control. 1968 somebody said to me,
" Yes. In your maiden speech in 1950, didn't you say this?" Well, I did.
It is quite right. As a matter of fact, he was a very nice man. He wasn't
wrong. Anyway, what I said then wasn't much different from what I am
saying now. But at least she Is spared this risk, which Is an occupational
risk of most of the rest of us as politicians.
It Is here on this night, in this room of this hotel, a
most memorable experience for me to be able to talk to you on this occasion,
My mind goes back, as the minds of man y but not all of you will go
back, because not all of you are old enough, to the time when this party
which you have supported for so long was formed, and to the conditions which
prevailed In Australia and which led to the formation of this party, and to
the work which you and others have put Into it for two decades. It is worthwhile
at this point t o go back and remember, to go back and bring into
our minds what it was then which so motivated so many people that they
were prepared to leave the professions In which they were engaged, that 
2-
they were prepared to give up time which otherwise would be devoted to
their own entertainment, that they were prepared to take the risks which at
that time were real risks, In order to try to change the situation in which
Australia then found Itself, in order to try to direct it along a path which they
thought, and I believe thought properly, would be a better path for the nation
to which they belonged. just think what then was the situation. We had then In this
country an approach by those who were charged with directing the affairs
of this country, which was prepared to accept that It was reasonable that
there should be from five to eight per cent of unemployment, and If we
attained seven per cent that was pretty well full employment, as far as
any country could achieve It.
We had then people who were prepared to maintain that there
ought to be, not for any observed or reasoned process, but that there ought
to be constraints and restrictions of various kinds just because those
constraints and restrictions had once been Imposed, and having once been
imposed, ought to be maintained merely for their own sake.
And we had a government then which was prepared to suggest
that In the name of planning, although it ougit not to have been In the name of
planning, In the name of social action, although It ought not to have been in
the name of sccial action, governments ought to take action In order to see
not that an individual was able to express himself for his own sake and for
the sake of the nation to which he belonged; governments ought to take
action not to see that exploitation was not carried out as sometimes It can
be carried out by individuals, but which was prepared to go further and to
say not we think social action is necessary to improve matters, but we think
social action is necessary to prevent people from engaging In some particular
field of activity, to stop people engaging, for example, In banking activities
not in competition with the State but to stop them altogether; to stop people
from sowing wheat fields if they felt Inclined to take the risk of sowing wheat
fields; to prevent individual initiative. And that is what we then had.
I think because of the Impact of this on those of you In this
room who remember It and those of you in this room to whom the memory
of those days has been passed down, you were ready then to ta-ke risks,
you were ready then to give effort and to give work to change that approach,
to throw out that kind of government, to put in something which fitted more
In with the beliefs that you had as to what you wished to see.
You were prepared to reject entirely the Idea, which was an
Idea Inherent In a government of two decades ago, that you existed, and the
rest of the Australian citizens existed to serve a state, and you were prepared
to put In the place of that idea, an Idea that a state existed to control, yes,
but existed for the sake of the Individuals that lived under It, and not for its
own sake, demanding from Individuals complete support.
This was a watershed, I think, In Australian development
and Australian history, and because we were successful then, and because
under two great Prime Ministers we have since then, with the application
of the principles they then set out, so far advanced this country that those
living twenty years ago could not have envisaged the situation which we
are now In, so I believe you will support those approaches. If you do support
those approaches, then in two decades from now, we will be as far ahead of
our present Imagination as today we are ahead of the Imagination of two decades
ago. / 3 
-3-
. As the result of what you initially did, surely we
have transformed this nation to take the examples I used before transformed
It where Instead of five to eight per cent of unemployment, we believe and
have brought Into operation the belief that full employment Is possible and If
we have one or one and a half per cent unemployment, then this becomes
a matter of comment. Surely over the last decades we have built up In thip
country Industrial muscles which have enabled us to take In the Immigration
which In that period of time has taken place.
How often do I remember members of the Opposition saying,
" T~ hat are you going to do next year when x thousand school-leavers come on
to the market?" Year after year have I heard it said, and year after year
have x thousand school-leavers been absorbed into the industries and the
opportunities which have been created because of the climate which has been
made by the government not because of what the government has da2 bit Oemase
of what the underlying philosophy which motivates the government
has enabled you and the other citizens of Australia to do.
Surely we have transformed our whole approach from one
which at one time said " VIe don't want to encourage In this country home
ownership because that creates little capitalists" into an approach which
says we wish people-to hold their own homes and to have other ownership
and to have a stake in the development of the country In which they live,
and which has been successfully, I think, translated Into action so that here
In this country In these two decades we have created a society in which more
people own their homes and have a stake In their country and have other
owinership of material things than has ever been dreamed of In this country
bef ore. Here, surely, In these last two decades, we have grown from
some small, relatively unconsidered nation, a nation shielded through Its
whole existence by the shield and buckler of the British Navy, into a nation
which yet still needs shielding, but which has become not a great power in the
world, because of course as yet we are not, bu t a power, the voice of which
has some significance In the councils of Asia, thanks particularly to the late
Prime Minister, Mr Holt; and to which so many of the peoples near us, and
I think some of the peoples of the great powers further away, look not now
as some significant world force, because we are not, but as some potential
world force, because if we go on In the way in which we have been moving, we
will be in two or three decades In the future some really significant world
force. as long as the roots are not cut by a reversal to that kind of approach,
which two decades behind us we left.
People say and it Is a proverb which has some significance
that the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Now those of us who are in
this room, and those of us who over the years have contributed In one way or
another to the pudding which now Is before the Australian people, will I think
agree that sa far If the proof of the pudding is in the eating, then the proof on
the record Is a good proof, even though there has been in these two decades
behind us, as there will be in the two decades in the front of us, even amongst
us in this room, even am ongst us with a general political philosophy, and
as there must always be amongst such people, differences of opinion as to
particular facts, differences of interpretation as to particular approaches,
arguments, because it Is of the very lifeblood of a political party that there
should be arguments inside It, solved inside it, and agreed by all in that
political party after they have been solved by it, even though that should be so
as it has been In the past and as It undoubtedly will be in the future, yet that
play and Interplay has brilliantly justified Itself under the two great men who
v / 4 
-4
for the last two decades have led Australia.
And now you, and many others like you throughout
Australia, have asked me for a while to try to continue to advance that work
which has been so well begun. I know, as I have said before, I cannot do
it without you and others like you throughout Australia, arguing, contesting
agreeing, if you don't agree, being told to go aloft In a particular way, to try
and continue this. And believe me, Indeed you know, we have before us
in the next two decades problems to be overcome which are perhaps even
more difficult, even more Intransigent than the problems which already
have been surmounted. There is nothing wrong with this, because this is true of
a mants life, any man's life, any woman's life, and any nation's life that
you don't by removing a problem, remove all problems. You merely, by
overcoming a problem and a challenge, provide yourself with a new problem
and a new challenge, and if you overcome that In turn, another one after that.
But each one that Is overcome is a new step up the ladder to the destiny which
I believe we can together bring to this country of ours.
I have made, In the election for which I have just stood, on
behalf of the Government which will shortly be sworn In, no finite promises
to you or to Australia, except that we will continue, as best in us lies, to
follow the paths which have been blazed before.
And yet all of us can see the problems which do need to be
overcome. We must and this I put highly, not overwhelmingly but highly,
because I regard it as the test of the success of any society, not just the
material success of any society, but the success of a society as a group of
people In which individuals are looked after an-asisted we must re-examine
from top to bottom our social services systemr 7f that Is what you wish to
call It, our welfare system.
WAe must seek to Isolate to examine and Isolate those cases
In which real need exists and In which real poverty prevails, and seek to see
that this is not something which crushes the human spirit of those under real
poverty or under real need. But this is not enough of Its own because we must
seek to make at the same time after all, we are all going to contribute to
this to make more efficient the methods we adopt in order to try to eliminate
this poverty and this need, and to see that there is no waste in the way In which
we attack that particular requirement of a really advanced community.
In doing this we must seek to try and not destroy the Incentive
of people during their working life to save and to provide for themselves, not
to sq uan der their savings In order to get more assistrance from the community
at the end of their lives. All these in this one matter a matter of great
Importance to us If we are to hold up our heads and say this Is a country which
Is not only materially but spiritually great all these are the bread and butter
which must be looked at, which must be closely examined, which must be
analysed, on which work must be put in to see that we attain the goal which
I have briefly outlined to you.
And in doing It, as we must and will do it, we have got to
steer between Scylla and Charybdis. Ie must avoid the approach so
prevalent in England under, I think. the thinking of a socialist government
that all Is provided without cost q rclatively shoddy way to everybody a 
at in fact a final cost which prevents in our case, or would, a growth to
greatness which has In its application, as I believe, In the United Kingdom
led to some decline from greatness, not because of the United Kingdom
people whom I believe to be as great in themselves as ever they were, but
because of this imposition which two decades ago, thank God, we got rid
of In Australia. These things and I have presented one problem to you
alone are not done over-night. There have been propositions easily thrown
around " Let's Integrate things. Let's have a Minister of Social Wlelf are
and an Assistant Minister for Social Services and an Assistant Minister
for Health and an Assistant Minister for Housing, who all come in to the
point of the Minister for Social Welfare". Indeed, tbis has an attraction,
but It is also an attraction which has a very difficult objecdion, because you
can't have Assistant Ministers under the Constitution under which we live.
Well you can, but you can't pay the m anything or else they lose their seat
In Parliament. So these easy approaches, and they are easy approaches,
are not necessarily to be accepted at face value. But what is to be accepted
Is that there does need to be an overall look at the whole of this field and
somebody whatever they are called, to correlate these to see that waste
does not occur, that duplication does not occur, that the areas In which
assistance is required are the areas to which assistance goes, and that we
do not destroy that self -reliance on which, really, Australia's future depends.
This, I promise you, we will try to do. It Is not done
overnight, but If it takes months to do, what of it, because If It Is done
properly, then It will for decades after it has been done, justify the expenditure
of those months and help our children and our grandchildren In this country.
That Is and I have expanded on it mo re than I meant to do
an indication of one of the problems which now lies before us. It is one of
many because we must, in these decades ahead as well, continue to bring Into
this country the immigrants which Mr Sne" den has been bringing In and must
continue to bring in, in order to see that we become not in terms of numbers
because In terms of number, no matter what our immigration policy is, we
will never catch up In terms of numbers with the countries nearest to us, but
to bring In sufficient to see that the technological advantages we now have,
and the technological advances we will mae, which we call Into the balance
to redress our lack of numbers, will have sufficient numbers to ensure that
those advances will keep us in the forefront as we have been In the forefront
in our region of the world.
Bringing these people in I s not easy, Is not a matter of
waving a wand, and is not inexpensive. Wle need, and we must do our best
to ensure that In meeting these two problems I have already mentioned,
in meeting the need for providing defence for this country which relatively,
for the first time in its history, finds Itself, of itself, relatively defenceless,
so to try to direct our efforts, that while we realise that we ourselves, by
ourselves, cannot stand against some great world power, yet we can and
have a responsibility to provide sufficient In the way of defence, to contribute
to the stability of our neighbouring countries and to be able to take, ourselves,
the first shock of any attack upon ourselves should it in the future come. I am
not saying it will, but should It in the future come as In the past it has come,
and as in the past It might have come much more seriously to take the first
shock of that. And to believe, being able to do that, and having contributed e / 6 
-6
to the alliances to which we are contributing that we could depend that
having taking that first shock, we would be able to require, not as of right,
but as of decency that those powers with more significant capacity than
ourselves would then come In, should it be necessary, to help us. This is
not cheap, this Is not inexpensive, this Is not easy.
' ie have a requirement, of course, In our Industrial
areas to try to see that we remove ourselves from the dependence that we
have had In the past almost completely, and still for four-fifths completely,
on primary produce to provide our overseas exchange; and so to foster
not to denigrate primary produce but to foster alternative methods of
exporting manufactured goods from this country to such countries as will
take them. This Is not inexpensive and this Is not easy and this requires
effort. I would If I had time, but I would weary you if I did,
expand that list to Indicate the other things in the public sector which we
need to do to expand the areas of education which today are such that if
someone two decades ago had looked Into the future, they would have thought
completely unattainable; to endeavour to see that the research already
encouraged in Australia Is encouraged more so that we, and not some other
country, get the benefits of inventions and of patents which come from within
our own community; to try to endeavour to see that scientific activity
generally In this country is directed towards an end which will quickly and
immediately solve some of the problems in any field In which you care to
look. This Is not cheap and this Is not inexpensive.
These are just some, just a random grab-bag I put
before you of the problems which now lie ahead of us, but problems which
in great part have been created because of the advances we have made, you
have made, and therefore not matters for despair, but rather matters for
exhilaration because it is a growing nation which has these problems, not
a stagnant nation, The fact that we have them indicates we are not stagnant,
we are growing, we are moving into a future which, If we approach it In
the way we approached it twenty years ago will, I believe bring benefits
not just in arithmetical progression but in geometrical progression over what
we know and what we grew up with.
You may think, and If you do so, you are wrong that In
presenting to you these problems which are before us, I present them in
some spirit of worry. I do not. I merely put them before you because I
believe It is possible, though I do not think it is so, but I believe It t3 possible
after two decades of government, people may look back only to the problems
which have been overcome, to the advances which have been made, and may
lose their enthusiasm for attack on those which now exist and those which are
still to be overcome. You would not be here, there would not have been, I
think, so much support for the Liberal Party as there Is now In Australia if
It were not true that most Australians are looking to the same approach as they
have had I don't mean exactly the same approach the same principles
as they have had applied. Perhaps some of them are looking for them to be
applied in a new and imaginative way to overcome the uew and different
problems which lie before us. It has been most encouraging I believe,
certainly to myself, and I think to nearly all of us in the Federal Parliament
to see this resurgence of Liberalism which will continue to have arguments,
as an underscoring of the fact that the Australian people still want to advance
and still want to advance with the same dynamo, with the same avoidance
of the other side which has led to advances so far. 
-7
Let me conclude in this way; just as we attacked
problems and overcame them before, so we will attack and overcome
them in the next twenty years not as a reactionary party, not as a
conservative party, but as a pragmatist party which examines problems
and sees the best way to overcome them, and applies those approach es,
and If those approaches don't work, then applies some other approach In
order to reach the required objective.
WNe are not and In spite of what has sometimes been
said never have been a party which, using the word in Its proper sense,
has been opposed to socialism, because socialism, using the word in Its
pzoper sense, means social action for the benefit of the community as
a whole. We have been prepared, of course, to apply social action for
the benefit of the community as a whole, and you only need to look at the
hospitals which are provided by social action, at the Irrigation systems
which are provided, the roads which are provided, the railways, the post
office, all those areas through social action, that Is through a government
taking money from you and using It for social purposes that are applied for
the benefit of the community as a whole. There are none of us, I think,
who would object to this.
What we do object to, what I believe we will fight to the
death against is that conception of socialism which brought this party to
Its first great success, the conception which said unequivocally The
State does not exist to serve the IndtIvual; the S1tate does not exist to try
to provide a climate In which the Individual Is able to expand himself In
any way in which he sees fit, provided he doesn't exploit his fellow -beings.
No. T1he individual exists to serve the State, which was the underlying
concept of what was previously overthrown.
W~ e object to that concept of socialism which says not:
" Yes, we will use social action for the benefit of the community,' but" We
will use social action to deny and prohibit and prevent an individual
engaging in some particular form of activity in which we think he should
not be allowedto engage. So we will stop him engaging In banking activities."
We are prepared to compete with him In banking activities, but they say,
" No. We will stop him engaging In It. Wle will stop him sowing wheat.
We will stop him doing anything which our planners say he shouldn't do."
This we oppose, and this would be the kiss of death for this country if ever
It were accepted again. To me the great encouragement, and to my colleagues
the great encouragement Is that all of -you here have come tonight as I
believe, with the same general approach as the one I have sought to put
before you, with the same willingness to work and sacrifice for that same
general approach, and that you are multiplied outside this room, as I
believe by a majority of Australans with that same general approach and
with that same willingn~ ess to work for that general approach. Because If
this impression of mine Is true, as I think it is, then I have no doubt
whatever that we will In how many decades I don't know but we will
become the Queen Continent of this Hemisphere, that we will have the
material strength of the United States and the spiritual strength of Europe, and
will be able to be a shining example of people who came to a harsh country
and by effort conquered it, because only by effort can things be attained,
and that we will In time not only see'the vision splendid of the sunlit
plains extended", but attain'the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended"
together. 



OPENING OF THE PHILIP MORRIS FACTORY
MCORABBIN, VICTORIA March 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Thank you very much, Arthur. I say " Arthur" because it
is true we have known each other for very many years, and indeed not
closely, or he wouldn't be able to say with such conviction so many nice
things, but intermittently and fairly closely during all that period of time.
I am here to make a very brief speech and to declare open
the factory and to declare open whatever It Is that is behind that curtain.
( Laughter). I daresay that you, as I, are going to be quite Interested to
see what it is the little bits that I can see look as if somebody round
Sydney Harbour may be wondering what's happened to the Opera House.
And if so we won't let them know where they are.
It is quite true, Sir, as you said In the course of telling
those assembled what it was that I'd said to myself, and in the course of
doing that saying a number of things that I was otherwise going to say to
them, that we do, as a Government, have a 42 per cent or 424 per cent
Interest or whatever it is, I'll have to ask the Treasurer in the profits
of this company. But, of course, that's not the whole story, Sir, as you
know, because we also have an Interest in the dividends paid to the
Individuals and the wages paid to the employees and all these other
Incidental matters such as excise which helps the wheels of Government
to go around. So it Is really quite important quite important to us, quite
important to Australia, and we do see here, I think, an example of growth
but not only an example of growth, an example of growth made In the way
in which we in Australia would wish it to be made. Because here is an
example of development as a result of the inflow of overseas capital which
we need If we are to develop as quickly as we must. But also an example
where an inflow of that overseas capital married itself with Australian
capital so that a third of the capital Is owned by Australians and the benefits
that flow from It go to those equity holders as well.
And this Is an ideal situation. Well it might be nicer if It
was 50 per cent, but still it's a good situation that here comes the
requirements for development, here is an example where Australians can
take part in that development, here is an example where jobs flow from it,
employment flows from it, dividends flow from it and all the other things
of which I have spoken.
And we, I think, can be a little proud or we can be proud
of the achievements of others when we realise, as I am told is a fact,
that this new extension is the most modern tobacco factory if that's
the word, tobacco packing plant in the world bar none. Now, this Is
really something, and I am Informed that this Is In fact so. I can't tell
you how many million cigarettes a month it can make because I'm not
allowed to, but it's an enormous number of cigarettes.
When you come to think of it, of course, I suppose the
credit for all this really goes back to some completely unknown American
Red Indian, because you remember that's where they first discovered
tobacco and that's where Raleigh got It from. You may remember somebody
threw a pall of water over him when he first started to smoke because they
/ 2 
thought he was on fire when he got back to England and If he had really
put Raleigh out with that pail of water, there would not have been a tobacco
factory and there wouldn't have been the interest that we've got here.
But can I say this as well. That not only do the things of
which I have spoken become evident here financially, and to assist in a
secondary industry employment but they stem down the line too, to create,
or help to create, help to expand a primary Industry in Australia because
the tobacco-growing industry benefits too from what Is happening here and
will benefit, of course, from the five-year extension of the tobacco
stabilisation plan which has just been announced and with the additional
quotas for Australian tobacco leaf which will be going up to 284 million
pounds. Now, these things one stands on a platform and talks about
but in one's mind, and In your mind, think of the people on the banks, the
red shore banks of the Murray, or wherever It may be, In small farms
wresting a living from that land and being helped to prosper and to grow
by the kind of secondary expansion we see here. The whole of Australia
benefits from it. That I think, Sir, Is all that I should say. I do congratulate
all concerned with the development of this factory. I know what was It
you had when you started was it 3. 4 million capital somewhere around
3.4. million capital, of which one-third is American. I'm not quite sure
what's happened since but I think there's been a bonus Issue and I'm not
sure there hasn't been a split and this again points up the benefit of having
an Australian equity interest in a factory of that kind $ 11 million
today. Wlell, I do hope that before very long I will be able to, at your
request, come and open another extension and you will be able to say
million today because I'll know that that growth is partly a growth for
Australians as well as abroad. 



REVIEW OF TROOPS OF FIRST BATTALION
RAR, HOLSVJORTHY, NSW 22 MARCH, 1968
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MNISTER, THE RT. HON.
JOHN G. GORTON, MP
It must have been a thrill to any Australian who today
saw you marching past and demonstrating the discipline, the training and
the ability which you have learnt.
I suspect, unless things have changed very considerably
since the time I once wore uniform, this has been-the result of some
considerable practice, of some -considerable rehearsals. And again I
suspect, unless things have changed, that sometimes these practices and
those rehearsals were a little dreary. But the end result has been, as the
end result of hard work and-application must always be, that you have today
put on for all of us here a parade which I do not believe would have been
bettered by any body of armed men from any country in the world.
You marched past-half of you, so I am informed,
Regular soldiers, half of you National Servicemen, and completely
Indistinguishable the one from the other as you will In the future grow even
less distinguishable, If that is possible.
A Regular -soldier or -National Serviceman is now, and will
be In the future, an Australian soldier and there is, and will be, no difference
between them. You will be going because your Government and your country
thinks It right, and for the safety of our nation that this should happen, to
fight some considerable distance away, ln terms of miles, from Australift,
but no-great distance away In terms of time. You have been asked to go, or
you have been told to go, b ecause in our judgment It is to -the safety of all
small nations to do what they can to see that other small nations are not
allowed to be overrun by force, or by subversion, or by terrorism, but
should have the chance to retain for themselves the opportunity to make , a
choice to build the kind of life that the Australian people have an opportunity
to choose. You will have before you, because this is a part of all
soldiering, many times of boredom, of heat, of uncomfortable conditions,
of tension, of strain, and I believe of fear, because I think that most men
In battle feel but conquer fear. This will be punctuated by periods of
action, but whether in action or in training, I would like you to know this.
No matter what some columnists from time to time may Indicate In what
they write; no matter what attitude some members of legislature may from
time -to time Indicate from what they say, your Government believes that
you are serving this nation i the highest way In which It can be served and
will stand behind you and guard your good name to the end to the best of its
ability. And -behind that, and far more Important than that, 90 per cent of
the Australian people are proud of how you bear yourselves, are proud of what
you are doing, In some cases what you have done and what you will do.
Never for a moment think that -this nation and Its people are not behind you
and backing you, because they are. ./ 2 
-2
Idon't want to keep you standing there for long,,. I will just
conclude by saying this.
Your grandfathers went to France and to Gallipoli, not for
themselves to try and see that aggression did not succeed, but to help to
see aggression didn't succeed. And for a while they were successful.
Your fathers went to the four corners of the world to try and see
that that great attack on human dignity made at that time by Nazi Germany
would not succeed, and they smashed that attack. You are carrying on in
that tradition. No man can say, and no generation can say, what I do now will,
for all the future, make life better. But a man can say and -a generation
can say, what I do now I believe will make it more likely that In the future,
life will be better for the people of the world. And when you come back,
and when you leave the Army, you will have this to retain for the rest of
your lives and nothing can take It away, and nothing can tarnish it.
You can say I have been one of a regiment, I have taken my place in that
regiment, I have borne myself as a brave and honourable man should.
I -have taken the risks that one must take. I have accepted that and I
have served my country well.
Good luck to you all. 



ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF ASSOCIATED Q. 2APR1968
CH. AMVBERS OF COMMERCE f
HOBART, TASMANIA L/ RA
MARCH 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Your Excellency, Mr. Macklin, Ladies and Gentlemen:
it is quite important to me to see gathered here
in this theatre people from the four corners of this nation
and from other countries who are concerning themselves with
seeing that the needs of people in the nation are met, that
the wheels of commerce go round, who are carrying on, really,
the kind of trade on which civilisations were origiftally built.
It may perhaps seem a little far-fetched to you if
I say this, but it is not really as far-fetched as it may
sound, because going way back into the past of history, nations
were brought together because some region or some country
produced whatever it might be let us say silk which other
regions and other countries did not produce but which they
wished to have, and those other countries produced, let us
say, some kind of beaten steel which the first countries did
not have, and so the traders formed their caravans and they
went to fetch from places where it was available, the goods
which other countries wanted. They brought from those other
countries the goods the first countries wanted, and in that
way by enriching themselves it is true but by serving the
needs of people in both places it is also true, they also
managed to bring closer together gradually, through understanding,
those two nations through whom, either in small ships across
the sea, or in caravans across the desert, they carried on the
lifeblood of trade.
Now, of course, things have changed since those
far-off, romantic days, but it is still as necessary as ever
it was that there should be those spending their lives engaged
in disseminating that which is manufactured amongst the people,
engaged, I would hope, more and more in trying to see that
just as we are interdependent inside this country one on the
other, just as you are dependent on good seasons for primary
producers, on full employment, on good purchasing power, on
other matters, so you would see that we were interdependent
internationally, particularly with the countries in our region
and would, as I know you are doing, turn your minds to that
trade going back to what the caravanners used to do.
Together, governments and people build a country;
neither the one or the other can do it alone. A government,
of course, can help or hinder the building of a country and
the improvement of the living standards of those living in
it, but that is all it can do help or hinder, create a
climate or prevent a climate being created, and then it is
up to individuals to take advantage or to fight against a
bad climate, and in that context build together that which
is sought. This of course does pose some difficulties, because,
I suppose, in an ideal world government would be so light and
the requirements would be so small that the individual would
be left almost completely without burdens placed upon him,
able to retain that which his own industry and initiative was 
able to achieve. But it is not an ideal world, and indeed not
only does the individual engaged in farming, or in commerce or
in manufacturing or working in a factory or teaching or whatever
it may be, wish to retain as much as his industry and initiative
will allow, but he also wishes many other things, and therefore
requires that burdens should be placed upon him to provide those
other things. In the case of this country, I can enumerate some of
them and at once you will agree with me, I know. It is required
now, in a greater degree than it has ever been required before
in our history, that burdens should be laid upon us so that we
can provide towards our own defence. I think I hardly need to
remind you that for something like 200 years, we have existed
as a nation secure behind the shield of the British Navy and
the British people and that that shield has been removed and
that that changes the situation and the world in which we have
grown up and that that requires that we should be able, as we
have not in the past been able before, to provide sufficient
defence forces to repel any initial shock upon our own shores
should it ever come and to be a credible ally to those countries
to whom we look should we ever require help. This in turn
requires expenditures and burdens which even in the last few
years I speak of " few years" in the context of a nation's
history have risen from some general average of $ 400 million
to $ 1200 millior. and will rise more. The people of a community
want, and you want I know, that we should, if we are to hold up
our head as a civilised nation, pay full attention to the
requirements and the needs of the ill and the aged and the
unfortunate amongst us, and this too requires that burdens
should be laid upon and borne by the people and the nation.
You want, and I know that you want, that we should,
particularly in the world as it is developing today, devote
more and more of your resources to improving the facilities
for education of our youth, and particularly perhaps to improving
the facilities for advanced technological education of our youth,
because in the years to come, the results of that education and
that technological education will decide whether we are able in
this nation, with the other nations of the world, with those in
the forefront of the other nations of the w~ orld, to manufacture
those new things which are being invented and which will be
invented, and through that process of manufacture, see that
commerce does not stagnate, but has new tools with which to
work, has new things to trade. These too require that burdens
should be laid upon a nation.
And you want indeed I have seen your agenda and I
know you want that we should continue to build up our nation
by immigration at least as quickly as we have been doing it,
and quite possibly, if possible, more quickly. But no longer
can this be done or should this be done in the way in which,
for example, the United States built up its population by
immigration in the last century; no more can or should people
just be brought to Australia from overseas and told " Here you
are. You' re on your own. Make your own way". Rather, it is
necessary that they must be not just brought, but provided with
the employment which you help to supply, provided with the
facilities they expect to receive here as they have received
them from the nations from which they came, provided with those
other matters of which I spoke an education for their children,
health benefits and matters of that kind. This requires
expenditure of capital to maintain each migrant. Though we
get it back in years to come, yet at the time it does require
a burden. / 3 
All of these things, I believe the people of Australia
want, and you as members of the Chambers of Commerce want, yet
all of these things do mean that there is more interference by
government with, in some cases, the way in which matters are
done, with in all cases the right of the individual to retain
completely that which he has earned by -his initiative, or
sometimes by his luck. This I know you accept.
Yet there is a point where governments and peoples
must reach a balance in this, There is a point where, while
seeing what needs to be provided for you at your wishes by a
government, while seeing the goals to which we want to attain,
a judgment must be made as to whether should we seek to do too
much in the fields of which I have spoken to you, we would
impose such burdens o-n the individual that we would perhaps
damage or destroy the incentive to work, the requirement to
devote oneself to the business in which one is engaged. That,
of course, is self-destructive because in the long run all
those things I have spoken to you about that you require and
governments provide are only provided if there is incentive to
grow in the individual, if there is requirement to devotion to
one's business in the individual, because that is the basis.
So there is a balance required between those things a nation
wants and between the necessity not to take so much from an
individual's earnings that insufficient is left to him.
There is another balance that is required because it
is not only from things that are taken from money or resources
that are taken from you that a government provides those things
of which I have spoken, a government also, at any rate a central
government, also has the capacity in fact, as you know, to print
its own money, to provide through bank credit, or however it may
be, for some resaurces, and yet there, too, there is though
theoretically no limit, actually and practically a very real
limit because if that path should be followed too far,-then
we destr-oy that other requirement that you have and that a
nation has and that wage-earners have, that pensioners have,
and that is, that there should be relative stability in the
cost-price structures of a nation, relative stability in. : the
cost of living. I don't mean the stagnation, I don't mean the
lack of any general slight inflation but that there should be
sufficient stability to ena) le plans to be made by commerce
and to enable individual pensioners and wage-earners not to be
destroyed by inflation. So there too i~ s another mark which
can't be overstepped. And it is in the selection of priorities, and it is
in the judgment of what should be laid upon a people that the
people will judge a government. A government will, if it is
wise, if it takes the right decisions, provide to a people
those opportunities which., if seized, will make that people
great, and these are the tasks as I see them, on the one hand
for a government, on the other for an Australian people.
I want, before I declare the conference open, to
mention perhaps one more thing, and that is this. I suggest
to you that over the last two decades, if we look back on
them, we can take pride because we have seen this country grow
from a relatively small, relatively insignificant nation to
one which is still not great and which still cannot throw its
weight around in the councils of the world, but one which is
much greater than it was, one which is I think respected in the
world for its attitudes and its approaches, and one which has
within it the seeds of greatness which, if they are nurtured,
will lead, and if the paths followed in the last two decades
are followed, will lead to what I think you would have in your
minds as a picture of the nation you would like Australia to be.
9-s/ 14 
4.
If we follow those paths, we must follow them not
just within this country. I know again that I am echoing what
is in the minds of many of you and of those who are officials
of your organisation when I say let us particularly, let
commerce particularly pay attention, forge links, make trade
with those countries in our region closest to us, with as much
devotion as you can. We believe that it is necessary to try
by all means to build up the edonomies of those closest to us,
and by building up those economies to try to see that the
living standards of the peoples in-those communities rise.
This is humanitarian, but it is more than that. It is, if it
becomes successful, of self-interest to us and to you and to
them. As an example of what I mean, let me draw your minds
to what has happened in our trade, in our nation's trade with
the country of Japan. Only a mere decade ago, about 1955/ 56,
we exported $ 173 million worth of goods from Australia to Japan,
and now that scant time later, we export $ 591 million worth of
goods from Australia to Japan. Ten years ago, we imported some
million from Japan, and now we import close to 6' 300 million.
This is an example of how trade can expand if there is a country
such as Japan with rising living standards, with rising
requirements, with the capacity to buy and the capacity to sell.
As one more example in that country which has become
a country to us of the most significance in trading terms, there
has been a revolution caused in the everyday living of the
Japanese in that as the standard of living has risen, .0o the
requirements which were always there but were not able to be
satisfied have bean able to be met, and the wool which is sold
in such large quantities to Japan has become a fabric that the
Japanese wear, whereas previously they could not afford it and
they could not wear it.
Well, that is Japan, but there is closer to us Thailand
and Indonesia and Malaysia and the Philippines. In all those
areas, as the standard of living rises, so will the opportunity
for them to sell to us and for us to sell to them increase. As
that increases, so will people be coming from there to sell to
us or perhaps forming joint ventures with us in one way and
another and so will we, I hope, be going there to sell to them,
so will you and the manufacturers be going there, I hope, to sell
to them, because as the markets arise there, there will be no
substitute for the old-fashioned kind of salesmanship which we
used to know in Australia door-knocking, visiting, talking
to the buyer. There will be no substitute for this. And if
this happens and you go there, then inevitably, just as in the
past nations were drawn together and learnt about each other
and had mutual benefit because of those who drove the caravans
across the desert or the small ships across the sea, so will
nations the better understand each other, the better know each
other's problems, the better be able to provide technological
assistance, whatever may come back in return for it, and there
will be not only dividends in terms of firms' balance sheets,
but there will be dividends in human relations which will be
more enduring for the future and which because I think you can
and will help in this, is one reason why I camne to declare this
conference open this morning and why I now do so. 



HOBART JOURNALISTS' CLUB LUNCHEON
HADLEYS HOTEL, HOBART March 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Ladies ana Gentlemen:
It's nice for me to be able to be with the Journalists'
Club at this midday gathering. It's nice to meet the exjournalists;
it's nice to meet the wives; it's nice to meet
the guests; it's nice to meet the journalists, particularly
since one relies so much, in this situation which I somewhat
unexpectedly find myself, on interpretations made by journalists
whether they are writing directly for newspapers, whether they
are writing columns I suppose that's directly with newspapers
but every editor I know says it's indirectly; they haven't
got any control over it or whether it's commenting, or whether
it's on this new media, T. V. Because the opportunity for
presentation of personality in the political scene on all sides,
does, I think, give the public a chance to judge to judge
between arguments advanced for this or for that, to judge
between whether one believes what one is saying or is saying
what one is saying because a consensus of Party opinion wants
it to be done, to make an assessment and to present it to the
public which then accepts or rejects the assessment so made.
As far as I am concerned, the assessments that have
been made whether they are pro or con are not assessments with
which I have been able to find myself able to quarrel. If there
have been in my association with journalists those who are
critical, there has seemed to me that the criticism has been
based on argument. I might not accept the argument, I might
not accept the premise,, and therefore obviously I might not
accept the conclusion. But it seems to me to have been based,
at any rate in this brief period in which I have been so closely
associated, on assessment by journalists, on argument by
journalists, and not on prejudice by journalists. And this I
think is very important.
I suppose I can't talk to you today in the same way
as someone could talk . was it the Gridiron Club the
original Journalists' Club, the one in ' Washington where people
went who were oither highly significant American politicians
or visiting Heads of State and spoke off the record and thon
had everything they said reported on the next day? I suppose
this is quite different. But it is good to find, I think, and
I have only so far found it perhaps because I haven't been asked,
I have only so far found it in Canberra and found it here, that
journalists would form this kind of association, would meet
together for these luncheons, would have people come before
them and talk to them and subject themselves to questioning by
them. It may be that in-this assessment I have some nostalgia
because I am a journalist manque myself. " When I first came
back from England, as a very young man, I came back to be a
journalist. But my father died before I was in Australia more
than a couple of months and I had to take over a bankrupt
property and try and build that up instead of being a journaliist,
which is probably just as well because I expect I'd have been
a sub-editor or something by this stage. I might not have had
quite as much fun, although from all I have seen there is a
certain amount of fun in this occupation anyway. 2 
I think that rather than talk to you on any specific
subject of national importance, or state importance, that it
would be better for me to subject myself to any questions which
any of you here may wish to ask. I warn you I will answer them
quite definitely if I think I've got an answer that I wvant to
give and that it is satisfactory to me. If it is in an area
where I am not quite sure of the answer, I will say I am not
quite sure of the answer. If it is in an area where I think
an answer at this stage ought not to be given, I'll do my best
without you noticing, to answer it in such a way that I won't
be giving an answer and you won't notice I'm not. But at least
I'll be subjecting myself to something I know is of interest to
those who are in this room and this I will do in just a matter
of a very few minutes.
I have spoken this morning at an opening of the
Chambers of Commerce here and very briefly skctched in the
choices which have to be made in a community such as ours the
requirements of the community for defence, for social services,
for education, for technological advances, for scientific
advances, for development, for a million things rnnd also the
requirement that a government should not so take from individuals
so much in order to meet these requirements that the individuals
just stop working and you can't meet any requirements. The
balance I have spoken about there and some of you may have heard
it, some of you may wvish to ask about it.
Our role as a country in the international field, some
of you may wish to ask about. The future which is possible for
us, some of you may wish to ask about, because we are now and
will be for the next two or three years in a period that I call
for this nation the tantalising years. Soon, but not yet, we'll
be reaping the benefit of the mineral discoveries we have made
and we will be exporting in the way of nickel and of iron ore
and of alumina, things which will put the wool industry on which
we have previously almost entirely relied into a much lower area
of importance in our national life. Soon we will be replacing
those things which we have had to bring from abroad and oil
is tho great example with oil from Australian resources and
some of these things you may wish to ask about.
We haven't got those benefits yet, we won't get them
for a couple of years but they arc there), they are coming, they
are beckoning, and for two tantalising years we must wait for
those full benefits to come before we can get a great I don't
like to use this word, because it is used by someone with whose
political opinions I don't agree but the great leap forward
which I think faces Australia; there will be advances but the
great leap forward when these things come in. Now there it is.
I am here to be questioned. I am here to the best of
my ability to try and answer those things which are in your minds.
And so may I ask you, having thanked you for this function,
having thanked you for the opportunity to meet you, to put it
now to the best advantage by cross-questioning me on those
things which arc of interest to you.
Q. With the current.-American elections coming up, if the President
is ousted by either Eugene McCarthy or Robert Kennedy and radical
changes in Vietnamese policy are made by the United States, will
Australia~ make these changes as well? / 3 
PM. Well, if there were and this is an awfully what President
Roosevelt always used to call an " iffy"' question, but if there
were great changes in the United States involvement in Vietnam
I think the Australian people would be forced to accept those
changes. We cannot, as a nation of 12 million people, and a
nation making, I think, a very significant contribution for
its 12 million people, we cannot as a nation of 12 million
people hope, of ourselves, to achieve a result without the full
involvement of the United States and its other allies and if
there were, as you have suggosted, there might be a bouleversement
complete change in policies, then, since we could not, of
ourselves, hope to achieve things by ourselves, I think we would
have a decision forced upon us not to try to do things of
ourselves.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, is it possible to ostablish a minimum
standard of living in Australia and is it possible to work up
machinery to make sure that nobody lives below that standard?
PM. I think it is possible to establish a minimum standard of living.
I don't think that there will ever be a time when there will not
be arguments as to whether that minimum standard of living so
established is high enough or there is no room for argument
that that standard of living should not be improved. Indeed,
I hope there never would be. I hope that in a developing
community, such as we have been and will be, that there will
be argument as to whether those on the lower standard of living,
the minimum standard of living, should not be able to be provided
by the community with something more. But yes, I think there
could be a minimum. The argument would then be whether the
minimum was enough or wasn't enough.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, on the matter of the 20uropean Common Market,
do you in the future perhaps see an Eastern Common Market where
we can raise our own tariff barriers say against Europe in our
particular area?
PM. Well, I would rather not touch on the matter of whether we raise
tariff barriers against Europe-as such, because who knows what
the future of Europe is going to be. Yes, there is an EEC now,
but it doesn't cover all the countries of Europe. One wouldn't
want to say " Yes, we'll raise tariff barriers against Europe",
I think you would have to oxamine that country by country
according to what they were doing in relation to our own desire
to export and to their own involvement in the European Common
Market. But what I would think was a possibility was this. If
by our smallish efforts and they must be smallish ( always
remember we are not a great power), but for our size significant,
coupled with efforts of the United States, United Kingdom and,
for that matter, the European powers, we could improve the
economies of the Asian countries near to us and thereby improve
the standard of living of the peoples of those countries near
to us and thereby improve the demand for better things from those
countries near to us, then we could, I would hope, see that in
these areas the same kind of demand for our own products would
arise as has arisen in Japan because the economy has gone up and
the living standards have gone up and the demands have gone up.
If we could do that in these densely populated areas of Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines, Thailand these are the
countries nearest to us but you can fill in the others further
away then if that could happen, there would be an immense
market for what we could produce and we would benefit ourselves
by being able to sell from and buy from that market.
In the last ton years, in our Japanese trade alone, ( the figures
/ 4 
have gone out of my mind now) there has been an immense
expansion in what we have been able to sell to the Japanese
and what we have bought from them, to our mutual benefit with
Japan. Now, with the other countries around, that same sort
of thing could happen, it could bc to our common benefit.
Q. On 2 February at a Canberra Press Conference, it was reported
you said Australia would not increase the size of its Vietnam
force. You are reported as saying that as far as you were
concerned this was a permanent statement. But on 13 March in
the House of Representatives in reply to a question about your
previous statement, you opened the way for an increase in the
number of Australian troops in Vietnam. Was this a change of
policy; was it pressure from the United States which influenced
you, or was it, as Mr. Connor, Labor, New South Wales, suggested
in Parliament on Thursday night that " the back room boys got at
you". What is your present policy on Vietnam?
PD1. Well, I think that if I could answer that this way. First, it
wasn't a change of policy and the back room boys hadn't got at
me and it wasn't a result of any request from the United States.
I was asked at the Press Conference to which you refer which
was held at the time when the Tet Offensive was breaking out
you remember, and people were pouring into the Vietnamese cities
and so on, would this lead to an increase in the U. S. commitments
in Australian commitments, and I said no, it wouldn't. And in
the statement in the House to which you refer but which was not
a full quotation because you left this bit out, I said yes. I
said that and what I said stands. This was in the answer to the
question in the House of Representatives. But I can't look years
into the future. There may be completely unknown developments
which no man in charge of the Government could bind himself to
ignore, but I do not know what they could be and I think that
we are, as a nation of 12 million people, with unknown requirements
as yet to help in Singapore and to help in Malaysia, with known
requirements for developments of our own nation, providing very
significant assistance at the present level at which we are
providing it and that seems to me to be the answer to your
question.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, Sir Wilfred Kent Hughes has suggested that
there ought to be censorship on views coming out of Vietnam.
Now do you, Sir, personally support this view or does the Cabinet
support this view?
PM. WIell, the Cabinet hasn't discussed it and anything that I say
to you would just be a matter of my own approach to it. But
I would have thought that one should agree that when one's
forces are engaged in war whether declared or undeclared, there
ought to be some censorship, indeed I am not sure there isn't.
But there ought to be some censorship, for example as to where
one's forces are going to go,. where an operation is going to
be carried out, how many troops are engaged in that operation,
what sort of back-up there is. In other words, things which
could be of use to an enemy commander whether guerilla or
regular would not in any war of which either had been cognizant
been allowed to be freely published and to that extent that
sort of censorship I think really ought to be imposed although
it doesn't seem to be imposed by most of the people up in
Vietnam and they are not necessarily our o,. wn people. Well
if you were to talk about censorship in that sense, I would
say my predilection was towards it if it was able to be imposed
by Australians.
There are other areas of opinion to be reported where it's 
not quite so clear, to me at any rate, that censorship ought
to be put in, but my impression of' what Sir Wilfred Kent Hughes
was talking about was more about reporting of troop movements,
of operations which, if they were reported prematurely, could
prejudice those operations and the lives of Australian troops,
and I would have a predilection towards that kind of censorship
if we could impose it.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, last year, largely we understood through
the personal interest of your predecessor the late Mr. Holt,
there was a national fitness campaign programme introduced
through the Federal Government. Is it envisaged that this will
continue under the present Cabinet?
PM. Well, I haven't turned my mind to that but in my present state
of physical health, it is probably time I did.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, how do you see the future of the National
Shipping Lines? Do you see it going overseas? Do you see
that Australia will be penalised if it doesn't?
PM. Well this is a question of policy. Let me just say this in
answer to you. I would think that that was a possibility
that is the question of an Australian shipping line going
overseas or getting some overseas link or something of that
kind. It is a question of policy which ought not to be ruled
out as a possibility.
Q. Mr. Gorton, the Adelaide journalist, Ian Mackay, says that in
Vietnam the Australians are killing wounded Vietcong. Now
what are you doing to investigate this? Are you in a position
to say whether or not it's true and how do you feel in general
about these allegations against our troops?
PM. well I'm not doing anything to investigate it myself and if it
were brought to me on a third-hand report which I understand
is the kind of report, I wouldn't undertake to even think of
investigating it. What I feel about allegations against our
Australian troops are these, having been an Australian troop:
that there are some individuals who from time to time may do
things which the Australian nation or the Army as a whole would
not support and this has always been so in all wars. But I
would have the greatest reluctance and repugnance to holding
up a service to some kind of ( an investigation, legal investigation
by a judge and people of that kind, where any allegations can
be made by anybody without any backing, where headlines will
naturally be given to those allegations and where if at some
later stage those allegations are shown to be without any
substance whatever, the damage to the Service and the morale
of the Service will have already been done. Now that's my
answer to you.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, are our external commitments, Vietnam's
especially, hindering this great leap forward you spoke of
for Australia?
PM. Woll I think, taking together our defence commitments Vietnam
is one, requirements for assistance from Singapore and Malaysia
are others, our own need to maintain some defence capability
ourselves inside our own country and this changing world are
others nobody could say that the requirement to divert
resources to those things did not mean that there were less
resources to devote to other things. We have gone on for a
long time in the past with an average annual expenditure on
defence of around about $ 400 million, if my recollection is 
right. All right, now it's risen to $ 1200 million. W1ith
commitments already accepted it's likely to go up more, almost
inescapably, but I hope not too much more. Now this is a mere
matter of arithmetic, that if those resources are devoted to
that end, then they are not available for many of the other
things that we would like to see done in Australia and so I
suppose to take the words you asked me, it is limiting advances,
leap forwards in other fields. But on the other hand I think
it could also be said that it is an insurance policy to see
that such advances as are made may be maintained and may be
permanent, just as in the case of an individual, the payment
of a life insurance premium prevents him from getting more
household goods or providing better education for his students
but is something he thinks ought to be done for safety's sake,
as I think this should be.
Q. Mr. Gorton, the late Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, in the time of
the Palestinian W! ar made an offer to the Arab refugees of a
place-. in Australia. Since then there's been nothing about it.
Now, I don't want to know whether they want to come here or not
but is the present Government of a mind to allow people such
as these into Australia?
PM. I'm not quite sure, if you will forgive me, whether you stated
the question quite accurately at the beginning. I didn't think
the late Prime Minister, Mr. Holt, did say we will take Arab
refugees into Australia period. I thought what he said was, if
there was an international plan in which a whole lot of countries
will involve themselves and they will all take some portion of
these refugqos into their countries, then we would consider
taking part in that plan. But as far as I know, there has been
no such plan agreed to by other nations.
Q. If there was a plan would you consider it?
PM. If there was a plan I would consider it.
Q. We are about to finish a trial period on daylight saving in
Tasmania. I would like to hear your opinions on daylight saving
and whether you would like to see it introduced into other States.
PM. Well you know I haven't had enough time to talk to all the dairy
farmers, and apple growers and I would rather wait until I had,
before I expressed an opinion.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, I am wondering whether you feel there is
sufficient communication between Government and the people in
Australia through the press, television and radio, whether you
feel that people are well enough informed about policies and
practices of the Federal Governmcnt?
PM. That's an extraordinarily interesting question and a hard one.
We do our best tt as a Government we do our best to try and
see that people are informed but of course as you would well
realise, onc of the ways by which Government Departments do
this is by handouts as to what it is that they are proposing
to do and how wonderful it is that they are able to do it.
These get regarded with some cynicism, I think, after a while
by those to whom thce handouts are given. Perhaps more cynicism
than they should be, but I think they do tend to be relegated
to a spike instead of analysed to see whether there's anything
in thern or not. How better things could be done to get this
communication, I'm not sure. When I was a Minister and not a
Prime Minister, my door was open always to journalists to come
o/ 7 
7.
in and question about handouts, to come in and question about
things they had heard around the market place and were they
true or weren't they true and all that kind of thing and this
seems to me to be the best method of communication that can be
devised other than interviews or interviews with press people
or interviews with television people, And provided a Government
can establish a reputation that what it says is designed to
provide information and not to suppress information, then that
kind of channel would be open. But it's not easy, partly from
a Governmental Department point of view because if there's some
kind of thing that they think could reflect criticism it is
sought to be suppressed. It's not altogether easy from a
Government's point of view vis-a-vis journalists because very
often some journalists will seek to take something and twist
it round a little bit and both ways tend to cause difficulties
in communication. I'm not satisfiod that the best method of
doing this has been arrived at. I am satisfied that we should
both try to see that it is arrived at because it seems to me
to be tho proper basis of a public judgment and a public
judgment seems to me to be the proper basis of a democracy
I mean a judgment on facts.
Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
WELLINGTON
STATE LUNCHEON 28 March 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Prime Minister, The Deputy Leader of the
Opposition, and Distinguished Guests:
The first thing that I would wish to say to you and
to those of you who have come along to this lunch is to thank
you for the honour you have done me and to thank you for the
opportunity of having met you and your Cabinet and now having
met, even if vicariously, such a representative section of
New Zealand opinion. I do not know, Sir, whether there are in
fact representatives of the South Island present, but there is
one thing I think I should make clear and that is that although
on this occasion my visit is unhappily confined, on past occasions
I have been to the South Island and have travelled from Christchurch
on the way to regions further south, where I had, at McMurdo
Sound, happy associations with the New Zealanders stationed
there so it is not a completely terra incognito to me as far
as that is concerned.
You were very kind in your remarks to me. There are orn~ n'
two things, before I launch in to what I really have to say of
serious moment to you, which unfortunately I cannot answer. You
asked me how many Rugby matches somebody had won. I do not know.
You see, I am an Australian Rules player myself. I share with
you entirely, Mr. Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the feeling
that this visit is too short, but while it is unfortunate that
one cannot have enough of a good thing, at least it is highly
fortunate that one can have some part of a good thing, and that
is what you are giving to me.
This, Sir, is the first time on which I haves spoken to
a gethering outside of my own country as the Prime Minister of
Australia, and because of that I think you will agree it would
be natural if I were rather nervous. In fact, to let you into
a secret, if you have not discovered it already, I am rather
nervous. But I can say this I am not as nervous as I would
be if I were speaking to a gathering anywhere but in New Zealand,
or to any other than New Zealanders. It is really and this
sustains me no new thing for an Australian to find himself
in company with New Zealanders. Indeed, it is in keeping with
what has happened over the last half century and more.
Australians and New Zealanders have had common goals in the
harsh arbitrament of war on Gallipoli, in France, in Greece,
in Crete, in the northern deserts of Africa, in Korea, in
Malaya, and now in Vietnam and during that time, and I
believe that this is true, those common goals in war which
were attained when the militant Fascism and Nazism of Germany
were overthrown, which were attained when the military invasion
of South Korea by Communism was overthrown, which were attained
when terrorism was prevented and destroyed in Malay-e, have forged
a link between our peoples which is enduring and which will, for
as far in the future as I can see, endure.
But we have now before us goals in peace. We have
now before us goals which beckon us to try together to make
the most use of that opportunity which together, and together
with other nations, has been won in war. It is of this that
I want to speak to you, but before I do, let me just say this.
There has been much speculation in newspapers and by individuals 
2.
on both sides of the Tasman as to whether there should or
should not be some form of political unity, and indeed the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition mentioned this, between our
countries; some kind of arrangement by which each one, I
suppose, of our nations I have never seen it spelt out
should give up some of the sovereignty it possesses, some of
the national identity it cherishes. I have no chance of
seeing what in some unforeseen future might occur and I
speak of an unforeseen future. Whenever, if ever that kind of
thing occurs, it can only occur by the nations and the
individuals in the nations of New Zealand and Australia saying
so. But this I say to talk about that now, to worry about
that now, to raise the questions which are involved in that now,
is, I would have thought, not only irrelevant but tending to be
damaging, because it can lead to suspicion; it can lead to
resentment; it can lead to impediments in the gaining of goals
which are quite clear before us and which do not require this
kind of solution in order for those goals to be attained.
So let us put that on one side. Let us put it out
0 of our minds, and let us reconsider what can be done by us both
as we are, with our sovereignty, without worrying about these
future things; these matters which can be achieved by you and
us, bearing in mind that both of us are relatively technically
advanced nations, relatively wealthy nations, relatively
isolated nations as far as the European origins from which we
come are concerned let me put to you what it is that I see
as the closer co-operation-for a common end.
Let me first talk to you about co-operation for a
common economic advancement and for the enhancement of trade
and employment opportunities and increased. populations between
our countries. There was originated not so long ago I think
in January 1966 the New Zealand/ Australia Free Trade Agreement.
Before that time, of course, we had one of those elements which
are claimed to be so significant as a result in Europe of the
creation of the Common Market, because we had taken for granted
the opportunity for New Zealanders to travel to Australia, to
work in Australia, to live in Australia; the opportunity for
Australians to travel to New Zealand, to work in New Zealand,
to live in New Zealand and this interplay of a work force was
one of the great benefits claimed for the European Common Market
in Europe. ' Ve have had it, and have taken it for granted. Not
only have we taken it for granted, but we have discovered that
those New Zealanders who come to Australia and who do live there
and work there have to a highly disproportionate extent attained
the highest offices in our country, and run such things as the
Snowy MountainsAuthority, which is one of our greatest developments.
I do not think we have done quite so well over here, but this is
something of significance, which we have.
This New Zealand/ Australia Free Trade Agreement was
reached on top of that, and I sometimes think that because that
Agreement has not resulted in an immediate and dramatic change
in the balance of payments situation between the two countries,
and because there are, as there will always be in such Agreements,
some areas of exacerbation, that we could tend to write down the
benefit of the Agreement already and the ultimate benefit to both
of our nations. This was not intended as an Agreement which
overnight would alter things dramatically. It was intended as
an Agreement which, as the years passed and as duties were
progressively reduced for the most part over a period:. of
eight years for matters stated in the Treaty would tend to
free trade between our two nations, would tend to help redress
the balance of trade between our two nations and this, I think, 
J 3.
it already shows not only promise of' doing but I think some
performance in doing, though, as the Deputy Leader of the
Opposition pointed out, we are four times the size of New
Zealand and you would expect some disparity in trade figures
between a nation four times the size of another.
But let me put this to you. Over the last two yearsand
this is roughly the period of operation of the Treaty
whether entirely due to the Treaty or not I do not know,
but over the period in which the Treaty has operated, our
exports to New Zealand have fallen off I think by some
million or $ 6 million. New Zealand's exports to Australia
have increased, I think by between $ 1 million or $ 2 million,
and this is a move towards what ultimately is suggested to be
the result of this trade Treaty. Of course, each nation will,
as the Treaty operates, seek to protect its own vital interests
if they become disrupted, but still the Treaty was signed and
so far this is an indicationz~ of what is flowing from it. It
provided for a whole list of nominated products which over a
period of eight years were to have duties progressively released;
but again, as a symbol of hope in the way in which this Treaty
is being approached by, I think, both of us, may I tell-: you
this. There was the matter of excuse me if I sound indelicateundressed
timber from New Zealand, which over a period of eight
years was to have duties progressively reduced. There was an
appIcation that we, the Australian Government, should waive
this and should at once say, " No, we will not reduce it over a
period of eight years; we will immediately abolish all duties
on undressed New Zealand timber coniiig to Australia." And
only a week ago it has not yet been announced in my own
country my own Government decided that as a result of that
approach we would agree and we will abolish at once all duties
on undressed New Zealand timber coming into Australia. A
small thing, but an indication of the way in which this Treaty
can work to our common and mutual advantage.
I have no doubt that over the period ahead there will
still be difficulties. There will still bo people in Australia
saying, " You cannot bring blue peas in from New Zealand, or it
will destroy something or other in Tasmania", and there will be
people in New Zealand saying, " We have not really got a big
enough market for our lamb or whatever it may be" l; but these
things can be ironed out, they can be a matter of discussion,
and on the history of the Treaty, so far I believe there is room
for great hope that we will not only have this ability for
employment to move backwards and forwards, but for trade to be
progressively freed to our common benefit, and for joint ventures
of New Zealand and Australian capital to build in New Zealand or
in Australia manufacturing processes such as Comalco, for
example, is building in New Zealand to take advantage of power
from your hydro-electricity capacity, providing employment here,
profits for both of us, and, through profits, an opportunity
for growth for both of us. You, Sir, spoke of the need to help
nations in our region, and I too speak of the need to do that,
and also, as far as possible, to protect ourselves as Britain
goes, as I believe she will completely go, from this part of
the world. That depends on growth, both in population and in
economic resources, to carry out those tasks, and in so far as
this Treaty helps and I believe it does so it will help both
nations to attain what you would, I am sure, agree are , tignificant
go~ als. / 4 
4.
In the field of defence itself lies another close
area of co-operation, not of integration of our Armed Forces,
not of a common commander, one star, for running the Armed
Forces of both nations, though it may be at some stage if a
Task Force is required for some particular purpose the best
commander might be picked from whichever country can provide
him but rather the study in common by an Australian Defence
Committee and a New Zealand Defence Committee of what each
nation was going to require for the purposes of its defence
over thc next three years or whatever time it might be, so
that as far as possible a compatibility of arms might be
achieved, so that we would find, for example, that squadrons
might be partly of New Zealand flights and partly of Australian
flights, and could operate together with the same kind of aircraft
and the same kind of ancillary equipment and same kind of ground
control; so that we might see that if fleets at sea, comprising
partly Australian and partly New Zealand vessels were put in
convoy then the ammunition used was as far as possible the same,
the signals used were as far as possible the same, and the
compatibility was there.
I do not need to spell this out, but it must be clear
that for any given expenditure of national resources on defence,
if two countries are likely to co-operate in defence in the
future as they have in the past and I believe they will then
from that proportion of national resources so devoted, greater
effectiveness can be gained if there is common study at the
beginning of the kind of arms, the kind of logistics, the kind
of spare parts which best will allow the integrated operation
and that is different the integrated operation of forces from
our two nations. And this we seek.
In our approach to foreign affairs there has been for
some time past the closest co-operation which I think is possible
between two countries, and this is whether it means an approach
towards a problem of external affairs posed because of the present
incoherent state of so much of the world, or whether it relates
to assistance in the economic field to try by that way to turn an
incoherent state of the world into a coherent state. These
together, again, are things which we get. They are of great
assistance. They do not require a surrender of sovereignty
by anybody. They do require the abolition of suspicion and
resentment in our own country or in yours. They do require not
only that politicians should say these things and believe these
things, as your politicians and ours say them and believe them,
but they require also that those charged with the industrial
management of a nation should belie-ge those things and should,
by getting together with their counterparts in Australia, and
Australians getting together with their counterparts in New
Zealand, translate the opportunities provided by political
agreements reached into the practical terms which provide the
employment and growth and economic strength we both require.
I am happy to say, again, that there are signs enough that
this already is operating, and I am confident that in the years
ahead not only will we achieve these advanced goals I have spoken
of they are fairly easy not only am I confident there is
unlikely to . be any rift between our approaches to foreign
affairs, but I am confident that firms both here and in my own
country will make their decisions and build their factories on
the assessment of a market available to a firm here or a factory
here; the Australian assessment of a firm or factory in Australia
on the assessment of a market ho-re. 
If this happens, as I think it will, and is built on
that goodwill already here, and is built on that experience
already gained, and is built on those sacrifices already jointly
shared, then I think that we have an opportunity and will be able
to take advantage of that opportunity. Perhaps, if this is not
going too far but perhaps let me put it as a dreamer to call
in this regional new world into being to redress the balance
of the old, as once was said about the calling of the United
States into being and when it is called into being, and when
it redresses the balance of the old, it will, if it is properly
done, remove many of the causes of dissension and lead to a
happier and a better life, not only for us and the peoples under
our care, but for the peoples in the region from whom geography
and morality must ever prevent us from being separated. That
is why I attach so much importance to this visit and to the
Australians'and New Zealanders'continued efforts in peace in
the Anzac tradition formed in war.
Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
AUC.-' KLAND
Speech at Civic Repto J
by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton LIBRJt1--
3C March 1966
Mr. Mayor, The Right Honourable the Prime Ministerp Ladies and
Gentlemen: You will not, I know, either expect or want the to speak
to you for any length of timie6 This is rather an occasion on which 1 say
thank you to the Mayor for having tendered to me this reception and tha nk
you to you people In this room for having been good enough to come alonig
to it. I have not, Mvr. Mayor, as you seem to fear, had to listen
to a lot of long speeches since I have been in this country. On the contrary,
I have had to listen to a number of short speeches which were warm and
touching and welcoming, and if there were long and boring speeches given,
then they were given by me, which is a far better thing to do than to haye
to listen to them being given by somebody else. Indeed, I was quite
surprised because as one travels around my own country, ( and I hope If
there are any of my own pressmen here they won't report this too nastily%,
as one travels around my own country, it is common for, at even the
smallest gathering, for there to be at least four, five, six, seven speeches.
This is why we are known as a nation which has the smallest number of
people to the square mile, and the greatest number of speeches to the
square meal ( applause).
This Is not, in fact, the first time either that I have been
to Auckdand, though it is the first time, of course, as Prime Minister. Wie
called through before, my wife and I, ou our way back from England to
begin to raise that family of which you spoke. And later I remember calling
in to Auckland on a trooper and picking up part of the Maori battalion who
went with us then across to I. ngland. But those were days of long ago. It
is my mission here and m-y hope here to try and see that those bonds which
began in war are now used in the arts of peace for the real use of the
opportunities the war has presented to us, the opportunities to act as a
free people for the good of free peoples.
Sir, It is kind of you indeed to give this reception to me.
It was kind of you to talk of the. potentialities of my own nation, which are
great, and which if we can overcome the shortage of water, which is the
main shortage, we now have open up for us, and I don't brag and please
don't think I am bragging -open up for us an almost limitless possibility
for the future. But that is speaking of one nation. This is not enough.
There are also possibilities in this nation which are great and If the
possibilities of this nation and of our nation can be wedded and welded
together for the benefit of both of us, then as I have said today at the
showground and previously at Wellington, we will be the stronger for
what you can do, you may be the stronger for what we can do. / 2 
2.
And if it turns out that that is what does happen then all
the peoples round us will be the stronger for what you and we together
do, and this Is what we seek this is what I think the future holds for us.
I don't know how quickly but I can see and I think that you can see and I
think the people of my own country can see in their minds that vision before
them at some stage in the future as something to build for. I am sure you
can do the same. If we don't get there as quickly as we would like, what
of it. just like a man, a nation's reach must exceed its grasp, or what's
the future for. The significant thing is to reach and to reach together as
far as Australia and New Zealand are concerned. And that's what we are
going to do, I believe. Tomorrow w e must leave but I do hope that there
will be an opportunity for me to come back and meet you all again. And
I do hope that when I stop being Prime Mi nister I don't hope that soon
but politics is an uncertain business that whoever is Prime Minister of
Australia for the next iC33 years will come to New Zealand as a matter of
course. And whoever's Primei Minister of New Zealand will come to
Australia as a matter of course. And this too is part of' that joint effort
which I see as something of a destiny for us both.
I thank you, Sir, indeed. I am sorry that I spoke longer
than I meant to speak to you. These are things of some importance to
all of us to both nations and forgive me if I spent too long in talking
about them. Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND
AUCKLAND
OPENING OF NEW ZEALAND EASTER SHOW Ap, 16
BY MR. JOHN GORTON March 1968
Mr. ( Co-Chairman, the Right Honourable the Prime Minister,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
You, Mr. Prime Minister, have said you attached
some significance to the fact that within three months of
assuming office in Australia the first overseas trip taken
by me as Prime Minister of Australia has been to New Zealand.
But this is, I think, in no way surprising. There cannot be
two nations more contiguous than New Zealand and Australia.
There cannot be two nations which have in the past forged
closer bonds in war and peace and which are now fusing yet
closer thosc bonds which were previously forged. And there
cannot be two nations which, if they are given the opportunity
to grow as they have the capacity and the will to grow, can
more significantly complement each other, can more significantly
help the growth of each other, and more enrich the standards
of living of each other, and by so doing can more contribute
to the region of the world in which these nations live. So
it is not surprising that the first visit of an Australian
Prime Minister should be to New Zealand, nor is it surprising
that that visit should take place quickly.
Rather would it be surprising if an Australian Prime
Minister first went anywhere else, or delayed too long before
he came to see those whose past and whose destinies are, as I
believe, so closely intertwined, and that is why I think there
will be now and in the future, not for a person but for an
Australian Prime Minister a requiremcnt to be closely and
constantly in touch with this nation and a requirement for a
New Zealand Prime Minister to be closely and constantly in
touch with ours.
This has been an all too brief sojourn amongst you,
but during the period of time I have been able to be here, I
have had extended to me that hospitality I expected before I
came and I expected much and got much and have had the
opportunity to speak in Nellington to the leaders of commerce,
to the leaders in politics, to the head men in all kinds of
human endeavour. This, I think, is the first time that I
have had the chance to speak to a large gathering of
representative men and women of New Zealand, and to them I
want to say that I bring in my person greetings from
representative men and women of Australia.
' tie are, as the Co-chairman has pointod out, as a
nation an exhibitor in this show and have been an exhibitor
for 10 years. d~ e are, I think, the only overseas exhibitor,
and from my memory I think we have committe ourselves to
continue to be an overseas exhibitor here until the lease of
the showgrounds runs out in 1974. ' Ie cannot commit ourselves
to be exhibitors after that because we don't know what the show
and the owners of the showgrounds are going to do, but if they
can work things out then you can count on us to continue to be
involved. And so we should, because here, and particularly in
this division of the show, we see the growth of secondary
industry in New Zealand. 
Now we, Australia and New Zealand, are competitors
in producing the products of primary industry and our markets
are, because of that, difficult of access, the one to the
other, for primary products, and we are competitors in other
countries of the world for the sale of primary products. And
we have a balance of trade which is adverse to New Zealand.
So how can we overcome this; what is being done to overcome
it? I think we can overcome it b0y endeavouring to open our
markets to the secondary products of New Zealand and by
continuing to sell in New Zealand our own secondary products,
and by expanding the volume of trade from New Zealand to
Australia and back, in that way, and in secondary products
but not entirely, hope to increase the manufacturing capacity
and the markets of each of our nations.
For that purpose we entered into an Australian/ New
Zealand Free Trade Agreement. This required that, at the time
that agreement was entered into two years or so ago, all those
products of New Zealand which were duty free should continue
to be duty free for admission to Australia, and it required
that a listed number of products on which duties were charged
when the agreement was entered into would have those duties
progressively reduced over a period of eight years until those
tariffs too were quite removed and those on that schedule were
also freely admitted. The result of that is already showing,
because, as your own Minister, Mr. Marshall, pointed out in a
press statement last February, in the last half of 1967 the
exports from New Zealand to Australia increased by over
compared with the exports in the last half of 1966.
And it is being required by this agreement that, by
arrangement, in order to help both countrics, manufacturers
can agree amongst themselves, and governments can endorse that
agreement, that something manufactured in New Zealand and
brought into and sold in Australia can be brought in and sold
without tariff even though it is not on the list of goods to
which I have rcferred, provided the New Zealand Government will
grant import licences to Australia for 80% of the value of the
goods imported to Australia from New Zealand. And it is provided
in that agreement that as it progresses the governments converse
with each other and can remove duties altogether before the
eight-year period is up, and this has been done on more than
one occasion, and just recently on undressed timber, so that
last October a decision was made to admit undressed Douglas Fir;
and this month another decision to admit undressed native timber
without duty, which we calculate, without taking in the factor
of growth, will mean an extra one million dollars a year trade
for New Zealand with Australia.
Now I know and I don't intend to traverse this
subject too much, because it is more one for manufacturers
and perhaps not immediately one which catches the imagination
of men and women I know that not only in the field of
secondary industry but also in the field of forest products
is New Zealand vitally interested, and this, too, will be
discussed between us in a week or so.
But these are mere mechanics of something which we
are seeking to achieve between us in the future, mere indications
of thc paths we are trying to travel, more hopes that the goals
that are held out to us will be reached. Those goals are ones
that we seek in the future, and the building we are hoping to
start now is one which will reach its fruition in the future,
at some time when you are a nation of 20 million people and
we are a nation of 50 million people perhaps, and we can together,
by what is in effect going to be joint effort through these 
3.
kinds of' agreements and their working out, see that there are
diversified opportunities for employment in this country and
in ours, that there are markets in this country and in ours,
amd that because there is this diversified manufacttiring
capacity, because there are these markets, because we are both
nations which can use technology, we will be able to make and
sell to each other things more cheaply than before and in
greater volume than before, and from the strength that generates
in both our countries will be able again jointly to contribute
to building up the standard of the region in which we live.
This is a task that I think destiny has laid upon New Zealand
and Australia. This is a task we cannot achieve if we hold
each other at arms' length. This is a task which is coming
nearer to being fulfilled because we are coming nearer together.
Some feelings of suspicion in the past, some feelings of
worrying about a big brother seeking a takeover, I think are
going, and they must go, because that is not the question that
confronts us. The question that confronts us is, how can we, who
are not cousins but more like brothers, work together, being
so close together and you, in terms of' time and distance
are closer to Sydney than is Perth work together for this
end which we have begun now to work for and which I think all
no, not all, but 90% 6 of the people in my country and in yours
wish to see pushed ahead until the goals I have outlined are
attained, and wish to see achieved, as a building is achieved
in the future, without having it handicapped by problems which
arise from some immediate consideration, which ax'e difficulties
but which can be overcome if that great structure which I think
you want and we want is jointly to be achieved.
Because this show helps towards it, because it gives
me an opportunity to speak to those of you who come here, not
as heads of great companies, not as members of parliament, not
as people in the Chamber of Manufactures, but as men and women
from New Zealand, because it gives me these opportunities, and
because I think the aims in front of us are so high, I thank
the organisers of this show so much for having given me the
opportunity to talk to you, to weary you a little with statistics,
but I hope to open to your minds a vision. It is because of
this that I thank the organisers, and declare this show open. 



STATE ZIONIST COUNCIL OF N. S. V1.
JSRAEL'S NATIONAL DAY
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY, N. S. W. 28 April 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Charge d'Affaires, Mr. Speaker, Rabbi Porush,
Distinguished Guests and Ladies and Gentlemen:
Three days ago in Israel, near Gaza, there was dedicated
a memorial to men from Australia and New Zealand and you may be
sure that among them were many of the Jewish faith who rode and fought
in that storied land a little more than fifty years ago, and who are still
remembered by the people and the Government of Israel. They left behind
them for some reason, in the country which is now Israel, feelings of
friendship which have grown and flourished in the years since then as the
eucalypts they planted there have grown and flourished and increased in
those years. And it is possible, it can be argued, that the events of those
days so long ago began not to lead to the seed of the State of Israel, because
that seed had been nurtured in dreams for centuries, but perhaps with some
first faltering steps to the germination of that seed, which thirty years
later, and twenty years ago burst into life as the infant Jewish homeland
began to grow. Now twenty years later you, as fellow Australians, have
done me the honour to ask me to come and participate in your rejoicing,
not at the establishment but at the re-establishment of the Jewish State.
And so here in this city, this capital, where our ow;: i nation some
years ago began, we all to. night, as I think it is fitting that we should, in
this place where we began,, celebrate thne new begi: nin-1g of Israel some
twenty years ago. This, Mr. Chairman, is a night to remember a nation that
faith made real. A dream, that being cherished in hearts through centuries,
ultimately became a concrete fact. And this is a night, too, to rerre mber
that these kinds of developments come only through brains, devotion,
dedication, unremitting effort and hard work and the willingness to sacrifice
and fight to keep the reality a growing, pulsing entity. And that's been done.
Sir, what a story is here what a story comes to mind,
not just of that culmination of twenty years ago but of all the years and
hundreds of years before that. A people conquered when? 2,00
years ago a people which in spite of conquest adhered to their spiritual
faith and their religious beliefs and which, because they adhered to their
spiritual faith and their religious beliefs in that time, had their holy places
defiled and'their cities destroyed and their nation dispersed to the corners
of the earth. A people which can look back in those days on such epic
stories, which can draw strength from reflecting on that human greatness
which led to such actions as that thousand strong garrison of the fortress
of Masada who fled, after the destruction of Jerusalem, to a high plateau
and there were besieged by the Romans for two and a half to three years
and held out against them all that time and then when the situation was
quite hopeless, and the night before an inevitable conquest came about,
killed their women and their children and themselves because they preferred
to be dead than to be slaves. A people who can look back in sorrow to
victimisation, persecution, massacre, injustice, in many of the lands
/-3 
will be strengthened. So this is no time for me to talk for long. I have
mentioned things, I have spoken of things which I believe must be deep
in the consciousness of all people of the Jewish faith but whiCh are as
true and as valid in the consciousness of people of any faith. And if in
the course of speaking to you, as may be possible, I've touched on
sentiments which I can feel but dimly, compared to the way they must
be felt in the blood aid bone and hearts of many here, and if I have
thereby trespassed perhaps, I ask your pardon. But I have done this
for two reasons. Firstly because, however imperfectly, I think I have
enough imagination, I think I have enough sentiment to begin to understand
the pride and joy which you, as Jewish people, must be feeling today.
And I want you to know this. And secondly, because I tall,, to you as
Australian citizen to Australian citizen, as part of my n-ation yours
and mine as I would talk to Australians of Scottish, or Irish, or
Scandinavian, or whatever-it -may-be descent because in this we are
one and I feel some right to rejoice with you.
We have much to do here, you and 1, in this country of
ours just as there is much to do in Israel, and as in Israel our far
tomorrows may see greatness, if we have the passion to live and create,
joined with a willingness to sacrifice and if need be die to preserve.
In one sense, the creation of Israel might be regarded as
a miracle, but as a great Jewish writer many years ago pointed out: " A
miracle cannot prove that which is impossible. It is useful only of a
confirmation of that which is possible". Perhaps everything is possible
for Israel -and Australia, given the spirit, given the endurance, given
the willingness, given the sacrifice, and I hope th at, both here and in
Israel, things now thought to be impossible will be shown to be possible
even if people may regard that as a miracle. One thing is sure and
having said this I'll sit down one thing i3 sure, that the values of a
human individual, the rights of a man to live ' his own' life without fear
of those eternal allies of totalitarianism, the secret police, the torture
chamber and the hangman, are rights which must be defended to the
death, are rights which if they are defended will lead to that full,
peaceful, happy life which yet eludes us, but for which you, as people of
Jewish faith, have striven and will strive, and for which you, as Australians
in Australia, will strive with me.
I thank you. 



CON4FERENCE OF P~ tESIDENTS OF CHAMBERS 0~
MANUFACTURES AND OF FEIRAL MANUFACTURERS'
ORGANISATIONS
A. C. Mi. A. C~ nference Centre, Canberra 2ND MAY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr President and Gentlemen: What I have to say to you, because of the time in
which I can say it, will not be very deep, nor would you expect it to go
very deeply into any of the many subjects which will be occupying your
own minds during the course of the Conference. But you will, I ' know, be
hearing from the Treasurer on matters financial, and I think the Minister
for Denfence will be talking about those aspects of defence which impinge
upon the manufacturing industry inside Australia. You will get from the
acting Minister for Trade and Industry comments in that field of activity
which are of interest to you. So really, the object of my being here is,
firstly, to show publicly the respect and regard which the Government, on
behalf of the people of Australia has for the Associated Chambers of
Manufactures and for what they are seeking in one way or another to do
for the growth of our country. It is a tribute to come, and that I think, you
realise is the main object of my presence with you.
I did notice that this was supposed to be a two-way
flow of ideas that is, a flow of ideas from the Chambers to the Government,
and on other aspects, a flow back from the Government to the Chambers.
It will, I think, be a three-way flow of ideas because I have no doubt that
at the meeting here itself, there will be a flowing of ideas from some people
with some ideas as to what should happen and they in turn will be tne subject
of discussion with others. You can do, and have done and can do more to
dvance the possibilities of Australia's becoming more quickly than she
otherwise would, a significant national power. I think it was Sir Robert
Menzies, some time ago, who said he doubted whether any country had
grown so quickly in so many fields in such a relatively short length of time
fis has Australia since the end of the Second V~ orld ' Var. I don't thin.-
that anyone could deny that the building-up of our manufacturing industry,
the provision of new fields of endeavour inside it, has given to this country
industrial muscles which, for a variety of reasons, are essential in these
days, and has given that employment which makes possible the continuation
of immigration policies which in turn make possible the growth of the
nation. There will be argulrents as to how this can best be done,
as to what price should be paid for what is being contributed by you. Of
course there will. But that there has been a contribution, I think nobody
can doubt. And so I hope you will take further advantage still of
such export incentive schemes as have been or will be provided and take
further advantage, too, of the ability to raise capital throughout the world
in this comparatively safe haven of the world, in order further to expand / 2 
-2
manufacturing activities. i don't suppose that twenty or twenty-five years ago
it would have been possible for this nation to have gone through the
period of drought in its most productive areas, which it has but recently
gone through, without having been most visibly affected, and badly
affected in its economic life. I think it is the growth of alternative
avenues of employment, the growth of manufacturing which has not wiped
out, but minimisect the economic effects of this drought which recently has
hit us. Well, how best to continue these matters is first
going to be the subject of discussion amongst yourselves, and secondly
the subject of submissions made on your behalf to us, some of which,
as you have indicated, may be difficult; some of which, it is not
impossible, might not be accepted, but all of wich will be very carefully
studied. We have for our part and I make this just a very
brief thumbnail sketch we for our part have to try, as n-anagers in the
way in which you are managers, to choose between what are in some
respects contradictory requirements. I think we maust see that those of
our citizens in Australia who are, as a result of the slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune, crippled by illness, unable to live a full life in their
age, invalids during the course of their productive life, are looked after
by the community to a degree which provides a respectable life for these
people. I know we have to supply for this country, more
than ever before, a proportion of our production going towards defence
greater than we have ever had to supply before except in tim. e of war, but
one which must be kept down and is not allowed to grow disproportionately.
Indeed, although the expenditure on defence will inevitably grow because of
commitments already entered into in this coming financial year and possibly
the one after, any increase in proportion must in the future be checked
against the other requirements we have got.
We have, at the same time as having to meet those
requirements amongst many others, to endeavour to see that we leave in
the hands of the individual citizen of Australia, and those who mobilise
the individual citizen for work, such as yourselves, sufficient reward for
what has been earned or what has been done to see that an incentive,
a financial incentive for future advance still remains.
We have to provide, and there are some here who
have been active in urging that this must be provided, and rightly so
we have to provide for even better educational levels than is provided
now, and particularly seek to build up technical education at all levels.
I would think that at a gathering of significant people in Chambers of
Manufactures, I do not need to underline the essentiality of technical
and technological education, in which I include such matters as retraining,
and such matters as managerial training at various levels.
All of these things, and of course many more are those
between which governments as managers have to choose. On one occasion, / 3 
-3
I said something of this kind to a Chamber of Commerce, and for some
reason which I find it impossible to understand, was reported in the
newspapers with a big headline saying :" More Taxatbn is Threatened".
What I am really doing is putting before you all the different requirements
which you want, and showing how, as managexs, one must choose between
them all, and that is all I am doing. In a way, it is trying to do what each
of you in each of your industries do
Whatever choices we finally make, whatever area. it is in
which we finally decide to try first because all of them cannot be all
overcome at once I can tell you this, and I believe that you will believe
me. We will, in this managerial role make choices which we arrive at
on a completely honest assessment, right or wrong, but completely honest
assessment of what we think to be the best for the present and future
growth of this nation, and I would think that you gentlemen would do the
same. If through your efforts, and if thrwugh the efforts of governments
throughout Australia, we can infuse into the Australian people a belief
that each one of them as an individual, in whatever it is that he is called
upon to do by way of employment, that each one of them should follow
the rule :" Whatsoever thy right hand findeth to do, do it with all thy
might" in production, on the land, wherever it may be; if we can
infuse into them the belief that in doing this they are contributing as much
to the growth of a great nation, and a nation in which it is good to live, as
is a soldier on the battlefield protecting Australia in Viet Nam, and that if
they are doing this, they are doing it not merely for their own material
advancement but also for the provision of a better material and spiritual
m-ilieu for their children, then really, Sir, we will have done a great
deal to make this a greater country than it is.
I hope that out of this conference which I now declare open
may come steps in that direction. 



FOUNDATION STONE CEREMONY AT THE
BETH RIVKAH LADIES' COLLEGE SADIE ELLINSON
SECONDARY SCHOOL,
MELBOURNE. 12 MAY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen:
It is for me the second occasion in quite a short time that
I have had the pleasure and the honour of speaking to Australians who
are of Jewish descent or of the Jewish faith. Not long ago, I had a
similar opportunity in the Town Hall in Sydney, and there I said, as I
will now repeat, because your Headmistress mentioned something
concerning debts that any debts that are owed by people of the Jewish
faith to Australia, are reciprocated by debts from Australians to people
of the Jewish faith who in the First and in the Second World War, and
indeed in the present troubles which beset our nation, are taking their
full place as Australians as they should, and as they are, and Madam
Headmistress, the books are completely balanced, if indeed there is in
these things to be talk of balances.
But I am here to congratulate you on opening here today
not opening on continuing the growth here today of your independent
schools. There was a time when it was a common occurrence for me to
appear at the opening of independent schools, particularly if they had
anything to do with science blocks, but this has recently been interrupted
and it is a pleasure to come back again to have the opportunity to see the
growth taking place here in the centre of this community.
I do not need to expand upon my own beliefs concerning
the value of independent schools, and indeed in this congregation, in this
gathering, there is no need for me to do so because there is nobody who
needs to be converted. If it were not true that you all believe that it was
proper and right for those who wished to do so to graft on to the education
that is given by a State the particular beliefs and particular teachings and
particular spiritual inheritances which you wish your children to have,
then you would not have done what you have done and made this school
possible. But, of course, in schools such as this throughout the
countryside, it is necessary not only that there should be great academic
attainments, and I think you will agree when you look at the figures, that
this school has shown great academic attainments, academic attainment
in those subjects required by a State education system but also that it
should, as I know it does, inculcate those beliefs, those spiritual
sustenances about which I shall have a little more to say later on. It
teaches not only academic subjects, not only the requirements of
spiritual beliefs, but what is in fact the great strength and joy in Australia,
that whether people are of Scottish descent and the Presbyterian faith or
of Irish descent and the Roman Catholic faith, or of English descent and
adhere to the Church of England, or of Jewish descent and adhere to the
Jewish faith, yet they are all Australians in the one community, working
together for the one ultimate objective, that all of them may maintain
their faith without fear, that all of them may inculcate that which I believe
is one of the major things this faculty in this school seeks to inculcate, and
that is a faith in the individual human spirit, the individual man, a belief
that that is the cornerstone alone on which a great and enduring
civilisation can be built. / 2 
2.
But what a doubly special occasion it must be for you, for
here just a short time ago, there was the celebration of the twentieth
anniversary of the re-founding, the re-establishment not the
establishment of the State of Israel. just as those others of whom I
have previously spoken can look back as Australians to the lands from
which they came, and can remember the deeds their forefathers did, and
can remember the struggles in those countries, so can you now look back
to such a land. And looking back, remember for the teaching of the young,
so that the future may be maintained in freedom, of what happened over
the 2, 000 years since Israel ceased to be a State in its own right; look
back upon a nation which being conquered kept faith, kept bright its
spiritual ideals and because of that had its holy places defiled and its
temples torn down and its peoples dispersed to the four corners of the
earth, and there being dispersed, still keeping faith, still keeping a
dream of a country which would one day be re-established, still keeping
t~ ie beliefs which to them were beliefs for which one lived or which, if
one revoked, one died either physically or spirfitually, still keepipg those
beliefs, were forced into separate communities in the countries in which
they lived, were persecuted, were massacred, had all that could be done
to destroy them done to them, at least in many of those countries in which,
homeless themselves, they sought to make their homes.
All through this period of time was kept not only this belief
in the inherent importance of the individual man, not only this belief in
the overriding importance of the spiritual existence of a man as against
his material existence, but also the seed of a dream of some day which
would come when just as others can look back to lands from which their
forefathers came as still a country, so could the people of Israel, as
they hoped, look back to the land from which they came, their forefathers
came. And this happened, and this came to pass. This has been protected,
and even though today Israel is still under the shadow of attack, under
the shadow of threat. Ihere must come a time when the whole of that
area of the Middle East will agree: " Here is a place in which there are
Arab States, in whiczh there is the State of Israel. By working together
economically, by co-operating with each other, by recognising the
inalienable existence of each other, surely we can do more for the people
living there than by living in a state of tension and of febrile argument
which now pervades the region. And I think that day will come.
The first step towards it must be a willingness for those
from the Arab States and those from the State of Israel to sit down and
talk over the problem which now exists and come to a reasonable
agreement on how this matter can be settled. It has been of some surprise
to me that for a long time I have heard, when international disputes have
broken out: " Sit down and talk about a solution of matters in Korea. Sit
down and talk about the solution of the fighting in Malaya. Sit down and
talk about the solution of the fighting in Vietnam". I haven't heard enough
about: " Sit down and talk about the threat which is now posed to the State
of Israel", and yet it is essential that this should be done, and while my
Government cannot do much towards it, it will urge it, it will support
it, it will do all it can to see it comes about.
Then you, and the children that you will educate here,
in the school you are building will have a country not one, I hope, that
will attuact first fealty, but a country in which you can have pride, will
have a country from which you can say: " Our traditions sprang", a
country in which you can say: " Our faith is centred, and you look
there, as Australians, just as 1, perhaps, as an Australian would look
to England from which my parents came. / 3 
This, I think, will be helped by schools such as this. When
we walked in, we heard a choir singing " Open to us the Gates of
Righteousness". I don't think I quite understood the words. They were
translated to me, but this is what I am told they were singing. And it is
for schools such as this a major task to open to children the " Gates of
Righteousness" and to show them that the " Gates of Righteousness", as
all gates, need to be guarded without hatred of those who seek to break
them down. This is all I wish to say now. I think it was one of your
great writers who said something like this: " A miracle does not prove
that which is impossible. A miracle merely confirms that something in
fact was possible". There are many things we now think impossible.
There are many things we think it may require a miracle to change, but
it won't require a miracle, it will just require a belief that in fact things
we think are impossible are possible, and they will then be achieved,
just as this school has been achieved, as other schools will be achieved,
and as I hope and trust and pray, in the Middle East, a safe, progressive
area will be created in which the State of Israel will play its full and
proper part. 



STATi. V1S. T B[ T-E EMPEI. OR OF ET OP;. A
LUJC.: EOi I AT PAR1AlvEi _ T OUSi,
CAJBER-.' A, A. C. T. 14 MAZ 1368
Speeci Dy ti. Prime Mvlinis cr, W. G. Gorton, MP
Your Imperial Majesty, Your Excellencies, Ministers, Parliamentary
Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen
This, I think, as far as the history of our land is concerned,
is a unique occasion, for it is the first time on which, although our land
itself is age old and worn down with erosion of the centuries and the more
than centuries, it is the first time on which a people with a histioryof something
less than two hundred years has had the honour and the privilege
of having had a visit, Sir, from the ruler of a nation whose history goes
back into the mists of time and which was, with one foot in the Mediterranean
basin from which Western civilisation sprang how many thousand years
ago? a nation which affected that growth at that time.
That alom, Sir, is sufficient reason for us to extend to
you, as we do, the warmest welcome which we could possibly extend to
a visiting emperor. There is something about the land of Ethiopia which I
think all Australians, indeed all people of British descent my own
father included.., knew more about, had. heard more about not in
detail but had heard more about in general, the land of Ethiopia than of
any other land in Africa, or indeed, most other lands in the world.
Our minds go back to that fabled Queen of Sheba,
apparently, Sir, an extremely attractive woman, who had heard of the wisdom...
( she was an Ethiopian) of the King Solomon, and being a woman because
they haven't changed over these thousands of years decided to find out
whether indeed the wisdom of that King was as great as it . was reputed to
be. So she set out as chronicles tell us to prove King Sdomon with
hard questions.... something which women still continue to do and which
is not indeed unknown, Sir, in the precincts of the House in which you
find yourself. I like to think and again I go back to chronicles that
amongst the gifts taken by the Queen of Sheba were not only many shekels
of gold, not only large measures of precious jewels, but something which
chronicles describe as an algum tree. Now, Sir, I am not quite sure what
the prefix " al" means. I think it is an Arabic prefix which may be " el" or
may be but in either case means " the". So perhaps it was that the
Queen of Sheba took to King Solomon " the gum tree", that perhaps because
of erosion disappeared, and Sir if that is so, we like to think that because
in your land this grows so prolifically that it came back so many thousands
of years later from us.
But it is not only because of the storied land, it is not
only because from this visit derived the title ' Lion of Judah" which
Menelek I, five or six thousand years ago assumed or was given, and which
you Sir still bear in direct descent, it is not merely because of this and 
-2
policy, and indeed, they are responsible for carrying out policies decided
by governments, governments being elected by the people of Australia because
we are, as I think you have been told, a country which is wedded to democracy.
The theme of this confer.. nce is, as I understand it, how to make
a machine work for the good of man, rather than to have men existing to
serve machines, how to harness the industrial development and invention
which takes place so that that industrial development and invention, causing
as it nearly always does, disruption initially, will nevertheless eventually
provide a better life than was possible before the invention took place.
This question is one which has bedevilled man for far back in
history. In Great Britain, the country from which my father came, I remember
reading of Luddite riots which took place when, for the first time, the cottage
industries which had employed people in weaving and other methods of making
their living were threatened by the incipient factories Mhich at that time were
brought in because it was found that things could be made cheaper, and in
many cases better. But although things could be made cheaper, and in many
cases better, nevertheless a pattern of life was disrupted and a pattern of
home employment was put in jeopardy, and so there were riots.
Yet, the eventual results of the invention, of course, advanced
immensely the material standard of living of those in that country
In the case of the Industrial revolution which swept the world 1 suppose, if
I may oversimplify beginning with the invention of steam, in that time also
we had the same problem repeated, with great industrial capacity created,
with infinitely more efficiency brought to bear on the production of the needs
of individual people, but with individual people indiscriminately being herded
into those " dark Satanic mills" about which words were written at the time.
Well, we have moved from those days. We have moved to understand,
as this conference will discuss, how we can use the new inventions which come
pouring in upon us, which must in many cases disrupt existing patterns o
empbyment how we can use them so that we avoid human distress, so that
we avoid human displacement, so that we achieve the benefits that the new
inventions will bring to us.
In order to do this, we need more than a mcre understanding of
the inventions themselves, than a mere understanding of the application of
new principles, important though this may be, for these new scientific
achievements, these new technological achievements are bringing to us
as human beings a capacity for good which I think has not been known in the
world before to the extent to which it is, and a capacity for evil, which I
think has not been known in the world before to the extent to which it is.
just as the invention of fire was the invention of something which could be
used on the hearth of a home to warm a fami ly during a winter's night, or
to provide a meal which was not raw and half-burnt, so the invention of fire
could be used, and has been used, to destroy cities and irreplaceable
libraries. just as the understanding of the atom has enabled immense
advantage in medical techniques and in industrial techniques, and I think and
hope for the future, provided a chance for dry continents such as our own
to take water from the sea and turn that water into the fresh water that we
need, so the understanding of the atom has also given an opportunity for
cities and regions to be laid waste. / 3 
-3
Therefore, it is more than n-arely understanding the
scientific changes, more than merely understanding the technological
changes which are required. It is an understanding of human hearts.
It is a call to educate human beings to see that these great powers now
being released are used for good and are not used for evil.
Beyond that, and I think below that, but nevertheless of
immense importance, is this requirement to understand what human needs
are. I know they vary; of course they must from individual to individual.
But there probably must be, I think, some common human requirement
if an individual is to feel himself fulfilled, if he is to feel that he is living
a not merely materially successful, but a satisfactory life.
These things, I think, we do not yet know, but because
one of the by-products of the scientific revolution is that there is goi ng to
be more and more leisure, more and more capacity for an individual to
move away from the hourly requirement to earn and leave him more time
to develop I did not say " ejo" but to develop oneself must be regarded
as enjoyment we need to know more about what it is that people wish to
do in this way, and to provide that along with the harnessing of the
scientific and technical advances made.
That I think, Your Royal H-ighness, is one of the basic
ideas underlying the whole of this conference, and indeed, the other
conferences you have held. Because these are problems which are not
confined to one country but problems which in varying degrees already
encompass the countries of the world and will in the future encompass in
greater degree more countries, it is time and more than time that people
gathered, as you have gathered, to discuss these matters. And it may
be that if from. your discussions come some ideas which, as ideas are
inclined to do, filter slowly, but filter through a community and then to
a government, then it may be that you will be providing for your children
or your grandchildren a world in which the great advances which have been
made will be understood, will be used in a proper way in the world, and
what I think we all seek more than anything else the individual can feel
he is contributing to the community in which he lives, can get satisfaction
from that, can feel that whatever it is inside him which is able to be developed,
whether it be musical talent, artistic talent, literary talent, or any -other
talent, is being full opportunity to burgeon and develop, If this harp. ns,
then a great service will have been done to mankind.
And so I wish you well in your deliberations. I have
great pleasure in welcoming you again, if I may, to the National Capital,
and I hope when you disperse to the cities of this Commonwealth that you
will see for yourselves the problems still remaining and perhaps suggest
some solution. If in your discussions you disagree as to the precise
solutions or even as to the precise problems, well, Sir, that will be not at
all surprising because it is not unknown for us to disagree amongst ourselves.
I thank you. 



2 1 ^: M
HRH THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH'S THIRD
COMMONWEALTH STUDY CONFERENCE.:
CANBERRA THEATRE, CANBERRA
Welcoming Address
by the Prime Minister, the lit, Hon, J. G. Gorton 16 MA I' 1968
I don't really think that-what I am proposing to do this morning
is to give a lecture. 7That I thought I was doing was to give
a welcome, and indeed, that is what I do with great warmth on
behalf of the Government of Australia and the people of Australa
to all of you who are gathered together here in what is our
National Capital.
We haven't had a national capital for very long. It is only,
I suppose 67, 68 years I'm not very good at precise
mathematics of that kind, but early in this century that what
were previously six completely separate and sovereign states
federated in this nation of Australia and chose Canberra as
the capital of the nation. I think it has probably only been
in the last fifteen years that the people of this country as
a whole, whether they come from Perth, or Darwin, or the north
of Queensland, or wherever it may be, have come to look upon
this city as a national symbol not as one which they would
like to see their tax money spent in, in preference to the
particular region from which they come, but es one in which they
would like to see tax money spent in preference to most other
regions from which they don't come. As a consequence, it has
grown, and grown in a planned way.
I think, Sir, that when you visited this city first it had some
28,000 people. It now has 100,000, and we expect that early
in the 1980' s it will be a quarter of a million. It was the
idea of a young man, that is to say, the planning of it was the
idea of a young man 34 years old at the time when he first
drew the circuits, the streets, the general way of getting
around Canberra which has resulted in almost every tourist who
comes here getting lost at least twice. Sut which, nevertheless,
has oiven a feeling of space, a feeling of ovnership, a feeling
of pride, I think, to most of those who live in the capital.
It is more than merely a capital city. It is the place in which
those leading members of the public service wvho, I understand,
are to speak to you at a later hour this day, live and work, and
for the most part, have their being. Of course, some of them
have still not yet been brought to The capital.
It is the seat of government at any rate of Commonwealth
Government which, in a Federal system as any of you who come
from federated countries know, is a government which bears all
the odium of anything vyhich has to be done in order to raise
taxation and gets none of the credit for any of the benefits
which flow from it. Nevertheless, it is here that , reat
government decisions are made, and it is on the advice of those
who will be speaking to you that those government decisions are
at any rate sometimes based. Niow that I will leave for them
to talk about. They will sa7y how it is that a government service 
( 2)
in Australia operates. They will explain, better than I could
explain, the duties and responsibilities which lie upon them
and they will, no doubt, very carefully point out that while
they are responsible for advice, they are not responsible for
policy, and indeed, they are responsible for carrying out
policies decided by governments, governments being elected by
the people of Australia because vie are, as I think you have
been told, a country which is wedded to democracyj
The theme of the conference is, as I understand it, how to make
a machine work for the good of man, rather than to have men
existing to serve machines, hov,,' to harness the industrial development
and invention which takes place so that that industrial
development and invention, causing as it nearly always does,
disruption initially, will never~ theless eventually provide a
better life than was possible before the invention took place.
This question is one which has bedevilled man for far back in
history. In Great Britain, the country from which my father
came, I remember reading of Luddite riots which took place when,
for the first time, the cottage industries '-, hich had employed
people in weaving and other methods of making their living were
threatened by the incipient factories which at that time were
brought in because it was found that things could be made cheaper,
and in many cases better. But although things could be made
cheaper, and in many cases better, nevertheless a pattern of
life was disrupted and a pattern of home employment was put in
jeopardy, and so there were riots.
Yet, the eventual results of the invention, of course, advanced
immensely the m6terial standard of living of those in that
country. In the case of the industrial revolution which swept
the world I suppose, if I may oversimplify beginning with
the invention of steam, in that time also we had the same problem
repeated, with great industrial capacity created, with infinitely
more efficiency brought to bear on t-he production of the needs
of individual people, but with individual people indiscriminately
being herded into those " dark Satanic mills", about which words
were written at the time.
' Well, we have moved from those days, We have moved to understand,
as this conference will discuss, how we can use the new inventions
which come pouring in upon us, which must in many cases disrupt
existing patterns of employment how we can use them so that we
avoid human distress, so that we avoid human displacement, so
that we achieve the benefits that the new inventions will bring
to us.
In order to do this, we need more than a mere understanding of
the inventions themselves, than a mere understanding of the
application of new principles, important though this may be,
for these new scientific achievements, these new technological
achievements are bringing to us as human beings a capacity for
good which I think has not been know,, n in the world before to the
extent to which it is, and a capacity for evil, which I think
has not been known in the world before to the extent to which
it is. Just as the invention of fire was the invention of
something which could be used on the hearth of a home to warm 
( 3)
a family during a winter's night, or to provide a meal which
was not raw and half-burnt, so the invention of fire could be
used, and has been used, to destroy cities and irreplaceable
libraries4 Just as the understanding of the atom has enabled
immense advantage in medical techniques and in industrial
techniques, and I think and hope for the future, provided a
chance for dry continents such as our own to take water from
the sea and turn that water into the fresh water that we need,
so the understanding of the atom has also given an opportunity
for cities and regions to be laid waste,
Therefore, it is more than merely understanding the scientific
changes, more than merely understanding the technological changes
which are required. It is an understanding of human hearts.
It is a call to educate human beings to see that these great
powers now being released are used for good and are not used for
evil. Beyond that, and I think below that, but nevertheless of immense
importance, is this requirement to understand what human needs
are. I know they vary; of course they must from individual
to individual. But there probably must be, I think, some
common human requirement if an individual is to feel himself
fulfilled, if he is to feel that he is living a not merely
materially successful, but a satisfactory life.
These things, I think, we do not yet knowi, but because one of
the by-producats of the scientific revolution is that there is
going to be more and more leisure, more and more capacity for an
individual to move away from the hourly requirement to earn and
leave him more time to develop I did not say " enjoy", but to
develop oneself must be regarded as enjoyment we need to know
more about what it is that people wish to do in this way, and to
provide that along with the harnessing of the scientific and
technical advances made.
That I think, Your Royal Highness, is one of the basic ideas
underlying the whole of this conference, and indeed, the other
conferences you have held. Because these are problems which
are not confined to one country but problems which in varying
degrees already encompass the countries of the world and will
in the future encompass in greater degree more countries, it
is time and more than time that people gathered, as you have
gathered, to discuss these matters. And it may be that if
from your discussions come some ideas which, as ideas are
inclined to do, filter slowly, but filter through a community
and then to a government, then it may be that you will be
providing for your children or your grandchildren a world in
which the great advances which have been made will be understood,
will be used in a proper way in the world, and which
I think we all seek more than anything else the individua~ l
can feel he is contributing to the community in which he lives,
can get satisfaction from that, can feel that whatever it is
inside him which is able to be developed, whether it be musical
talent, artistic talent, literary talent, or any other talent,
is being given full opportunity to burgeon and develop. if
this happens, then a great service will have been done to
mankind. 
( 4)
And so I wish you well in your deliberations. I have great
pleasure in welcoming you again, if I may, to the National
Capital, and I hope when you disperse to the cities of this
Commonwealth that you will see for yourselves the problems
still remaining and perhaps suggest some solution. If in
your discussions you disagree as to the precise solutions or
even as to the precise problems, well, Sir, that will be not
at all surprising because it is not unknown for us to disagree
amongst ourselves.
I thank you. 



VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA
MRS INDIRA GANDHI
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA 22 MAY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton
Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is my very pleasant task to propose the toast of our
distinguished guest. I think it is impossible for me edequately to express
on behalf of myself or of those Australian people who are here, or Prime
Minister, who are in their thousands watching you now and waiting to hear
you speak the intense admiration which we have of you as a person, and
the great pride and excitement that we feel in this nation because on this
occasion we have been visited for the first time by the Prime Minister of the
great Republic of India. I think that when August comes this year, it will be just:
twenty-one years since the flag of India flew from the old Red Fort at Dell~ i,
as a symbol of the political independence which had been gained as a result
of a struggle of some quarter of a century, a struggle, Prime Minister, in
which you and your distinguished family, together with countless other of
your countrymen were engaged in, a struggle which occupied all the thoughts
of your early life. I have heard, and you have confirmed to me that the story is
not apocryphal, that at the age of three or five or some very early age of that
kind, you began to make political speeches standing on a table at the home of
your distinguished father, with a captive audience, and I have not only envied
you this early start, but I have also had borne in upon me the fact that fromn
that time until the time the flag of free India flew from the old Red Fort
Delhi, you were entirely engaged upon this struggle. In it you lived and
breathed and had your being, and in his heady excitement of striving against
sone thing, which appeared stronger at the time, for an ideal which you believed,
and those with you believed to be more important than the hardships which
struggling against it entailed, because you believed that, eventually you
achieved that political freedom which for so long you had sought.
It was a struggle, I like to think, Prime Minister you
may not agree with me not against a harsh, oppressive, overbearing,
corrupt power, but against an alien power and one which was in your coun try,
and one which you respected but wished to leave your country so that politically
you could run your own lives.
I can only, as from a distance, feel in myself the excitement
there must have been, the heady wine there must have been during those
years, and congratulate you on having with your countrymen finally achieved
that for which you had so long fought. But this was just the beginning, this
attainment of political freedom.
That freedom having been attained, then those who had b~ een
successful were at once faced with the immensely significant requirements of
economic freedom, ( for political freedom of itself is not enough) and faced with 
-2
immense problems problems which to a country like ours almost stagger
the imagination of seeking to take and raise the standards of what is now
530 million people in a nation which each year adds to its population, the
same number as is the total population of our nation of Australia. Having
to build up almost from nothing an industrial base and industrial muscles,
having to face in such a vast country the terrific incursions of drs~ ughts in
particular areas1 having to provide for those whcq having followed your
banners toward political freedom now required some material advancement
as a result of having achieved that, having at the same time to provide for
the defence of that political freedom and those boundaries of India against
incursions which were first feared and then in fact occurred, having all
these problems to cope with, you had to show that a democratic country
because through all these times you remained a democractic country could
cope with these kinds cf problems and could provide for the citizens of
their nation an improving standard of material things.
So from that first struggle, that first excitement of seeking
political freedom, these problems came upon your country and in time you
became the leader who must decide how best they could be met. During
that time, you have managed, Prime Minister in your country to increase
the average expectancy of life from 32 years to, I think, 49, you have
mai~ eI to build up an industrial capacity much greater than that with which
you started, you have managred to resist and to repel incursions upon your
frontiers. It looks as if you will, in this present plan, overcome the
agricultural disadvantages which have dogged you for so long and will manage
to be able to provide from within the borders of India the food which India
requires. These are no mean achievements, Prime Minister, and
these if they are maintained, as 1 am sure they will be, will stand as an
example to other nations in Asia that great problems can be met by
democratic processes, that great problems can be overcome by democratic
processes, that there is more than one way to improve and increase the
economic well-being of a nation, and that it is not necessary to surrender
political liberty in order to do this, If this indeed turns out to be the fact,
Prime Minister, then I can think of very little that would be of more
significance for the future of the world and the peoples who will live in
the various countries of the world.
I" is not for me to speak long, Prime Minis ter, in this,
but may I take your mind back to a time when you were left alone because
your family were all in gaol, and when you had written to you by your
distinguished father a poem which I know must lose much in translation
but which yet I would like to express to you who have not forgotten it and
to others who have not yet heard it:
Wlhere the mind is without fear
And the head is held high.
Where knowledge is free
Where the world has not been broken up into
fragments
By narrow domestic walls
WVhere words come out from the depths of truth
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards
perfection
VWhe re the clear stream of reason
Has not lost its way into the dreary desert sands of
dead habit
Where the mind is led forward by thee
Into ever-widening thought and action
Into that heaven of freedom, my Mther,
Let my country awalke. / 3 
-3-
Prime Minister, the man who wrote that poem did much to
see that it was translated into fact. Prime Minister, you are doing much
to see it is translated into fact. it is something which your country and
mine can both ta., e as something of a guidance for the future, and i wish,
Prime Minister and hope, Prime Minister, that for many years to come you
will be aole to continue to try to see that the se. itiments expressed in your
father's verse are expressed in actual fact in the country that you lead and
that you lead it with the same high courage, political perspicacity, elegance,
modesty and grace with which you have led it so far. 



V-IS04T-THE U. S. 1968
WASHINGTON
EXCHANGE OF REMARKS BETWEEN PRESIDENT
JOHNSON AND THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN
GORTON IN THE EAST ROOM OF THE WHITE HOUSE
JU16 27 MAY 1968
THE PRESIDENT
Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton, Secretary and Mrs. Rusk,
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
Mr. Prime Minister, it is a very great pleasure for Mrs.
Johnson and I to welcome you and your most charming wife to our country.
We have very little to offer in the way of surprises. Mrs. Gorton is a
native of New England. We have some New England weather for her this
morning. But she already knows all of our secrets anyway. Even if she
did not, you, yourself, Mr; Prime Minister, are the Prime Minister of
Australia and the Australians and the Americans have so much in common
that we seem to understand each other almost on sight anyway.
Our people have been moulded by the same forces. Both
of our continents are vast. Both of our histories are young. Both of our
Governments are free. All of our people were drawn from many lands.
We both enjoy an abundance which, for most of the world, is yet just a
dream. We share a common vision. We see a world where might
does not make right. We strive for a world where nations can live together
in peace and freedom under the rule of law. We have been fighting for this
dream for a long time now. Twenty-five years ago we fought side by side
from the Middle East to the South Pacific. Today we are fighting side by
side in the rice fields in Vietnam.
I do not know how close we may be to success in our
common and our historic cause. But I do know that you, Mr. Prime
Minister, come here at a moment of very historic importance. Cur
American aim is now, as it has been from the beginning, to achieve
peace with honour, a peace which will permit the people of Asia and the
South Pacific to work out their own destiny in their own way. We have
never sought anything else, and we will not accept anything else. I
believe that Australia shares that aim, and I look forward with a great
deal of anticipation to our conversations about this and about many
other common concerns. Mr. Prime Minister, you and your countrymen are always
welcome in Washington. I think you will soon find that although you are
half a world away from Australia, you are still very much at home.
Thank you very much. / 2 
PRIME MINISTER
Mr. President, Mrs. Johnson, Secretary Rusk and Mrs. Rusk, Distinguished
Guests:-Thank you, Mr. President, on behalf of all Australians, for
the honour which, through me, you do my country. We value this the more
since it comes from a power which is not only great, but which, since the
end of the last world war, has assumed all the burdens and responsibilities
of being great. You helped reconstruct Europe. In large measure, you
financed the constructive work of the United Nations. You have without
stint given blood and treasure to protect small nations from subjugation
by force or by threat. And you seek to raise the living standards of people
in every corner of the world. For this your country has received scant
thanks yet at one time, through sole possession of atomic power, you
could have imposed your will upon the world and did not. You could have
chosen to conquer, but chose to set free. You could have looked inward,
but instead you chose to look out. If the United Nations has not bro ught
that end to war which its founders sought, if the world is still torn by
strife as it is, that is the fault of others, not of yours.
You have assumed, Sir, as I said, many burdens, and today
one dominates our minds, Even as we stand here, out men fight in Vietnam~ r
together, as they fought in other wars, to protect smiall nnrinnn from
overthrow by force of Governrnenrs elered by rhe people. Even as we
stand here, diplomats in Paris seek to discover whether there is hope of
ending that fighting and securing a peace just, lasting and honourable
giving to the people of South Vietnam a chance thernselves . to choose
their future path without fear or threat.
You, Mr. President, bore the lonely weight of decision to
continue to resist force with force. You, Mr. President, by your recent
gesture, brought the North Vietnamese to talk. You, Mr. President,-
relinquished chance of further office to give those talks such chance lof
success as they may have. And for that we admire and salute you. * It is
that struggle which engrosses us today, but when it is decided, that
solution will be one step only in the solution of other problems to which
men and nations are born, which have arisen in the past, which exist now,
and which will arise in the future in a world in transition.
So the Revolutionary War decided whether America would
or would not be independent. The War between the States decided whether
the union would continue or fragment. The Second World War decided
whether the world would be subject to fascist tyranny. just as those
decisions engrossed the hearts and consciences of those then living, and
decided a particular matter but did not provide solutions for future confli zt
or for progress, so will the outcome of the war in Vietnam decide that
matter but not those questions for decision arising in the years ahead.
As Australians see it, those problems, although worldwide,
are likely to be most acute in Asia. We see there an area which needs
an economic and technical base such as Europe already has. We see there
an area where development and progress are essential if the peoples of
those divergent nations are to support and defend something dynamic and
developing not something stagnant. We see there an area crying for
technical skills, a more experienced administration, a more equitable
sharing of an increasing incom-e and we see there an area subject, above
/ 3 
3.
all, to the threat of subversion, terrorism, and aggression. In some
way, Sir, because of internal division, parts of Asia are reminiscent of
the Balkans before World War I and in some ways they may pose the
same dangers, dangers aggravated by the eagerness of agitators to exploit
divisions. Perhaps, Mr. President, though I don't think so, we
Australians see this out of perspective because it is here that we,
contiguous to Asia part of the South East Asian region live and breathe
and have our present and our future. It is here that we feel that we can
best contribute to stability and to progress and to preserving its political
freedom which seeks economic freedom as its concomitant. It is here
that we can play our part. But we cannot effectively play it alone. As
for ourselves we are not a great power, thou~ gh we are destined so to
be. In our nation are new frontiers and boundless opportunities for those
who will risk in order to win; for those who will work in order to build;
for those who will endure initial hardship to gain distant goals. We shall
grow in numbers and in industrial power, and further develop the use of
our natural resources, and in growing, Mr. President, will grapple with
existing problems and prepare for those which wait in the corridors of
the future. But for the present, we, who for two centuries were shielded
by the British Navy, have as our major shield the ANZUS pact, and behind
that, and because of that, we can the sooner grow to that stature we shall
reach, we shall the sooner reach a po sition to repulse * any attack the futur e
may hold from any quarter, and by any means. We can the sooner grow
in capacity to offer more economic and technical assistance to the
Governments and peoples of our region. I do not mean that we do not now
play our part in defence, as we do in aid, or in seeking to foster trade
which may be more important than aid. But I do mean that becausc of your
assistance, because of the ANZUS Treaty and what it implies, we cant
divert to building a future strength, resources which would otherwise: be
now diverted to defence, to the future detriment of defence, and to thp
future diminution of our ability to render as much help in the region as
we would wish. This is to us the virtue of the ANZUS pact. And allied
to it is the sure knowledge that you while providing that shield recognize
that behind it we, as we build our country, are free to make and will make
our own foreign policy decisions subject only to our treaty obligations.
Sir, I have not been here before in my present off ice, yet
I f eel I come not as a stranger. On too many fields of battle we have
stood together fighting for the concept of freedom, fighting against
aggression. On too many occasions we have co-operated in the economic
plans to help the worldrs underprivileged advance their standards of living.
There is too much common heritage of a system under which Government
is chosen by a majority, dismissed by a majority, protect minority rights,
yet refuse to be coerced by organized minority demonstrations. There are
too many bonds for any Australian Prime Minister even to feel that here he
is a stranger. And so as in the past, so may it be in the future. Looking
down the vista of the years, I hope that you in your greatness now, and we
in our present strength and our greatness to come, will together give
protection, stability, advancement, encouragement, will help to foster,
along with and depending on the people who live in that region a new
world in Asia to redress the balance of the old. If this can be done, if
we can do this together successfully, the price to be now paid will, in the
future, be thought by humanity small.
Thank you, Sir. 



VISIT TO, THE U. S. 1968
WASHINGTCN
EXCHA-NGE CF TCASTS BETWEEN PRESIDENT JOHNSON
AND PRIME MINISTER GORTON IN STATE DINING ROOM
OF WH-ITlE HOUSE 27 MAY 1968
THE PRESID~ ENT
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Go: 2-ton, Secretary and Mrs. Katzenbach,
Ambassador and Mrs. Wailer, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and
Gentlemen: Mr. Prime Minister, I have a confession to make tonight...
I have been talking quite privately to your wife. I hope and I believe this
was not a violation of protocol. But I needed advice. Two years ago,
your predecessor--our late and beloved friend, Harold Holt--made a
promise to me. During our visit prior to the Manila Conference, in the
cool of the evening over a mint julep, he very generously said that if
things ever went wrong here in the United States, I would always have
a political future in Australia. Mr. Prime Minister, I have been somewhat
curious to know whether that might still be true.
Bettina, as you know, Mr. Prime Minister, is a daughter
of New England. She said, " Mr. President, you will always be welcome.
But Australians are a lot like you Texans--you are never as bad as they
say you are when they're mad and you are never as good as they say
you are when they love you. Mr. Frime Minister, let me assure you
tonight that I do not intend-I may reassess that a little later-I do not
intend to stand for office in Canberra. This is a considerable sacrifice,
since I can truthfully say there is no place outside my own native land
where I really feel more at home.
Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton, I hope that you will
feel equally at home here in America and I hope that you will come to
visit us often. Lady Bird and I are pleased and honoured that we should
have this opportunity to be the first to welcome you to our country as Prime
Minister. The friendship that joins our two countries is a vital force
in the struggle to transform the world's hopes into tomorrow's realities.
It is a partnership which grows stronger and deeper with the passage of
time. It extends from trade and mutual defence to man's newest frontierthe
exploration of outer space. Right now that partnership is being tested--
tested in the hardest way that the ties between nations can be tested, and
that is by the commitment of our men to combat. Tonight we are in a
decisive phase of the struggle for peace and order in South East Asia.
Talks have begun, but the other side is forcing the pace of battle; it is
pouring men and supplies into South Vietnam at an unprecedented rate.
Let me tell you this
-in Paris we shall remain patient but firm in the quest for an
honourable peace. Ambassador Vance will be here in the morning
to report to me and the security council, and to report to you,
Mr. Prime Minister, on the developments there. / 2 
-In Vietnam tonight your men and ours--and the gallant South
Vietnamese, the South Koreans and the Thais who have fought
so long for the right of self -determination--and all of our allieswill
turn back this offensive.
-In time;--and I pray it may be soon--the other side will turn
from fantasy to reality; from violence to genuine peacemaking.
I know there are some in Asia and elsewhere who are
wondering tonight whether the United States will maintain its commitments
in Asia; who are wondering tonight whether the strains of this struggle
will lead us to withdraw and leave two-thirds of humanity to its fate
without American assistance or American support. As you so well know,
Mr. Prime Minister, with your years in political life, I cannot speak for
my successor, but I can speak for myself, and the answer is no; we will
not withdraw until there is an honourable peace. I do not think that my
country will permit us to do otherwise.
If you look back over the years since 1941, you will see
how steady the performance of the American nation has been. We must
put aside the Senate speeches that have been made and the debates that
have gone on and you will see that from one Administration to anotherfrom
Republican to Democrat--the United States of America and its
people has steadily understood its interests in Asia and has acted on them.
I deeply believe that this will be true in the future as it has in the past.
All the energy and influence that I can command will be in that direction.
I think, Mr. Prime Minister, it will be true for a very simple reason:
every year that passes brings us closer to Asia and brings us closer
really to the other regions of the world; closer in terms of military
technology; closer in terms of communications; closer in economic ties;
and closer in terms of simple human friendships.
If I may depart, Mr. Prime Minister, I think you will be
interested to know that this afternoon I saw a report that on the list of
choices for R and R--rest and recreation--in Vietnam, Australia was the
first choice of the American fighting man. I think you will also be pleased
to know that of the thousands who have gone there, who have been taken into
your homes, and they have been entertained as if they were their own sons,
that so far as we have been able to ascertain, there has not been one, single
misunderstanding or violation of your hospitality or your courtesy--and
that is saying something of Vietnam fighting men who are on rest and
recreation in Australia. In the years ahead, we hope that the new Asia that is being
born will be increasingly organized to shape its own destiny. It should be
able to do more for itself and rely less on the United States. But I have no
doubt that there will be no return here to isolation. I have no doubt that
America will remain the partner of Australia, and I have no doubt that
Australia will continue to give leadership to the new Asia and the free
Asia as far ahead as any of us can see. One of the comforting and pleasirg
developments of the last few years has been to see the leadership that the
Government of Australia has given to this huge population that makes up
two-thirds of the world; that this little country, through its leaders, has
gone out and met with them, visited with them, exchanged views with them,
and let them know that we are one and that we are trying to build toward a
better day where we can fight the enemies of hunger, disease and poverty
that are rampant in that area. / 3 
3.
Mr. Prime Minister, your presence tonight is proof that
this partnership is still vital and still growing. We are so pleased that
you could bring your Maine lady with you and join us on the boat last
night and that we could find all the differences that we had and solve most
of them before the dinner tonight. We think this visit of yours, so soon
after you have taken over the responsibilities of the Prime Ministership,
will be of great help to us and will endear you to this country.
Mr. Prime Minister, we hope that your visit here--and
you will be visiting other parts of our country--will give you an insight
into the affection that the American people hold for the Australian people.
In sunshine and in sorrow, we have stood side by side. Alt hough Ed and
Ann Clark found it so pleasant out there that they dared not take more
than two years of it we are sending you some other Texans who we hope
will be representative of this country and be concerned with the future of
Australia. The young Ambassador said to me, Mr. Prime Minister,
when I talked to him about two or three countries, " Why are we so high
on Australia?" I said, " If I could be Ambassador--and I am not sure I
can under the next Administration-if I could be, the one country that I
would want to be Ambassador to is Australia. That is when he made
his choice. That is when he decided he wanted to go to Australia.
So, Mr. Prime Minister, we welcome you and your party.
We know that our talks will be fruitful. We assure you of our continuing
co-operation and friendship. We now ask you to join us in a toast to the
great lady who symbolizes our common heritage.. Her Majesty, The
Queen. PRIME MINISTER
Mr. President, Mrs. Johnson, Members of the Diplomatic Corps.,
Distinguished Guests:-I must first of all thank you, Sir, for extending such a..
warm welcome to myself and to my Maine lady--that is spelled with an
You know, Sir, you have spoken tonight of a number of matters
which beset us today. But in doing so, you have mentioned other matters
which beset us in the past and which you will remember because you came
to Australia at the time when these things were threatening then.
You went on missions over Papua and New Guinea in the
defence of Australia at the time these things were threatening. I flew
at that stage in company with pilots of the United States Air Force who
had come to see what was threatening then did not prevail--and it did not
prevail. These difficulties, these problems, are borne on me tonight
more than they ever have been before, because I stand here in a historic
residence and my mind goes back to the time when, for example, one
former President sat here and mourned the loss of more Americans in
conflict than have been lost in all the wars since between 1860 and 1865,
and exercised will and exercised judgment in order to see that a nation
due to become great did become great, and did not become split. I can
imagine well--because you showed me today upstairs, the room in which
this great man slept--what those five years or six years, however long
it was that man sat there, beset not only by an enemy across the potomacand
I am bound to say that I speak as a convinced confederate; at least
/ 4
I 
I would have been then--but not only by an enemy across the potomac, but
by the cooperheads inside the union, by the riots taking place in New York
so that regiments had to be brought back from the army of the potomac
to put it down by the vilification and attacks of Horace Greeley and the
newspapers--and newspapers are now much the same as they were then--
and through it all, because the end was an end that was good, he saw
that whatever was required to be done was done, and it was. If it had not
so been done, then there would not now be a United States of America.
Things don't change that much. I know that at one subsequent
stage, part of the house in which I stand apparently inadvertently caught
fire. But that has, of course, nothing to do with Australia, Sir. I dare
say that people responsible for it eventually finished up in Botany Bay as
transportees. I don't think that I should, on this occasion--which is a
happy and a festive occasion--for too long talk about matters that are too
serioust I tried this morning to set forth what Australians think about
what you are doing in the United States. When you speak of leadership
that we give, we give that leadership, if we do, and we try to because we
are protected and shielded by a gr. eater power. We will give greater
leadership in the future because we will have in the past been protected
and shielded by a greater power. * rhe coat of arms of my own country,
Sir, is borne on one side by a kangnroo and on the other by an emu.
Ileither one of these creatures, so tile botanists tell me, is physically
able to move backwards; they can only move forward. We will and we
have. There is little time for figures to be presented to a meeting
such as this, but at least in the last decade one can say that the grosE
national product of my country has doubled at an average rate of five and
a half per cent; that the expenditure on foreign aid has doubled; that the
expenditure on defence has trebled; that our population has increased by
one third. But that is all in the past. I remember, Sir, if I may translate
it a little later into idiom, something which struck my mind when I was
young. All of the past is prelude, which means " You ain't seen nothing
yet". But still we, like you, do have to contribute more than we
would wish to to the protection of other peoples against attack, to the
building up of a region which you could have said, which was once said
by a British Prime Minister, was a faraway region of which we know
nothing, but which, as far as we are concerned, is a close region of which
we know much. We have to contribute to that because unless it happens,
unless the people living there have a greater chance to improve their
living standards to be able to live a reasonable and decent life, then in
the future there is little hope for a reduction in that money necessary,
but in one sense wasted for defence.
So, we have to do it, and you make it possible for us to do
it. But if this is achieved, if it is possible to beat the swords into plowshares,
if it is possible to translate the aircraft into factories, if it is possible to
take people out of uniform to be productive, then we can see in that area of
the world something growing, something growing not only for their own
benefit, but for our own because we will sell them things, for your own,
because you will sell them things, for our own, because we will buy from
them that which they peculiarly can produce. And we may-who knows,
becaus~ e man is born to travel as the sparks fly upward--but we may achieve
an era nearer to a time when men can live in peace, when men can live in
peace throughout the world, when these great political schisms which, for 
so long as I can remember, have torn the world to pieces may become
muted and instead of people saying... " I will run through facism all the
people of the world" or " I will run through communism all the people in
the world", we may have instead a brotherhood of men. Who knows?
I don't, but I am sure that what you are doing and what we are trying to
help you do in a minor way is the only method by which this shining goal
might eventually be achieved.
Sc I do not, as I say, wish tonight to make too serious a
speech, but I would like to repeat a tribute that I made this morning, and
that is..... that the power inside this country, utilized as it is being
utilized by this country, is to me the only sure--not sure--the only
hopeful beacon, not only for this country, or for mine, but for the
peoples generally of the world. Well, the " Maine Lady" of whom you
spoke, long ago said to me something which she said I was to remember
on any occasion when I spoke to a gathering of people. It is a little
quatrain. It " I love the finished speaker, I really truly do. I
don't mean one who is polished, I just mean one who is through".
Mr. President, though I could for an hour go on expressing
the same feelings that you have expressed, I think it is unnecessary
because I think between friends short exchanges are understood and
detailed explanations are not required.
Therefore, I am through. 



VISIT TO THE U. S. 1968
WASHINGTON
ADDRESS TO THE NATIONAL PRESS CL( i i JU] 096B
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORI&amp; 18 R
28 MAO 1968
Mr. President, and Gentlemen:-
I suppose this is the most daunting audience to whom it
would be possible for a politician to speak, because quite clearly, every
word that is said, and particularly if it is said off the cuff--and in any
case it has to be said off the cuffi because I have not got anybody to write
my speeches for me, I haven't got time to do as many as I should--but
every word that is said off the cuff is listened to, and interpreted; I won't
go so far as to say misinterpreted, but at any rate, very, very closely
examined. The other thing about it is that all of you know so much more
about international and economic affairs than any speaker who came to
talk to you could possibly claim to know. So there are considerable
difficulties facing me.
Now, this has brought to my mind a delightful mental
picture, when you talked about the sequoia, and coupled with the words
" duchessing" and " arm-twisting". And I could not help but wonder what
the duchess was having her arm twisted for. But I do not think either of
those things in effect happened. I do not wish to talk to you for a long
time. Initially, when I first came and spoke at the reception I
was given at the White House, I sketched out in short compass the feelings
that we in Australia have about what the United States is doing in various
parts of the world, and, by implication, what we hoped the United States
would continue to do in various parts of the world. But there are one or
two things that I do want to say.
I do want to say that as a representative of a small nationit
is all right-later on I will tell you how big we are going to be in the
future--but just at the moment a comparatively small nation I
wonder if anybody has thought what the situation of comparatively small
nations in the world today would be if there were not in existence a United
States, with a heritage of democracy, and with a willingness to see that
small nations, who otherwise might not be able by themselves, were given
some shield and some guarantee that they would be able to run their own
affairs in their own way. just imagine what the situation in the world would
be if there were not a great and giant country which were prepared to make
those sacrifices for that end. And the end is not negligible.
For a long time, for as long as my study of history extends
into the past, and indeed for as long as my vista of the future extends,
there is likely to be, as there has also been, a deep division of opinion
among mankind as to whether it is better for a country, any country, to
have political freedom, to have Governments which are chosen by
majorities and dismissed by majorities, or whether it is better to have
some Government which is not so subject to dismissal, and which is a
state above the individual. This is the cleavage which for so long has
continued: Is the state designed to serve the individual or is the individual
designed to serve the state? / 2 
Now we have seen in the past this struggle in the Second
World War, when those who believed that the individual was merely
something to serve the state--when those who believed that you could
not have political and economic freedom, but had to submit yourself to
some arbitrary authority in order to gain a loaf of bread, sought, under
black fascism to have it around the world. And that kind of division
of opinion still exists.
If it is true, as I believe that it is true, that in the future
mankind, as a whole, and in all the nations of the world, can only reach
a state of enduring peace and proper progress if it is realized that the
individual must dominate the state and not the other way around, then
what was done in the Second W-orld War was something which serves the
future of humanity. Now, I go further.
As we see it in Australia, this is the basic question in
Vietnam. It is claimed this is a civil war. We do not see it that way.
We see it as your President sees it, and as I believe your President's
predecessors saw it, as another test of whether small nations are to be
subdued by force, as another test of whether the state or the individual
is to be the unit by which humanity progresses. And because we see it
that way, we contribute. We do not contribute a great deal, but we do
have Navy, Air Force, Army there. We do what we can to help, because
we think that what you are doing to help the South Vietnamese is right.
I do not mean that all the people in my country feel this
way, because I do not. But I do mean that the vast majority of them, the
last time they had a chance to express their opinion, felt this way. And
I am confident that the next time they have a chance to express their
opinion, they will feel this way--though in the interregnums I have no
doubt that minorities will protest, will carry banners, will get television
coverage, will get press coverage, but will not represent the feelings of
my own nation. Now, let me tell you a little of my own nation-those of you
who have not been there. I know there were thirty or so who recently came
through--we were delighted to see them. We are a country of some 12
million people. We are a country of immense national resources which
have not yet been properly or fully exploited. We are a country, as I
believe, where frontiers lie for those who are willing to come and live
with us, for those who are willing to provide that capital we need to help
us develop into a significant power--a more significant power. Let me
tell you some of the things that have happened in the last ten years in this
comparatively new country.
In that time, our gross national product has risen from
5003 million to $ 18, 800 million--an eighty per cent increase. Despite
the growth, the average annual increase in our gross national product
has been five and a half per cent. Our fixed capital investment has
doubled, from 500 million a year to 000 million a year. And ninety
per cent of that capital investment comes from our own resources--ten
per cent from abroad. We have invested twenty-six per cent of our gross
national product in this kind of growth. VWe have increased our population
over a period--give or take a year or two--from nine million to twelve
million. Well, Mr. President, I do not think that is too bad a record.
And if I sound as if I am bragging, it is because I am. But it is only the
beginning. 
They have already discovered most of the oil, sixty per
cent of the oil that we are going to require for our present needs, and
there will be discovered all that is going to be required for our future
needs. The mineral resources already uncovered are fabulous. And
yet I believe the surface has scarcely been scratched.
I am certain that given ten, twenty years, we will be able
to provide a nation of twenty million--twenty-five million people--and
we will be able to give to each individual in that nation that kind of social
justice which we believe must be a part of any successful country. We
must see that those who are subjected to the " slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune", to illness and old age, ( against which they have been
unable to provide) to invalidism, are properly looked after, and we will
do this. We will play our part, as we grow, along the lines I have
roughly sketched, in the region in which we live, because I think that not
only we, but all the wealthy countries of the world must, if they are in
the future to be understood-must, if they are, in the future, to see the
kind of Governments which will serve their people established in Asia,
be prepared to help contribute and establish those countries in Asia for
the benefit of the people there and for the benefit of ourselves and of our
children and of our grandchildren.
I think that in this task that lies before us, we have been
enormously helped by the United States. I believe the completion of this
task will be brought the more quickly to fruition by the continued help of
the United States in the area--not the United States alone but by the United
States, with us, and such others as will join in that area in the economic
development, the raising of the living standards of the Asian people, the
raising, therefore, of the requirements, the material requirements of
the Asian people, and the protection of what I began to talk about as
political requirements, but will finish talking about as spiritual
requirements. Because in fact, that is what political freedom meansit
means that economic freedom must be provided through political
freedom, but it also means that the innate desire of every individual to
deVelop to the top of his bent, to the best of his capacity, in h ichever
way he wants to go, must be encouraged and permitted, subject only to
his not exploiting those others among whom he lives.
Well, Sir, you have got a lot of questions set down there,
and perhaps I have talked long enough. But I did want to let you know
just the gratitude we feel to the United States, just the certainty of
development in the future we feel for ourselves. And I think there is
almost no Australian and no Australian leader who would not say to you,
even if he is in a different party--and different parties are not much
good--but if he is in a different party, he would at least join with me in
this, to say we are going to grow, we are going to try to provide an
example of a nation along the lines I have indicated to you. We are already
on the way. I do not know where the end of that way will be, but I do know
this--that a nation's reach must exceed its grasp, or what is a future for.
And our reach is pretty great, I think.
I thank you.
President romley: Mr. Frimne Minister, please tell us what you can
about the results of your talks with the President and his advisers. / 4 
Prime Minister: I would be delighted to, Mr. Secretary. We had
some most interesting talks on a whole variety of subjects. But of course
since they were private talks, it is difficult to say any more than that, or
they would cease to be private talks.
Q. It has been reported, Mr. Prime Minister, that you envisage an Israeli
style defence posture for Australia in the future, relying on the ability to
launch punitive forays to discourage aggression. Is this so?
PM. This was never a statement made by me publicly. This was
a statement attributed to me by interpreters of what had been said at a
private meeting. And I cannot discuss or disclose what was said at a
private meeting--that is a Party meeting. But I would be prepared to say
this--that we, in Australia, when I talk of an Israeli-type capacity for
defence, mean a citizen army, properly armed, properly quipped, and
ready to be able to go at a moment's notice into action, just as the Israelis
were able to go at a moment's notice into action. This does not necessarily
mean that such an army is to be used only in Australia, because we have
treaty commitments with the United States, and we regard those as our
greatest shield. But it does mean that I would like to see allied with
mobility of forces, spearheads able to be used immediately, and a build-up
of that kind of citizen military force. which means that for a large part of
the year an individual carries out whatever his occupation may be, but is
available for call-up, is trained for part of the time each year) and is
properly armed and equipped should an emergency ever arise.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, what will Australia do to bolster Malaysia -Singapore
defence after Britain leaves?
PM. Mr. President, that is a matter which is to be discussed on
June at the Five Power Meeting to be held in Kuala Lumpur, between
Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore. Until
that Five Power Meeting has been held, and indeed quite possibly this first
Five Power Meeting may only lead to future discussions amongst the
same powers--but until those matters have been hammered out, a precise
answer to what I take to be a question of defence rather than economic help
and other help just simply could not be given. It is on 10O June that talks
begin to see what all the various countries concerned in the region are
prepared or able or willing to do.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, you proscribed defence, but indicate
you leave open economic. Would you care to discuss that.
Pm. Well, we already provide considerable economic assistance
to the area, and not only to Malaysia and Singapore, but to the area which
includes Indonesia, our nearest neighbour, and our most populous
neighbour. Through the Colombo Rlan, a considerable amount is provided.
A great deal of technical and scientific training and training in public
administration is given in our own universities. We have in Australia
some 130, 0,00 Asian students at the moment--not all from Colombo Plan.
But we have the equivalent of one complete Australian university devoted
to training Asian administrators, Asian doctors, whatever it might be. We
of course will continue to do that. I think the United Nations or somebody
in the United Nations has suggested that all countries ought to give one per
cent of their gross national product--not all countries--that a number of
countries ought to give one per cent of their gross national product to a lot
of other countries. We do not see any particular point in picking out a
specific figure like that. But we are, per head, I think, from memory,
something like the third ranking country in the world in the provision of
foreign aid of various kinds. 
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, with : Emerson, Roche, and Newcombe,
all professionals now, is Australia prepared to surrender the Davis Cup
to the United States?
PM. Well Mr. President, can you tell me when a tennis player
is an amateur and when he is a professional, and when you can, I will
answer that question!
Q. With the United States having second thoughts about the
F-li! aircraft, is Australia considering cancelling its purchase rather
than to be saddled with an inferior machine?
PM. Now, Mr. President, I would hate to get into an intercompany
argument about the capacities of any particular aircraft, Whoever wrote
that question states that this is an inferior machine. On the other hand,
there does seem to be quite a body of opinion that it is an extremely good
machine indeed. I understand that at this stage of development, the F I11
has had rather fewer accidents than the Phantom had at the same stage
of development. This at least is what I am told. And the specific answer
to the first part of your question, Sir, is no--we have contracted to buy
F-111aircraft. We have a team over here now seeing whether there are,
as with most developing aircraft, some bugs that need to be ironed out.
When they are ironed out to the satisfaction of our own team, then we
would propose to continue with the purchases that we have already
undertaken to make.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, do you think the peace talks in Paris
should include representatives from South Vietnam?
PM. I cannot answer for South Vietnam, and I would not propose
to. But as far as my own country is concerned, at this stage of the peace
talks in P-aris, which I imagine are really talks to see whether there is
a base for any peace tallks--we see at this stage no requirement for
Australian participation. ' We do have there an External Affairs
representative--that is a State Department representative using your
terms--and he is in close consultation with Mr. Harriman and Mr. Vance.
But this does not seem to me to be the sort of exercise where a lot of
people s it around a table-it ha s not reached anywhere nea r that pointto
work out an old-fashioned Versailles Peace Treaty. Rather it is a
circumstance where the United States' representatives, the North
Vietnamese representatives are having discussions. We have the
opportunity to express our views to the United States' representatives
as various aspects of those discussions arise. That is all we wish. And
I cannot speak for South Vietnam.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, do you endorse Prime Minister Holt's
position of " All the way with LBJ". Are you all the way with LBJ, another
questioner asks?
PM. Two of them. Let me perhaps answer it in this way as in a
sense I answered it when I first came. We think that the United* States has
in its history so far done more than any other country to protect the rights
of small nations and the liberties of the individual. We have treaty
obligations under the ANZUS pact with the United States. We form our
own judgments and make our own policies on aspects of foreign affairs
as they may arise in the future. But I think it likely, on past example,
that the objects of the United States would be likely to be the same objects
as those of the Australian people. And that, I think, is what I will say on
that. 
ti er Do you plan to visit Vietnam and other Asian countrieq
PM. Yes, Sir, I will be arriving back in Australia on 1 June,
and leaving--if my memory serves me right--on 5 June for Vietnam,
and from Vietnam to Malaya, Singapore and Indonesia. And I ought to
make it clear that the only reason that the other Asian countries are not
included is because there just are not enough hours in the day or days in
the month to make this possible when there are also local political
requirements. They will come later.
Q. Could Australia's prosperity survive a recession in Japanthat
is, is the Australian economy now too reliant on exports of ore?
PM. I think if there were a serious recession in Japan, that it
would have some effect on the purchases of our iron ore. But the
Australian prosperity I thinkc would still survive. It is now so much more
broadly based than it used to be. Certainly Japan in many ways is one of
our best customers. The United States is our third best customer. Vie
can even survive a recession in the United States. But I think neither
one of those possibilities is likely.
Q. In the interests of promoting tourism to Australia and the
South Pacific, do you contemplate modifying the ban against air charters
to Australia?
PM. Look, this frankly I do not know. I would have to talk to
my Minister for Civil Aviation about that, and get all the pros and cons
of it. I will write you a letter.
Q. How do you feel about reports that New Zealand wants to
become a state of Australia?
PM. Well, I feel they are inaccurate, and grossly exaggerated,
like Mark Twain said about the report of his death. I have just recently
been in New Zealand, and spoken to their Government, and they, I am
quite sure, Sir, do not want to become a state of Australia. I do not
know whether I should go any further and raise any queries as to whether
Australia wants them to be a state anyway, because there are difficulties
about federal governments which plague us as it is. But I do add to that
that what we are arranging with New Zealand, and what New Zealand is
arranging with us is closer and closer economic ties, and a kind of free
market, as it were, where a factory established in New Zealand can have
products in Australia entering either free of duty or with less duty than
many other countries. But they are quite properly a very independent
and proud nation.
Q. Is the American duty on Australian wool hurting that
industry badly, and have you askXed the United States to modify it?
PM. The answer to the first part of that question is, it is hurting
it, and the answer to the second part of that question is yes, frequently.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, are you in any way disturbed by the
anti-Vietnam, anti-war sentiment being expressed in the United States?
PM. It is difficult for somebody at as great a distance as I
am to assess the real depth of the anti-Vietnam sentiment being expressed
in a country 3, 000 miles away, or however many thousand miles away it is.
/ 7 
7.
But we do have the same kind of expression in our own country, and it is
an expression of a very small minority. My mind, Mr. President, goes
to a quotation from a speech by one of your former great Presidents,
Theodore Roosevelt, who said that the dangers to freedom in the sort of
society that the United States has or would have do not come so much.
from majorities as from organized and fanatical minorities who attempt
to impose their will or their wishes by other than constitutional means
or the ballot box. This I think is the situation in my own country as
regards those who express, violently express, anti-Vietnam sentiment.
What the situation is in the United States, I don't know. There are, of
course, others. I speak of people who make violent protests. There
are of course others who have doubts in my own country, and no doubt
in yours. There are people who see this as a civil war in my own
country, as no doubt in yours. I do not agree with them. And they are
not worrying in Australia because they are not in a majority in my view.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, we have writers from all segments
of industry here. How is oil prospecting going in Australia? You mentioned
oil in your speech. Would you elaborate?
PM. Yes. Well, the two major finds, or the major find so far
has been under the sea, between the state of Victoria, where a combination
of companies--Esso, one of yours, Broken Hill Pty., one of ours-has
discovered really what looks like being, but not yet fully proved to be,
very, very great oil deposits indeed. It is estimated that they have found
oil on Barrow Island in Western Australia, thousands of miles away, and
some other smaller fields at Moonie. already provide sixty per cent of
our present oil requirements. Oil prospecting is continuing, and I
believe, though there is nothing but faith behind this belief-that more and
more will be found, and that we will be able to be completely independent
in this field.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, is the fact that you have an American
wife a disadvantage to you in Australian politics?
PM. Mr. President, it would be quite impossible for any man in
this room ever to say that a wife he had of whatever nationality was a
disadvantage. But I can add to that, and say that not only is it not a
disadvantage-it is in my view a great advantage, particularly since we
discovered, much to her and my surprise, a year or so ago, that she is
not only an American citizen, but also an Australian citizen. So we get
the best of both worlds.
Q. Mr. P-rimie Minister, when would you say the next election
will take place in Australia?
PM. The time at which the next election should take place, if
the House of Representatives runs its full term, is towards the end of
1969. That is the time when it would take place, if the House of
Representatives ran its full term.
Q. Someone asks--when will the Sydney Opera House be
finished? Will you have that open house so we can all at least come and
visit?
PM. Well, I would hope that you would all come and visit before
the Sydney Opera House is completed, because the last party we had
through was thoroughly enjoyable from our point of view, and I think from
their point of view, and gave us extremely good publicity coverage. But
/ 8 
8.
there -does seem to be some argument about the precise date at which the
Cpera House to which you refer will be f inished. Indeed, Sir, some of
the more disrespectful citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia are
referring to the F-ill1 as a flying opera hotse. I am not. But I think
within a year or two. It is really taking shape. It will be something when
it is done, and something worth coming to see. But don't wait for it--just
come.
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, before the last question, we want to
extend to you our certificate of appreciation awarded for meritorious
service to correspondents of press, radio and television in the capitol
and our traditional press club official silk necktie.
PM. Thank you very much Sir.
Q. Finally, Mr. Prime Minister--is it true that Matilda has
stopped waltzin-g, too, in Australia, and is now doing the. frug?
PM. No, Sir, that is completely untrue. Mind you--what did
you call that-
Q. It is a dance.
PM. I know it is a dance. I rather think that occasionally some
foreign ministers get photographed doing it. But we are quite versatile,
quite versatile, and the young people and the not-so-young people certainly
do whatever that last dance you mentioned was. But they have not stopped
Waltzing Matilda, because Waltzing Matilda is not our national anthemit
is our national song. There have, I think, been no occasions on which
Australian troops have marched to war except to the strains of Waltzing
Matilda. There have, 1 think, been no occasions when vanguards of
Australian' troops entered cities, such as Bardia, and with a certain
braggadocio, hauled a slouched hat to the top of a flagpole, when they did
not do it to the strains of Waltzing Matilda. There won't be everybody
in Australia who agrees with me on this. But my own mind goes back to a
time in London during the blitz, when a few of us waliked into a nightclubbecause
in those days we were young enough to walk into night-clubsin
Air Force uniform, Australian Air Force un-iform, and as we entered
the band, no doubt because it had run out of other tunes to play, suddenly
struck up Waltzing Matilda, and I think that all Australians, with me, were
stirred, and will continue to be stirred by this song--even though we do
this other dance you mentioned in the intervals. 



THE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS 8 JUL 96B3
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
As some Premiers requested that the financial assistance grants
arrangements be listed for discussion at this Conference, I think it would be
useful if I were to say two things:
* First, to indicate by how much these grants are likely to grow next year
under the formula agreed between us three years ago; and
* Secondly, to indicate the Australian Government's attitude towards any
suggestion that we should change the five-year agreement to which we
have all subscribed and which obtains until 30 June, 1970.
Formula Grants for 1968-69
In the present financial year we now know that the agreed formula
provided the States with grants amounting to $ 907, 539, 000. This was
5 million more than the amounts estimated a year ago and included in the
budgets of both the Commonwealth and the States. As compared with the grants
paid in 1966-67 the formula produced an increase this year of approximately
$ 81 million. The formula for determining the grant to each State next year,
that is 1968/ 69, will take account of the estimated rise in average wages in the
twelve months to 31 March 1969 and the increase in each State's population
during the calendar year 1968 while the grants so produced will be increased
by a betterment factor of 1. 2 per cent.
It is not possible at this stage to make a reliable estimate of the
future movement in average wages. Nevertheless, for purposes of planning our
budgets we need to make an estimate of the grants and for this particular purpose
we have calculated the effects of an increase of 5. 5 per cent in average wages
in the twelve months to the end of next March. On this basis, and with he added
assumption that the increase in each State's population will be the same * in 1968
as it was in 1967, the grants payable to the States in 1969 will be about
$ 989 million, or $ 82 million more than in the year just ending. If the increase
in average wages proved to be 6 per cent, the grant would amount to about
$ 994 million; if the rise in average wages were as great as 6-1 per cent, the
grants would be about 1, -300 million. I mention these latter figures to illustrate
a broad range of possibilities.
For purposes of our discussion, I suggest that we use the estimate
of $ 989 million as the prospective amount of the grants next year. This would
represent an increase of about $ 82 million or 9 per cent as compared with
the formula grants paid in the present financial year. I am circulating a table
giving details of these figures for each State.
Commonwealth's Attitude to Revisions of Formula
" The Commonwealth's general attitude towards the formula grant
arrangements themselves is that we wish the agreement made
between us and the States to be kept. The present formula grant
arrangements are designed to operate for a period of five years
as from 1 July 1965 and they therefore do not come up for review
until 1973. It is fair to say that, from the States' standpoint, the present
agreement represents a great improvement on the arrangements which operated
prior to 1965. When the grants were reviewed at the Premiers' Conference in
June 1965, two main improvements were effected in the grants formula namely,
/ 2 
-2
a trebling of the betterment factor and a reduction in the time lag before changes
in population were reflected in the grants. At that Conference, a special
addition of 2 million was made to Victoria's formula grant for 1965-66
resulting in further increases in subsequent years and it was agreed to increase
Queensland's share of the grants by adding 0 million to the amount on which
Queensland's grant for each of the five years of the arrangements would be
calculated, In 1967, two further concessions were made by the Commonwealth
in the grants arrangements an amount of $ 5 million was added to the grants
on which the formula operates and arrangements were made to reduce the time
lag before increases in wages are reflected in the grants. This latter revision
gave effect-to a proposal which the Commonwealth had advanced at the June
1965 Premiers' Conference as being desirable but which the States preferred
not to agree to at that time.
As a result of these changes, the grants formula has now been
improved to the point where it virtually ensures that the grants to the States
will increase at a faster rate than Gross National Product. It is, I think, alsd
worth pointing out that, under the present formula, the grants not only rise in
proportion to increases in the two main factors causing increases in State
expenditures rises, in the wage costs and increases in population but also
provide an element for improvement of standards of State services, nan-ely,
a betterment factor which increases the grants by 1. 2 per cent each year.
We recognise that, even under the improved grants formula,
these grants have not been growing quite as fast as the growth in State
expenditures desired by the States. Clearly, however, the Commonwealth
could not undertake a commitment to underwrite any rate of growth by which
State Governments might decide to increase their expenditures. This is
particularly true at a time when the Commonwealth's commitments in other
fields particularly defence have been increasing at a rapid rate. Nor should
we overlook the assistance which the Commonwealth has been providing in other
directions to the States. Commonwealth assistance in such fields as education,
roads and railways has been increasing at a rapid rate. In fact, in recent
years, total Commonwealth assistance to the States has been increasing at a
faster rate than Gross National Product and it has also been absorbing an
increasing share of Commonwealth tax revenues.
In this regard, in addition to the formula revenue grants to the
States, specific purpose capital payments to the States, about which the
Treasurer will have something to say in more detail at the Loan Council,
have also been increasing. For the moment, it is sufficient for me to, say
that these additional payments to the States are expected to increase next
year to $ 330 million, equivalent to an increase of 20 per cent on the payments
of $ 275 million this year.
It is sometimes suggested that the revenue grants should increase
at the same rate as what is described as the " natural" growth in Commonwealth
income tax collections. It has also been suggested that this natural growth
of income tax collections is in the region of 10 per cent per annum. Between
1959-60 and 1966-67 Commonwealth income tax collections did, in fact,
increase by 10 per cent per annum. That increase, however, reflected a
significant effective increase in tax rates. In actual fact, there is no clearly
definable " natural" growth rate of Commonwealth income tax collections and,
by choosing different periods, different answers can be produced. Between
1956-57 and 1966-67, for instance, the average rate of growth of
Commonwealth income tax collections was only about 8 per cent per annum.
In short, our attitude is that requests for variations in the
agreement reached between us on the grants formula can not
be considered until the present arrangements come up for
review in the course of 1969-70. Clearly, there would be / 3 
-3-
little point in having arrangements which were agreed to
run for a certain period of time if such arrangements were
to be altered, or be subject to review, every year."
Action to meet Special Difficulties
At the same time, the Commonwealth is always ready to consider
making assistance available outside the formula grant arrangements if any State
is faced with serious financial difficulties arising from circumstances beyond its
control. I illustrate this fact by referring to the assistance which the
Commonwealth has provided to help those States who have been facing major
problems arising from the recent drought. Over the last three years, the
Commonwealth has provided about $ 84 million for this purpose.
The Commonwealth has been helping in two ways. First, we have
made available over the last two years special revenue assistance amounting to
about $ 25 million to help offset the effects of the drought on the revenues of the
States concerned. ( This year, such assistance amounted to $ 14 million.) We
have also been meeting virtually the whole cost of the drought relief measures
which have been instituted to help farmers and to provide employment grants in
the drought areas. We have done this in co-operation with the States.
Commonwealth reimbursements to the States in respect of these relief measures
have amounted over the past three years to nearly $ 60 million of which
approximately $ 23 million has been expended in the current financial year. These
relief measures will co. tinue for a period in 1968-69, and as there will also be
large claims arising from commitments made in 1967-68, our reimbursements
to the States next year will again be substantial.
General I conclude on this note. These days, all Governments
Commonwealth and State are faced with heavy commitments and with increasing
demands for the provision of Government services. I appreciate that the State
Governments are called upon to discharge important responsibilities. But I am
sure that the Premiers will appreciate that the Commonwealth, in its approach to
the problems we are discussing today, must also consider very carefully its own
national responsibilities. In saying this, I am not referring simply to our
increasing defence c: ommitments though these are important enough in
themselves. I am refer; rng also to much wider responsibilities for the economic
health of the nation. We must keep the Australian economy moving strongly but
not unhealthily ahead, we must maintain a sound external financial position in
these unsettied times and we must avoid inflationary conditions which could
undermine our efforts in all these directions.
JUNE 1968 



PREMIERS' CONFERENCE 1968
STATE TAXATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr john Gorton
I thinkLl it is the proper time for me to make clear the
Commonwealth's attitude on this question of possible extension of the areas
in which the States levy taxation. In particular, I think i must ma-ke clear
our attitude towards the imposition of States receipts duties on wages and
salaries and similar receipts of personal icome which we regard as income
tax. We take as our starting point the arrangements which were
made in 1965 governing the payment of the financial assistance grants.
These arrangements, like the ones that preceded them, were made on the
' tahssumaptiton that the exerciseof taxing powers would remain unchanged and
the States and their authorities would continue to pay Commonwealth
pay-roll tax. An agreement on that basis was, 1 understand, explicitly
stated at the time. I believe that the States then knew that the Commonwealth
of was not undertaking to pay the agreed grants to the States unless the States
refrained from levying income taxes themselves. That was the position, and
as far as we are concerned that remains the position. We have em phasised
that the introduction of State income taxation would in our view be a serious
breach of the present arrazzgernents.
Over the whole period since World War 11, the Commonwealth
has adhered firmly to the principle of uniform, income taxation and opposed
any suggestion of double income taxation. M\ y own Government is convinced
Sthat this principle is sound and beneficial to the nation and that any multiplica-
Wtion of income taxes would be undesirable both economically and socially*
Because th~ e imposition of income tax and the rates of income tax imposed have
' nmaajor timipolicatnions, f or economic and social policies throughout the whole.
the Commonwealth will not stand by and permit its use of income
taxation for policy purposes to be impaired by the itroduction of State income
taxes. At last year's Conference, there was some discussion as to
what scope there might be within the terms of the present financial assistance
arrange ments for the States to extend their fields of taxation should they
desire to do so. In that context the question of State purchase taxes or turnover
taxes on business receipts was raised. The Commonwealth's attitude was that
it would not be opposed in principle to State taxation of this kind providedit was
not carried to the point where it would significantly affect Commonwealth
revenue collections or the carrying out of national policies.
Shortly afterwards, Victoria introduced its new receipts duty
which extended beyond taxation on turnover with which we have no quarrel
to taxation on wages and salaries and other personal incomes. The Commonwealth
stated its objection to this duty insofar as it applied to wages and salaries and
other comparable payments such as superannuation. I know that a tax similuir 
-2
in many respects to the Victorian one was already in operation in Western
Australia, and I icnow, too, that the stamp duty legislation of other States
has at one time or another involved minor imposts on wages and salaries,
but we regard any impost on wages and salaries as in fact, substance 4nd
principle, a form of income tax. The Commonwealth is firmly opposed to
such a levy on wages and salaries and will continue to be so opposed.
In our view, such a levy is in breach of the preseat financial
assistance arrangements agree-d to by all States. W-e believe it is wrong
to impose more than one direct tax on Wages, salaries and related . forms
of income, and if such a practice were to become established and to spread,
it would not only add to the tax burdens on wage and salary earnlers which
already are by no means inconsiderable, but also it could give rise to all
of the evils of differential rates of income tax on citizens living in different
States, from which the system of uniform taxation has rid this country.
We want the States to refrain from imposing receipts duty
on wages and salaries and comparable payments. if these imposts are
still in existence when we come to review the present arrangements in
1970, that will be a decisive factor in determining our attitude on the
allocation to a State imposing that form of taxation. In the meantkme,
should a State that continues this impost on wages and salaries impose it
a higher rate than at present, we would mnove forthwith to amend our
legislation and seec to reduce that State's grant.
1 have already said that we do not object in principle to
modest extensions of State taxation into the general field of business
receipts or business turnover, provided it is not carried to a point where
it could significantly affect the Commonwealth's ability to carry out
national policies or to raise Commonwealth revenue. Subject to that
proviso, there would be -no conflict with the present grants arrangement
if any State decided to move into this field. But we do not suggest or urge
this. We are ready to accept it within the limits I have stated.
In recent times there have been suggestions that some States
might impose a tax on pay-rolls, presumably on the lines of the Commonwealth
pay-roll tax. We have studied that possibility and the various
implications it could have. It is right that i should tell you that the Commonwealth
does not look with favour on such action by any State. " We would
regard it as cutting across major Australian interests and purposes.
Pay-roll taxation is an important source of national rexenue and it is also
an instrument that can be used to promoite activities and developments of
benefit to our economy. For example, the rebate of pay-roll tax is
basically involved in the Commonwealth's scheme of export incentives,
which has been of marked success in promoting the growth of exports,
especially of manufactures, and this in turn has helped all of us. W-e
regard that as a kXind of tax that ought to be reserved to the Australian
Government and administered on a nation-wide basis. 
0? 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
million
N. S. W.
Victoria
Qld. S. A.
W. A.
Tasmania Six States 1966-67
275.1 207.5 124.8 93.8 85.9 34.5
821. 6( b) 1967-68
302. 8
228.3 139.6
102. 7
96. 1
38.0
907. 5( b) 1968-69( a)
Amount 328.9 247.7 153.9 111. 1
106. 2
41.2
989.0 Increase 26. 1
19.4 14.3 8.4
10. 1
3; 2
81.5
Assumes an increase of 5. 5 per cent in average
wages for the twelve months ended March 1969
and the same increase in each State's population
during 1968 as during 1967
In addition, the following amounts of special revenue
assistance were provided in 1966-67 and 1967-68 to help
offset effects of drought on State revenue
N. S. W.
Victoria
QId. S. A. 1966-67
$ million 8.0
2.75
10.75 1967-68
$ million 5.1 4.8 2.3 1.7
14.0
The following reimbursements have also been made
to the States by the Commonwealth to meet the cost of drought relief
measures: 1965-66
million 14.2 7.5 1966-67
million 13.0 4.9
21.7 17.9
N. S. W.
Victoria
QId. S. A. 1967-68
million 7.6 8.0 3.0 1.0
19. 6 Total million 34.8 15.4
59.2 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
Li B SAIGON
WELCOME BY VIETNAMESE PRIME MINISTER,
TRAN VAN HUONG, AT AIRPORT 7 JUNE 1968
Mr. Prime Minister, it is a very great pleasure and a very
great honour for the Vietnamese people, for the Government of the Republic
of Vietnam, and for myself to welcome on our soil today the representative
of a people to whom we are bound by so many ties.
Since Vietnam regained its independence and liberty, it has
had to defend that independence and that liberty against an enemy who is
set on destroying them in order to impose on the Vietnamese people a
system of government ard a way of life that they rejected as -not corresponding
with their interests or their best traditions, In this struggle, the Vietnamese
people have benefited from the sympathy and support without reservation
from the Australian Government and people in all fields political, military,
economic and humanitarian. We are therefore happy to have the opportunity
to express through you our gratitude to the Government and people of Australia.
Mr. Prime Minister, you arrive in Vietnam at a time when
our common enemy, international communism, is intensifying its efforts
with a view to obtaining a seeming military success in order to support
his political demands in Paris as elsewhere.
We have decided not to fall into the communist trap. We love
and hope for peace, but we will not accept a peace dictated by an enemy who
himself knows that hie cannot gain victory. We are convinced that the
Australian Government and people will continue to work closely with the
Vietnamese Government and people, as with the other nations which are
friends and allies of Vietnam, in order to prevent communism spreading
south of the 17th parallel.
Mr. Prime Minister, in the name of the Vietnamese people
and Government, I bid you welcome and a pleasant and fruitful time in
Vietnam. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
SAIGON_
STATEMENT MADE BY THE
MR. JOHN GCRTON 7 JUNE 1968
Thank you for the warmth of your welcome and for your
generous remarks about my country. I received with great pleasure the
invitation which the Government of Vietnam kindly extended to me soon
after I became Prime Minister of Australia.
I was anxious to make an early visit to Vietnam because
Australia's continuing commitment of men and material to support the
freedom and development of the Republic of Vietndm occupies so large a
part of our thoughts and affects at so many points our Governmental
policies. I believe that my discussions wikH the leaders. of your nation,
and the personal contacts shall make with them, will contribute to
strengthening the friendship between our two countries,
I see this visit as reaff irming Australia's support for
Vietnam. It is also part of the process of consultation Which takes place
frequently, and at all levels, between representatives of our two countries,
and our allies, and which does much to consolidate and improve our common
efforts. Such consultations are of particular importance when, at the same
time as conversations are taking place in Paris, North Vietnamese aggression
is continuing here. I look forward to meeting my countrymen who are now fighting
and working by your side the soldiers, sailors and airmen of the Australian
Force Vietnam, our aid experts, and the members of our medical teams
whose humanitarian work exemplifies the co-operation between our two
countries in many fields of endeavour.
I welcome this opportunity to pay personal tribute to the
valour of the Vietnamese people and to the achievements of the Vietnamese
Government in these tragic and difficult times. Australians have admired
what your people have achieved in adopting a constitution, electing a
representative Government and laying the foundations of national reconciliation
and reconstruction regardless of the dangers and complex stresses of war.
We have admired your courage and determination in doing this despite the
campaign of terror designed to deter you. We salute your soldiers for their
sustained defence of their homeland, and their courage in face of the present
offensives. Our deep sympathies go to all those civilians-and soldiers
alike who have suffered because an unwanted and bitter war has been
brought deliberately and callously into their midst. In the face of the
enemy's aim to destroy you it has been your constant purpose to defencd
and, at the same time to build a nation.
Few countries have been faced with such a formidable task.
No country has been more determined to achieve its goals. Our purpose
is to help you to achieve them. / 2 
2.
At Manila in 1966, the allied nations clearly expressed
their hopes and objectives for a peaceful settlement of the war in Vietnam,
Our aims have not changed, and no military, political and
diplomatic efforts by Hanoi will undermine our resolve to achieve a lasting
peace under which the people of Vietnam will live in freedom and justice. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
NUL DAT
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
TO AUSTRALIAN TROOPS 8 JUNE 1968
There are perhaps one or two things I would like to say to you
and say to you as representatives of all the people in this camp and of all the
Australians in Vietnam who aren't here to say to you what I would like to say
to all of them. I have only been able to meet a few this morning and they are
individuals and a few from each unit. But what can be said to one can be said
to all and that is that I regard it as an honour to have the opportunity to be here
to see you, to have had the chance vicariously through you to talk to all my
countrymen here. I think you are doing a magnificent job for our own country,
and though you may be far away from it, I feel the results will be felt in our
own country for decades to come.
I suppose sometimes, because of some of the activity that goes
on home, you may feel that the vast majority of Australians are not thoroughly
behind you because the newspapers tend to give publicity to any nut who carries
a placard or sits in the middle of a road rather than to the hundred citizens,
for each one who does that, who are thoroughly behind you4 Please believe
that your Government is behind you and ninety per cent of the Australian people
are behind you in what you are trying to do. I would like to congratulate you
once more on the way that you are doing it.
That is really all that I have got to say to you. I don't think
that there is anything to add, except to repeat and to put it in a capsule, it is
an honour to meet men doing the job they have to do as well as you are doing
it. And it's an encouragempent to meet men doing a job which is of such
importance to their nation now and in the future.
You will have heard talk of things that are called peace talks
in Paris. They aren't peace talks. They are preliminary talks to see whether
there is any basis for a chance to have talks later. And you will be interested
to know, those of you who are here and have been here for some time, that,
so far it has been quite impossible to persuade the North Vietnamese negotiators
to admit that there are any North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam at all.
I daresay that you would be able to correct them on that if you could get over
there, but that is the stage it has reached so far. Now I wouldn't build too
many hopes too quickly on that. The hopes are to complete the job, to finish
the job and to give the South Vietnamese people a chance to elect their own
Government, and to demonstrate that aggression by force does not pay. This
you are doing. Thank you for it. I wish I could have met you all. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
SINGAPORE
ARRIVAL STATEMENT MADE BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON 9 JU NE 1968
When I passed through Singapore last week in transit to
Vietnam I explained that my official visit here would be part of a tour
which included several South-East Asian countries. This tour is not
merely one of goodwill on my part as the new Prime Minister of Australia.
It reflects the need for an Australian Prime Minister today to widen his
knowledge of Australia's neighbours in South-East Asia and to gain, at
first hand, experience of the problems which they face and the policies
they are pursuing. I shall be having talks over the next two days with your
Prime Minister, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, and his colleagues, and renewing
my personal acquaintance with a number of them. I expect to give them
an account of my visit to Vietnam and there will be exchanges of views on
various regional questions of concern to both Governments.
My visit is not connected with the Five-Power defence talks
now commencing in Kuala Lumpur, although my discuss-ions here will
naturally include defence and security matters of common interest. The
kind of South-East Asian region that develops in the years ahead, and the
pace of its development, is of vital interest to our two countries. We
have the same basic concern to see in the South-East Asian region a
community of co-operating nations and a climate of order and stability
for national development. I look forward to seeing something of the social and
industrial achievements which are so dramatically changing the appearance
of your island. 1, also hope to learn more about your expansion programmes
for your harbours, shipping, communications and commerical facilities
and for your development and regional economic progress. Relations between
Australia and Singapore are firmly based on useful and practical co-ope ration.
We are both developing peoples, determined to use the
benefits of knowledge and modern technology for our progress and a better
life for our peoples. This is shown by the extensive range of contacts and
exchanges between our two communities, embracing commerce and
education, the professions, tourism and the arts. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
S[ NGAPORE
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton,
at Banquet given by Mr. Lee Kuan Yew JUNE 1968
Mr. Prime Minister, Mrs. Lee, Distinguished Guests Ladies and
Gentlemen: May I start, Sir, by thanking you for the honour which you;
do my country today, through me, by extending this State banquet to us.'
It is an honour the more appreciated because we feel, as later I shall take
more time to explain, that you are an example to the area of the world in
which you live and that you, and we together, may perhaps with the other
countries in the region, if they follow this example, bring not only to you,
not only to us, but to all of us in this region a stability you want, an
opportunity for. progress you want and we want, and by doing so contribute
more than we can contribute in any other way to the peaceful progress of
all of the nations so close and so neighbourly around here.
This is not the first time that I have been in Singapore. Indeed,
it is not the second, third or fourth time. But on the first timeJ. was here,
things were not so peaceful here as they are now. Because on that occasion Si
Singapore was under attack, was under threat of conquest, and indeed, was
subjected to aggression. And those of you in this room who lived through
that period of time, will know what this meant to individuals in Singapore.
And will know what it meant to the opportunity given to individuals or rather
denied to individuals in Singapore to be the arbiters of their own destiny,
to be the deciders of their own fate.
One of the objectives which we must seek in the whole of this
region and by this region I mean not only Malays, Sin gapore, Indonesia,
Australia or New Zealand but other countries including Vietnam.. one
of the objectives we must seek is to see that that kind of aggression does
not succeed in denying to the citizens of any particular area the right to be
arbiters of their own destiny. And that this is of as much importance to us
in Australia as it is to you, let me illustrate, by saying this.. a little less
than a week ago I was in Darwin, one of our northernmost Australian cities,
and as I stood there, I was closer to Saigon, and was closer to Singapore,
than I was to the southern regions of Australia in Hobart, in Tasmania. There
are no longer these great geographical divisions there used to be. There are
no longer these great differences in time and in travel that there used to be.
We are getting closer and closer together in point of time; we are getting, I
hope, closer and closer together in point of understanding. / 2 
You spoke, Sir, of expecting from Australians a hard-headed
appreciation of where Australian interests lie. I think it is natural and right
that this should be so, for the first duty of any government of any nation is to
look after and to advance the interests of those people whom that government
governs. You, I think, have the same approach. But this doesn't mean that
either country, ours, or yours, or any other country in the region can be
unconcerned with the interests of the neighbouring countries, because that
very hard-headed appreciation of which you spoke must lead one to the
conclusion that the ultimate interests of any country in a region can only
properly and fully be served if the progress, the stability, the economic
viability of the neighbouring countries are also served. For otherwise, there
is always a potential threat.
The future of this region, as you said, Mr. Prime Minister, is
likely to be shaped by the answers, as yet unknown, to the questions which you
posed. Some of them will be answered relatively soon; some of them will
take a longer time to answer. But some of them are at this very moment being
hammered out, or at least the initial steps to hammer them out are being taken,
at the Five-Power talks occurring in Kuala Lumpur; Five-Power talks which
are, as I suspect, only the precursors of discussions between the Five Powers,
but which are at least starting now and which regarding what you have said from
a purely military standpoint, are the beginning of trying to get the answers to
some of the imponderables which you have posed to us. And I think I should
say no more on that, than that these talks are progressing and that as the
answers come from them so the future course of events is the more likely to
be properly assessed. But stability won't depend merely on these kind of talks. In the
long-range, stability will rather depend on the economic progress which the
various governments of this region can secure for their peoples, and this, in
turn, will depend on the dedication of such governments to the interests of all
their peoples, not just that section which forms the governing class. It will
depend also on the administrative capacity of these governments to translate
their intentions into accomplishments, for only in that way will the peoples of
the nations in this region feel an identification with the governments who rule
their nations and swing * in behind those governments to help themselves and
sacrifice and work to see that a government in which they bd ieve will bring
to them the benefits that sacrifice and work will ultimately bring. That, I
think, will * be the abiding basis for security and stability in this region; which
is not to say, Sir, that it will be the only basis.
And I say, with genuine belief as far as I am concerned, that
here in this city state, perhaps the inheritor of the tradition of Venice, and
perhaps a city state destined to hold longer than did Venice that leadership
in this part of the world, you have provided a shining example of what a
government concerned with advancement of its peoples can do. You have
shown what a government which has skilled and devoted public administrators
can achieve, and the loyalty and support which such a government can generate
in the people it rules. / 3 
It fills me, Sir, with respect and envy to think that a
government is able, at an election, to win every seat.. to win every seat
on its record, and I have no doubt that every seat was won on your record.
I think that the drive, the energy, the hard work, the initiative which you
have shown, the realization you have shown of the possibilities inherent in a
private enterprise system damped down by government to see it doesn't
become an exploited system, guided by government to see that its energies
are pulled into channels which are designed for the public good, but not
overseen in every detail of its work by government and by bureaucrats
have achieved what this city state has, in fact, achieved.
I hope that this example which I have called a shining example
will be able to be emulated by all the countries in this region, because I am
sure that ifit is, then the worries one has of subversion, of terrorism, Qf
infiltration will be so minimal that they will not any longer pose a significant
threat. And because if it is, then I feel that the other major threat that might
hang over the region, that of an organized invasion, would run so counter to
world opinion that it would have no chance of achieving what it set out to do.
So these are the abiding things on which the stability and security and progress
and prosperity of this region must be built.
Of course going along with them, especially in the initial stages,
must be some significant capacity to reinforce * what one is doing with the
military arm. But, Prime Minister, I know that you and I have the same
ultimate goal, the same ideal of what might be achieved, and I know that you
and I both realize the inherent difficulties which w ill need to be overcome and
the slow progress which will necessarily be made, because these new worlds
cannot, be built and varnished and brought. new into being in a day..
But knowing this, I assure you, Sir, of this: we stand ready,
in my own country, to endeavour to play our part in a co-operative enterprise
with you to bring about what I believe we want, and we expect, and I have no
doubt that we will get. And just as you have pointed out that we have reached
the stage now in history as a result of hard work and endeavour over 200 years,
and have in front of us the future because we must look to that and not to the
past so I believe if you and we and the other nations of this region can achieve
this administrative capacity, can use aid from whatever source it comes and
see that it is used to the utmost benefit of all the people and is not wasted, then
those 200 years of which you spoke are but a prelude.
Mr. Prime Minister, I am reminded of this saying: " All of
the pas * t is prelude", which has been irreverently translated as meaning, " You
ain't seen nothing yet". Really, I think this is true, be cause casting one's
mind forward, and we can only do it for ten years, for a decade, but tryirg to
cast it forward further still it is possible to envisage here, not in Singapore,
here in this region, in Australia, in New Zealand, in Singapore, in Indonesia,
in Malaysia and in bordering countries, a technological base, and education
and administrative capacity, which will enable each to develop and advance in
peace and in progress. / 4 
That, Sir, I think, you and I would seek to see achieved and
that, Sir, while * we each hold our respective positions, we will work to see
achieved. I hope that not only will my wife and I return here to see you, but
that you will come to see us, for the invitation for you and your wife, Sir,
stands open for as long as you are the Prime Minister of Singapore, and a
private invitation stands open if you ever cease to be Prime Minister.
Thank you.
I, 



' 09 1~ a, VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
MALAYSIA
ARRIVAL STATEMENT MADE BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON 11 JUNE 1968
I am glad to have this opportunity to visit Malaysia soon after
taking office as Prime Minister of Australia. Our two countries have long
been in warm and friendly association. I look forward with pleasure to once
again meeting'and talking with your revered Prime Minister and his colleagues,
so many of whom are well known to us in Australia.
It is a pleasant experience to fly into K,, uala Lumpur and see
this beautiful and well laid out city and the attractive, prosperous countryside
which surrounds it. Over the years, peaceful suburbs and rural development
have transformed areas which were once the scenes of bitter conflict. The
peace and harmony in Malaysia is the more noticeable because I have recently
been in South Vietnam. a country and people still suffering the ravages of
war. Yet one can take heart from what Malaysia has succeeded in
doing. For Malaysia too has had its trial by fire. You were ableto overcome
the challenge of insurrection, long continued, and having overcome go on to
develop a progressive nation. This must encourage all small countries subject
to aggression or externally-inspired subversion.
Malaysia is a living example of what can be achieved in the
Asian region by a Government dedicated to national development and to
expanding opportunities for its peoples. We in Australia admire the increasing
part that Malaysia is playing in regional affairs, both in its direct contacts
with neighbouring countries and through its membership of the regional
organisations and groupings that are being established to promote the sense
of community and the common purpose of the region. And we look to close
co-operation with Malaysia in these endeavours.
These are among the matters I shall be discussing during my
stay in Kuala Lumpur. I hope, too, to give your Government an account of my
visit to Vietnam. Although my visit is not directly connected with the Five-
Power talks, I shall hope to hear Malaysian views on the progress of the talks.
While in Malaysia, I will visit Australian forces at Terendak and at Butterworth. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
KUALA LUMPUR
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
at State Dinner given by Tunku Abdul Rahman 12 JUNE 1968
Prime Minister, Mr. Holyoake, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen:
The first thing that I must do, Prime Minister, is to express to you my
thanks, very sincere thanks, for your having extended to my wife and I the
invitation to visit your country. And to say that, during the course of that visit,
you have extended to me many kindnesses which I shall remember as long as
I have breath, You did this morning an honour to my country, through me, by allowing
me to enter your House of Parliament, and by the things you said about my
country, remarks which were seconded by the Leader of the Opposition in that
House. The fact that I was the first Australian Prime Minister to enter your
House of Parliarent, and be so treated is perhaps an indication of how much
closer together wV-e have been getting, and perhaps an indication of how much
closer yet we may get in the future.
The ties betw., een Malaysia and Australia, and particularly that part of
Malaysia which I shall call Malaya, and Australia, go backIC a long while, but
they were in the beginning quite tenuous. The people of my country knew little
of the people of yours and I expect that the people of your country knew little of
mine. But a little more than a quarter of a century ago, those ties began to mean
something rather more real when together, you and we, and New Zealand, Great
Britain and other nations attempted to stem the tide of conquest then sweeping
down the Malayan Peninsular. That, I think, gave to thousands of Australians a
clearer knowledge of this country and of those who live in it. And, since that
time, the inter-flow of the thousands of visitors of -which you spoke, the great
enrichment of our own country by the students who have come in such large numbers
from Malaya, the closer economic co-operation between Malaya and ourselves,
the requirements to use force in order to resist at first an emergency and then a
confrontation, have all strengthened those ties of which you spok e.
Prime Minister, they are not now just ties between Prime Ministers;
now, are they ties between governments or the policies of governments. I
believe that they are now ties between the peoples of my country and of yours
and, I think, that they will grow still more in strength as the years go by. I
don't know, Sir, what the future holds, for none of us have a crystal ball. Vie
have for some time been engaged in joint attempts to safeguard the stability, the
security and the progress of this area but now a change has come and some of
those who are engaged in these attempts may or may not be engaged in them in
the future, or at least not in the same way. And this, of course, has been the
theme of the initial Five Power talks just concluded.
3ut I would hope, Sir, one m~ uld not put one's trust for security in such
things as the w, alls to which you referred which the Romans built ; when they
quitted Britain because, if I remember subsequent events correctly, they were
of no use whatever in preventing the Scots from completely subjugating Britain
and indeed I think New Zealand. But one doesn't of course put one's trust in
such things: rather does one put it in that common pur pose which you have
expressed a common purpose to seek by such means as each of us are able
to spare, the security of an area which is necessary if the peoples of that area
are to progress and get a better standard of living. Rather does one put one' s 
trust in a common outlook recognising that security, and progress, are best
secured by those kind of democratic processes, which you put into practice
here and we put into practice in Australia. These are the ties that bind, these
are the objectives in common.
And until that time comes when the motto of the United Nations is
translated into that motto being " They shall beat their swords into ploughshares"-
until that time comes, and it has not come yet, then there will need to be
co-operation for security, and, under that shield, co-operation for progress.
And because I think, as I said, that the people of my country are interested in
the people of yours, and of neighbouring countries, I have high hopes that both
our nations will be able to progress, behind the shield of security, to a future
of even greater security, because the future rests on the will of the peoples and
the standards of living which we will be able to achieve for them.
Ladies and gentlemen, would you join me in a toast to the Prime
Minister of Mal ay sia. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
DJAKARTA
ARRIVAL STATEMENT MADE BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JCHN GORTON 13 JUNE 1968
I am happy to have this opportunity to visit the Republic of
Indonesia on my first trip to South East Asia since becoming Prime Minister
of Australia. My wife and I have been greatly looking forward to this visit
and are grateful to the Government of Indonesia for its kind invitation.
Although the association between our two countries is short
when measured in terms of history, dating only from your independence
Iit has been an association which has laid a foundation of friendship
and co-operation. We in Australia, contiguous to Asia and part of the Asian
and Pacific region, look to the forging of an enduring relationship with our
closest South East Asian neighbour, We in Australia are deeply aware of
the new world of independent nations in this region. It is in this region we
feel that in friendly co-operation with our neighbours we can make our
contribution to stability and progress.
As a friend and neighbour, Australia has enjoyed fruitful
relationships with Indonesia in fields of practical co-operation. Your Stutsr
have attended our universities and technical institutions and Australians
have worked alongside Indonesians on projects ranging from road building
in East Nusa Tenggara to the installation of an aerial communicat ions network
spanning the vast area of the Archipelago of the Republic. Our firm support
of your present rehabilitation programme is assured.
I am looking forward to discussions with your President and
his Ministers on the many matters of mutual interest. It is my hope that
our two Governments will expand their areas of co-operation in the future
and that the range of personal and cultural contacts between our people will
widen over the coming years.
I hope also during this visit to see more of your country and
people. My wife, who stayed in your country for a period of six weeks in
1966, has insisted that I see something of the natural beauty of Indonesia
and experience the warmth and hospitality of the Indonesian people. This
we will do. After my period of official meetings and discussions here in
Djakarta, we are also going to visit Bandung and Bali. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
LB^ Ry DJAKARTA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINI3TER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
AT BANQUET GIVEN BY PRESIDENT SUHARTO 13 JUNE 1968
Mr. President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
Thank you, Sir, for your kind welcome and warm remarks about the
relations between our two countries. My visit to Indonesia in the course of my
first visit as Prime Minister to this area reflects the close concern and interest
which the Government and people of Australia have in your country. This
interest is not new found.
Australians are proud to have extended the hand of friendship to Indonesians
in the earlier days of the struggle for independence. Vie are even prouder, Sir,
that you accepted that friendship and paid us the honour of nominating us as
your representative at the United Nations negotiations at that time. It was in
those days that a firm basis evas laid for an enduring and neighbourly relationship.
Those early days of close co-operation were followed in due course by events
that were less happy. But through all these times of differences and confrontation
Australia's interest in Indonesia did not slacken.
For example, during all that time our aid programme continued and your
students remained at their studies at our universities, It was also possible at
that time to reach agreement on the marking of our common border in Irian, In
all our dealings during those, difficult times we sought to indicate that we were
fully conscious of the need to preserve as wide an area of co-operation as possible
and continue to work towards a confident and productive relationship. I believe
that you shared this aim and looked forward with us to the time when the full
warmth of our relations could be restored. And that time has come. It is a
matter of the highest satisfaction to me and to all Australians that relations have
now been fully restored and indeed, as I think, lifted to new levels.
The Australian Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Hasluck, has visited
Indonesia three times in the last sixteen months. Your Foreign Minister has just
concluded a visit to Australia. There have been numerous visits by other
Ministers between our two countries in the last two years. At the Parliamentary
level we had a Parliamentary Delegation here last year and your Parliamentary
Delegation has just returned from Australia. Large numbers of individual members
of the Australian Parliament from both sides of the House have come here on
visits both official and private. Our Air Force Commanders have exchanged
visits. We have Army officers training in each other's country. Units of the
Australian Navy have been most courteously received in recent visits in Indonesia.
This is quite a satisfying list. But in itself it does not fully convey the
; armth of the relations established, the growing frankness of the exchanges that
we have and the desire to seek out even more ways of helping each other overcome
our individual and our shared problems. It is this spirit and not just the fact that
there have been these meetings which is so important and which ensures that we
shall go forward along the course of mutual help and interest with trust and respect.
None of this that I have said is surprising to me, nor, Your Excellency, from
what you have said, is it surprising to you. Nothing is more natural than that
Australia and Indonesia, situated as they are and occupying the places they do
in the political and economic life in this part of the world, should be the best
of friends with a common interest in developing good neighbourly relations.
/ 2 
2.
For whatever happens in this part of the world affects us both, not always
equally, but surely nonetheless. d'e look out on the same vista of international
affairs from the samne geographical situation, and we give thought to the same
questions, and cope with similar problems. The conclusions we arrive at, the
actions we take, are not always going to be the same. VWe each have our
particular traditions, and linkcs, and interests which togrether with the facts of
geography, determine those individual conclusions and actions. But, in many
cases those conclusions will be the same, and when they are not it is important
that we both have a clear understanding of the reasons for any diversion of
approach. And I think there is already ample evidence that this is a realistic
aim and that this can, and will, be achieved.
So I believe, Your Excellency, that our two countries must go forward
tether. I believe also that each of our two countries recognises that. I believe
that not only our two countries but the other neighbouring countries in the region
must also go forward with us. And I believe finally that we shall accomplish
this goal, God w., illing, to our mutual benefit, prosperity and to the service of
the independence of each one of our countries and of those other neighbouring
countries in the region.
Ladies and gentlemen, would you join me in drinking a toast to the
President of the Republic of Indonesia. 



968VISIT ~ ju~ TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
DJAKARTA
SPEECH GIVEN BY PRESIDENT SUHARTO AT STATE
DINNER IN HONOUR OF THE AUSTRALIAN PRIME
MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON 13 JUNE 1968
Your Excellency Mr. Prime Minister and Mrs. Gorton, Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen:-May 1, on behalf of the Government and the people of Indonesia,
once again express our pleasure and appreciation for Your Excellency's
acceptance of our invitation to visit Indonesia. This constitutes one of the
most important visits to us, for Australia is one of Indonesia's closest
neighbours. Our very close geographical propinquity makes it one of the most
significant aspects for the future development of our two nations.
Indeed, during the past few years the relations between our two
countries were not at their best and at certain periods it was even quite clouded.
However, right now we thank God Almighty those days have passed. We are
now entering a new period and a hopeful future. It has now become our mutual
responsibility to give substance to the future; something that is beneficial to
our common inter ests which we should realize jointly as far as possible and
on the basis of equality.
National independence and the peoples' sovereignty are basic
principles to which we fully adhere. We maintain and at the same time apply
these principles in our attitude towards other nations in the world. Therefore,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity from Sabang to Merauke
are for the Indonesian people matters of principle. In order to realize those
principles the Indonesian people have fought for hundreds of years sacrificing
all they could offer. The fight for freedom has culminated in the proclamation
of our independence, but our struggle had still to be continued years after. Up
to the present moment, the Indonesian people have still to endure the
consequences of their sacrifice in the effort to achieve their territorial integrity.
One of them is the people's plight in the economic field. We are therefore
determined to defend whatever we have achieved painfully. Despite the burning
spirit of our nationalism, the pantja sila, which is the basic Indonesian
philosophy, will guarantee that it remains a sound one. Nationalism based on
pantja sila will stem the greed for territorial expansion.
To the Indonesian people, independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity are very important principles; they do not only constitute
our rights and honour, but they also serve as one of the important instruments
for nation building in its broadest sense. I am confident that the Australian
people will understand what I have just said, as they did when the Indonesian
people fought to uphold and maintain their independence in 1945, which they
fully supported, and to which they rendered their concrete assistance. For
all this, on this occasion, the Indonesian people once again wish to express
their high est appreciation and profound gratitude.
Much has happened since the Indonesian people achieved
independence and many changes have occurred in the world and around our
territory. After going through various stages of developments and serious
ordeals, the Indonesian people have now regained their genuine ideals of
independence and we are doing our utmost to substantiate that independence
with the welfare of the people. In our effort to give substance to our
independence by way of reconstruction, we are aware of the necessity to
maintain stability in South East Asia. This stability is to be based upon the
/ 2 
principles of national independence and the people's sovereignty by which
genuine good-neighbour policy can be established.
In this wo rid, that still contains greed to influence other nations'
internal affairs which in some instances were conducted by force of arms we
also realize the necessity of a physical defence capable of protecting the Indonesian
nation and our country's integrity. However, the Indonesian people believe that
the means for defence, which are decisive and at the same time advantageous,
are the conviction in its own national identity and the standard of prosperity of
its people. In my opinion, such a good neighbour policy is sufficiently realistic
and will always serve as a basis for the Indonesian nation in conducting its
co-operation with friendly countriesi in particular with those in our immediate
neighbourhood. We highly esteem the fact that recently Australia has paid a great
deal of attention to problems encountered by the developing South East Asian
nations, and in particular Indonesia. The developments that have occurred in
Indonesia and the new outlook that has come about in the minds of the Australian
people, to my belief, reflect a very favourable situation for our two nations.
Let us maintain this very favourable atmosphere and transform it into a more
concrete and effective mould. This mutual friendship and co-operation beneficial
to our two nations, will certainly be significant not only for Australian and
Indonesia, but also for the sake of this region's stability and the more so it
will positively contribute to the peace in the world. I pray that my hopes will
become a reality in the not too distant future.
Finally, may I invite Your Excellency, Your Excellencies,
ladies and gentlemen to raise your glasses and to toast to the health of Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, and also the health of Your Excellency, the Prime
Minister, Mrs. Gorton, and the distinguished members of the Prime Minister's
party. Thank you. 



VISLT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 196( r-
DJAKARTA
SY E72C H BY FR ZSL" DE11' FP SUHA RTC AT DINNER GIVEN 2 4 JUR 1968
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON 14 JUNE 1968
Your Excellency Prime Minister Gorton and Madame Gorton, Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Honourable Guests:-
After having been in the capital of Djakarta for a few days, Your
IExcellency Prime Minister Gorton and Madame Gorton are going to visit some
areas of Indonesia. I am convinced that this visit to the other areas will be
very useful: Your Excellency will then be able to kcnow better the Indonesian
people, and their culture: you will know each other better from heart to heart:
you will better understand their everyday problems and their efforts to overcome
them. Above everything else Your Excellency and your party will even more
enjoy the friendly atmosphere as is the wish of the Indonesian people. I am sure
that you will feel all these thingg even better, because among your party there
is somebody for whom it will be easier to understand them, namely Madame
Gorton who speaks indonesian fluently.
It is indeed an honour, it is even very moving for the Indonesian
people that this time outside the Malay race we have a State guest who is well
versed in our language and who has a thorough knowledge of the Indonesian culture.
I feel that Mrs. Gorton's fluency and her knowledge of the Indonesian language
are a manifestation of the friendly feelings and the understanding of the Australian
people about the Indonesian people.
In the last two years these bonds of friendship have become even
more visible: an exchange of visits among officials and leaders of our two nations
have taken place, also among private persons. Indonesia has also received
financial, and technical help and other forms of assistance which are very useful
for us and which we value very highly. But much more important than material
help are the deeper foundations as I see them, foundations which are manifestations
of an understanding from Australia about the problems which are being faced by
the Indonesian people at present. Indeed the Indonesian nation is at present
focussing her attention and her ability to bring about economic stability, and on
the basis of this economic stability we will soon begin with development in the
truest sense of the word. We fully realise that in developing Indonesia's economy
emphasis must be laid upon the mobilisation of our own forces. However, we
are also fully aware of all the limitations which are still binding us: so that
foreign assistance and co-operation have a considerable influence in accelerating
efforts by the Indonesian nation in developing their economic potentialities.
I sincerely appreciate the fact that Your Excellency during this
visit has been able better to understand the problems which we are facing. This
understanding can be seen very clearly during our discussions which I held with
Your Excellency this afternoon, especially with regard to relations between our
two nations and Indonesia's efforts to improve her economic facilities. The open
discussions and heart-to-heart talks held between us concerning international
problems in general and about Asia in particular are indeed very useful. Cur
exchange of thoughts have convinced me that the future of the friendship between
our two nations is extremely hopeful and that it contains many useful
possibilities for both parties. / 2 
2.
With regard to relations between nations in the world at present,
I get the impression that an exchange of visits between leaders of nations is
extremely useful for strengthening the bonds of friendship, because mutual visits
bring mutual understanding. It is mutual understanding and mutual esteem that
are absolute requisites for the realisation of everlasting peace in the world. With
this general picture in mind I believe that Your Excellency would agree with me
that your visit to Indonesia this time is truly of great significance for Australia
and Indonesia, The results of this visit will become a firm foundation for future
friendly relations and co-operation between our two nations and, let us hope
that it will be a positive contribution towards the stabilisation of our area.
Your Excellency Prime Minister Gorton and Madame Gorton,
tomorrow Your Excellency and Madame and your party will leave Djakarta to
continue your trip to various areas of Indonesia, after which you will be leaving
our country. My wife and I very much regret not to be able to accompany you on
your further trip in Indonesia. However, I believe that this will not in the least
reduce the value of your observation trip. Therefore, I shall avail myself of
this opportunity to wish you a happy journey.
During your visi t we feel that Your Excellency has succeeded in
creating a friendly atmosphere towards the Indonesian people: we also hope that
when leaving Indonesia Your Excellency will take home with you the friendly
feelings of the Indonesian people. On behalf of the people of Indonesia and on
my own behalf, through Your Excellency, I wish to send friendly greetings to
the Australian people. At the end, allow me to invite Your Excellency, Your Excellencies,
ladies and gentlemen, and all honourable guests to raise your glasses and to
drink to the prosperity of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth 11 and to the health of
Your Excellency and Madame Gorton and your party and to the prosperity and
progress of the Australian people.
Thank you. 



V IS 1T TO SOUTH EA ST ASI1A 1968
DJAKARTA
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
AT A DINNER IN HONOUR OF PRESIDENT SUHARTO 14 JUNE 1968
Mr. President, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
It would, for any Australian Prime Minister, at any time, be a
special privilege to be a host to the President of the Republic of Indonesia. But
on this occasion there is perhaps a doubly special pleasure because quite soon,
I think perhaps tomorrow, you begin a series of fairs and carnivals in Djakarta
to celebrate the 44 1st anniversary of the foundation of this city. It is therefore
doubly pleasant that I should have quite inadvertently so timed this visit that it
coincides with this celebration.
It is perhaps salutary to someone from Australia to consider this
Wand to consider that this city, in which we are tonight, was founded 250 years
0before the nation which I represent was founded in my country. This long stretch
of history behind you was reinforced to me last night by the cultural exhibition
Swhich you so kindly presented and which was from the various parts of this
Vgreat archipelago. You showed dances stretching back three, four, five hundred
years and which we for our part cannot match. Our own national existence has
been shorter than has been the existence of this city though we do draw from
centuries past, a culture from Great Britdin that we must turn and will turn to
our own ends as people from other nations come and make a new nation in
Australia'. But it is a double privilege to have you as the guest of honour,
for we in Australia have a keen awareness of the leadership which you are giving
Sto this nation in difficult times; a keen awareness of the problems which you
Wwith courage and imagination are seeking in these times to overcome. We wish
you all success in these endeavours, not only for your own sake but for our own
sake too and for those of other neighbouring countries. For if you achieve success
in the task which you have set yourself, then our future will be the easier, so
will the future of other neighbouring countries: so will the future of the region
as a whole. In this great and difficult task which you have before you we will,
as far as our nation is concerned, be helpful as far as we are able, considering
the commitments at home and abroad which we have.
Sir, what we can do will depend on many factors, but I do assure
you that we will try as a nation to play that part in helping to fulfil the dreams
you have for -the future of your nation and the dreams we have for the future of
the whole of the region to which we are contiguous, of which perhaps ultimately
we will be an important part. Sir, you will know that just recently we have
taken a decision in Australia to double next year the amount of aid which last
year we provided to Indonesia and it is a matter of special pride that this was
one of the first decisions made by the Australian Government since I became
Prime Minister of my country. But that is, in the context of the problems
facing you, a small contribution. We will, besides that, stand behind you in
the councils of the world to seek to see that other greater countries, not
contributing more per head perhaps, but contributing more in total, enjoin
with you and ourselves in the goal you have set.
We are glad to have large numbers of your students studying in
our country, and we hope that when they return, as they do return, to their
homeland, the result of their studies will be shown in technological progress,
in administrative progress, in the general assistance to you in your governmental
activities which through such training we hope to give. / 2 
.39
00 0 
And you will know that, regarding investment in this country, the
first main conference in Indonesia of private firms and private individuals took
place in August of last year and had, as its origin in Australia, a large number
of Australia's leading businessmen and industrialists who came to Djakarta at
that time to participate and who, as regards many of them, have pursued their
interests since then. In some cases, in turn, investment will follow. In other
cases, investment might not follow but technical assistance, technological
assistance, will be there for the asking and we feel that it is possible that in the
context of the Indonesian economy, the technical assistance which we can provide
may be, and I say only may be, more significant and more appropriate than the
technical assistance of some greater complexes of some greater countries,
because it may be that at our stage of development, and at your stage of.
development, this technical assistance will be better than it might be from some
mighty complex of a power country.
But this iimportant as it is, must go side by side with agricultural
Simprovements which I know is close to your hearts. Is it impossible to increase
Vfood production in Indonesia? If it is possible to double the production per hectare
of land, for example, of rice, then that must be a basic requirement for future
progress in any direction because the production of food in sufficient quantities,
to ensure that food is sold without an increase in price must be the basis on which
all other building takes place and we would be interested, Sir, in seeking to try
and play a part in that should you regard that as a large priority in the many other
activities in which you are engaged.
I do not wish to traverse the whole field of co-operation between
our two nations. I think we have made some advance in the cultural agreement
signed between our two countries: one which provides for exchange of scientific
knowledge for bringing closer together the academics in our country and in yours:
for bringing to our own nation those cultural heritages which you have: for
Sbringing for the Indonesian people that which we can do to entertain them. These
Vmust, in the long run, build up to a better understanding between our two peoples
and indeed, Sir, it is my belief that the signing of such an agreement will give
added impetus to an interest already evident but not as evident as it should be
in Australia to the studying of Indonesian language, of Indonesian history, of
Indonesian culture, and this I believe will take place in our country in the future.
That step has been a part of the past between Indonesia and
Australia that I think is a part of the vision of the future between Indonesia and
Australia but there are tensions in the whole of the area in which you find
yourselves geographically and we find ourselves geographically, and I would hope
that it would be possible in the course of the future, the near future, to see that
these intentions were as far as possible damped down and that you and we and all
the other nations in this area could at least say to each other that we respect and
honour the territorial boundaries of each nation and will not, under any
circumstances, seek to upset them. This is, Sir, just a matter of damping
down the tensions: if it happened it would be good, and if after it happened or
while it was happening we could, together, seek to improve, however slowly,
but constantly the living standards of the individuals in each country, then we
would be laying a real foundation for what is possible if the men and the women
of each nation in this area, under the leadership provided to them, are prepared
to make it possible, and because I think that you, Sir, are prepared to make it
possible and because I think you are aiming at making it possible. T1hat is the
third reason why tonight I have such a sense of privilege in having you beside
me in the Indonesian capital, and in asking all those gathered here to rise and
drink with me to the President of the Republic of Indonesia. 



VISIT TO SOUTH EAST ASIA 1968
ARRIVAL STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, AT RAAF FAIRBAIRN ON RETURN
FROM SOUTH EAST ASIA 17 JUNE 1968
Since leaving Canberra twelve days ago, I have visited four
of Australia's nearest neighbours in South East Asia.
It has been, I hope, a valuable journey and has contributed to
closer relations with the countries visited, besides demonstrating Australia's
continuing interest in the security and advancement of South East Asia.
In Vietnam I was honoured to visit our servicemen at their
Woperational bases. I found them in great shape. Their morale is high and they
are doing their job with resolve and confidence in the finest Anzac tradition.
Talks held in Saigon with Vietnamese leaders and senior American officials
were also helpful. In Singapore and Malaysia, we discussed a variety of matters,
and in particular the future stability and development of the South East Asian
region in the wake of the British with~ drawal.
I was particularly pleased to be able to visit Indonesia, our
nearest nieighbour. There, I had Lengthy private discussions with President
Soeharto which I think will further friendship, co-operation and understanding
between our countries. An agreement to increase cultural exchanges were
* signed between our two countries while I was in Djakarta.
One benefit from the visit is that I now have personal relationships
with the leaders of the four count Aies whose futures are closely related to our
own and this should be in itself of benefit in meeting challenges which the future
Omay hold.
Note: The Prime Minister is now due at Fairbairn between 10. 30 and
11. 30 p. m. this evening. Because of the late hour, he will not be giving a press
conference. The above statement will cover his return. He will be speaking
in more detail, and answering questions, when he is Guest of Honour of the
National Press Club in Canberra on Thursday. A. EGGLETON
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister 



N ATIO 0N AL P R ESS C LU B
LUNCHEON AT HOTEL CANBERRA REX, CANBERRA JUNThE 1968
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
Mr President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
This must necessarily be a truncated report on visits recently paid
to the United States, Viet Nam, Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia.. Being
brief, it can only touch on some of the matters discussed and that-without
going into the matters in any depth, Indeed, if it were to do anything else,
iwould deprive you of that which you have come along to do, and that is to
Wsuch searching questions as may have occurred to you before this Luncheon
took place. One of the main purposes of the visits to these countries nearest
0~ Mr President, was to demonstrate that although there had been a change of
mie Ministers in Australia, there had been no change in our interest in or
desire to co-operate with those Asian countries in our region. I wished to
demonstrate that that policy:-furthered so well by my predecessor, was a
continuing policy of the Australian Government and, as I believe,' of the
Australian people.. This, I think, the visit succeeded in doing,
A further purpose was to make personal contact with the leaders
of the countries visited and with other senior people in the Administration
of those countries., It is always a good thing if you are at some later stage
to speak to, or to write to an individual,. to have met that individual
feto face and for him to have met you.
6 A third purpose, and indeed not third in point of importance, was
a desire to see and meet with and bring greetings from Australia to those
Australian forces which are serving overseas in various areas and which are, in
pnt of-numbers, the greatest forces we have had serving overseas since the
clusion of the Second World War,
These visits. Mr President, took place against an international
background of change,.
Firstly, the President of the United States was trying to bring
North Viet Nam to the conference table to see whether a just and honourable
peace could be negotiated in that war-torn country, and to that end, he had
ordered at some considerable military sacrifice, a cessation of bombardment
over a large area of North Viet Nam, He had announced that he, himself,
would give up any hope of being re-elected ae President of his great nation,
so that he could devote his efforts to that end and so that he could not be
accused of devoting his efforts to that end for personal political purposes..
This had led to a flood of speculation that the United States might withdraw
altogether from Asia: might withdraw altogether from Viet Nam, might accept,
in the words of the President of the United States.. a " fake" peace which was
merely a prelude to a takeover by North Viet Nam of the South, and might lose
all interest in involvement in this area of the world,, 
An assessment of the answers to these questions was clearly of
importance to Australia's future planning, and I sought to make this
assessment in personal talks with the President and with such of his
likely successors as I was able to meet, and I have reported on this,~
Secondly, Mr President, there had been a fundamental change in
the basis on which Australia~ s strategic planning had for more than two
decades been predicated,~ This was caused not only by the accelerated
British withdrawal from the Malaysia/ Singapore area, but also and this
is of at least equal importance by the uncertainty that surrounded the
questions as to when, and with what forces and under what circumstances
the British would contribute to the defence and stability of the region
to our Near North after their withdrawal.
Clearly, a concept of forward defence by troops stationed
outside Australia. valid when based upon participation with Incal forces
of a major power, needed minute examination when the forces of that
major power were to be withdrawn and the circumstances of their re-entry
were unknown., Clearly any contribution by us to the stability of the
ion after 1971 cannot be fixed until we know what Britain, New Zealand,
* aysia and Singapore will do, or are likely to do, in the future..
Against this background ' I have asked before the visits took place
that our Defence Committee should prepare a new strategic assessment, a
~ wstrategic appreciation, taking into account those fundamental changes
ch had occurred some four to five months ago, and which had so radically
altered those assessments which, for more than two decades, we had accepted.
These journeys, and the initial meetings of the Five Power Pact
countries in Kuala Lumpur, have provided some of the answers to the questions
that we have to ask ourselves, The new assessment from the Defence
Committee when it is presented to Cabinet, as I expect it will be by
August at the latest,. will enable us, together with the facts gathered
on these journeys, properly to assess what the far future role of Australia
should be and I say " far future" because the end of 1971 is still three
and a half years away.,
0 But against this background, and until we get that appreciation
and assess it and set it up against the facts gathered in the conferences
and the journeys that have taken place, until we have examined a number
6 various possible alternatives for long-range planning, it would be
~ esponsible to settle long-range military planning, We would not
propose to do it until we have the full facts on which to settle those
plans; which is not to say that our forces will not gro~ w greatly in
capacity next year; for they will,
Against this background, there was added value in meeting
personally the leaders of Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesiaz In the case
of Indonesia, this was not because she was involved or is in any way
likely to be involved in such decisions as we may make in conjunction
with New Zealand, Britain-Singapore and Malaysia, but because she is our
nearest neighbour, because she is a significant power in this area, and
because that being so, I thought it proper and right that these matters
should be the subject of discussion between her President and myself,
Now, I turn very briefly to the countries visited on this
Asian tour,~ 9 o/ 3 
In Viet Nam * the fighting is as fierce and as cruel as ever
There are indications that since the partial embargo on bombing of North
Viet Nam: i there has been a very great build-up of North Vietnamese
regular forces in South Viet Nam.. It is belived these forces will be
used over the coming months in co-ordinated attacks on Saigon and other
centres of population, designed primarily to influence public opinion
outside South Viet Nam, and designed in the hope of influencing the
talks at present going on in Paris, These are talks which it is all
too easy to describ. e as peace talks, but which in fact are not, but
merely preliminary talks to see whether there is a basis for the
negotiation of a just and lasting peace, talks which regrettably have
so far made no discernible progress, talks which, as I said when they
were initiated, contained the seeds of hope, but talks which so far have
not shown any indication of the germination of those seeds.
I found an intention on the part of the South Vietnamese
Government to increase their own armed forces., to make a stronger
contribution themselves to the war-~ and I found;. too, a nagging fear
amongst all with whom I spoke that there might be in Paris some
further military concession without reciprocal concession by the
Worth Vietnamese which would undermine the morale of the armed forces
of South Viet Nam and of the population of South Viet Nam. I do not
believe these fears are justified,
Turning now, Mr President, to Singapore, I had long talks with
Wee Kuan Yew and with'the Foreign Minister Rajaratnam-There was
evidently a lively appreciation there of the need to build up Singapore's
capacity to defend itself, and a determination to do this side by side
with the successful efforts presently being made to provide better
living conditions for the people of Singapore.
There was a purposefull attempt being made to tackle the
problems of unemployment. which are still great, and a conscious attempt
to forge the divergent races living in Singapore into a unified whole
owing allegiance to that city state giving loyalty to that city state
and not to the origins from whence they sprang.
There is no doubt of the genuine belief of Lee Kuan Yew that
the defence of Singapore and Malaysia is indivisible and there is no
doubt of his intention to contribute to that defence and to do what he
* can to see that this indivisibility is not in any way divided,
For ourselves; it seemed to me that what we could do best to
help was to provide technical assistance defence aid in the form of
equipment and matters of that kind: to encourage private investment
in Singapore and to continue -that government assistance which we
already are contributing
In Malaysia. too ' there was an equal awareness of the
indivisibility of defence between Singapore and Malaysia and an
equal awareness of the need for defence in adequate strength in
in that area., defence to which they must contribute,
There I had the opportunity to speak at some length with the
Tunku and his Cabinet in private on these matters,' and had the honour of
being the first Commonwealth Prime Minister to be received on the floor
of the Malaysian Parliament and to receive an address of welcome by
the Prime Minister and by the Leader of the Opposition. Although I should
point out to this gathering that there are so many different parties
in the Opposition that they have been unable to agree amongst themselves
who is the leader, so the leader is designated by the Prime Minister, 
Sir.' if I have spoken largely of defence, it is because the
question of defence looms so largely in the minds of the leaders., both
in Singapore and in Malaysia. I found in these countries no acceptance
whatever of the proposition that what they need is economic aid in lieu
of defence. but rather the reverse, although; of course, they need both.
In Indonesia, on the other hand-the emphasis in all our talks
was on the economic conditions, particularly in Java, and what might
be done by the Indonesian Government itself for that must play the
primary part and by other nations in conjunction with the Indonesian
Government to improve those conditions.. This will take a massive effort
by the major powers and will require careful selection of projects and
effective administration in order to be successful,.
I found there, too, complete acceptance by the Indonesian
Government of Australia's peaceful intentions and complete acceptance
of any decisions we might make to contribute to Singapore's and
Malaysia-s defence after 1971.
Now, Mr President I know you wish to get to questions;. and I
Would merely conclude on thi's note. because after all, the question of
what is happening in Viet Nam is of major importance -in this country.
I see no reason for any change in Australia's attitude to this
~ truggle, We belive the Americans are right to seek for the South
ietnamese the right to elect their own government, to carry out that
election free from invasion, terrorism or threat and to have such
decision as they may make respected by all,
We belive that we have a stake in demonstrating that armed
aggression must not succeed.. We believe we now contribute sufficient
forces from Australia to carry out our duty in this respect,: and we
have the will to continue this contribution in concert with our Allies
until the political objective which the military operations are aimed
at is achieved; and until, if such political objective is achieved, we
can turn. as I would like to turn our efforts. to rebuilding that
ounryand providing to its people that kind of life which I feel under
terown control they can achieve..
I think I had better stop so that you have plenty of time for
use t on s Th a n k yo u
QUESTON SESSION:
Q Bob Baudino: Mr Prime Minister, if I may be forgiven, I
intend to indulge in the fashion of the Indonesian press
conferences and to ask you two entirely unrelated questions.
You have referred to our defence planning and mentioned it would
be irresponsible to go ahead with forward defence planning of
this kind You have also added that our forces will continue
to grow in the meantime.. Could you give us further details of
the interim plan for defence--Secondly,. at Nui Dat,, when
addressing our own troops, you told them that for every nut
who held up a placard or sat on the road in Australia-there were
one hundred others behind them. I think there may be points of
clarification needed here,~ C. 
1W
PM: Thank you, Mr Baudino. The answer to the first question
you have asked is this-As a result of decisions already taken on
defence, there will in the 1968-69 financial year be significant
growth in the Australian defence capacity. There will, during that
period, be delivered the 24 Fill strike aircraft which will be
arriving and be put into service.. There will be 36 Macchi jet trainer
fighters delivered ( which have an operational capacity). There will
be delivered one new corvette to the Navy.. There will be delivered
a large amount of new Army equipment, There will be delivered to the
Army. apart from the ordinary equipment from memory, I think some
36 light aircraft and light helicopters, And the size of our
Regular Armed Forces will grow by at least 3,. O00O men, In addition,
there will be very large works programmes carried out for the Army,
the Navy and the Air Force in areas spread throughout the whole of
Australia.. Even that is not a complete list of the new equipment
to be delivered during this period of time. For example, another
Oberon submarine will be delivered and put into service during
1968/ 69., So there will be during the coming year great accretion of
defence hardware, if I can put it that way. and an increase in
defence forces There will also be a considerable increase in
defence expenditure for it will, on any estimate I can make, go up
to at least $ 1,250,000. The overseas requirements that we will have
to extend will rise from round about $ 350 million this financial
year to something like certainly well over $ 400 million next
financial year. So there is no interruption to defence planning;
there is no interruption to the accretions to the strength of our
Forces.. But seeking to look a long way ahead, it will probably
be towards the end of the year before some new Three-Year Programme,
to be operative not in the next financial year but in the one after
and in the two years after that-will be able responsibly to be
brought down, That would be the answer I would give you to the
first question. On the second question, that relating to ' nuts-, I would
like to make two things clear. One is that this is not to be taken
as a reference to those who oppose a course a government is taking,
and who use the proper channels to express that opposition the
proper channels being the newspapers,. being any media of public
expression that can be attained, being the holding of public
meetings, being seeking to influence public opinion against the
last expression of majority public opinion; for this must be
maintained as a right of any minority. As Voltaire indeed said:
" I disagree with what you say, but I would defend to the death
your right to say it" But if that minority opposition is extended
to actions -actions such as throwing things at people with whom
the disagree, actions such as throwing paint over the cars of
representatives of nations with whose policies they disagree, actions
such as carrying placards and lying down in roadways to disrupt
traffqic; then that-I think, is something not known and not proper
to a democratic society, because it is not an assertion of minority
rights to seek to change majority opinion,. It is -the beginning, an
incipient requirement of a minority to force a change in majority
opinion by breaking the law and by disrupting the rights of the
majority,. This kind of thing, beginning in this way, can ultimately
lead to the sort of tragic consequences we have seen in other
countries, and I belive that perhaps ' nut' is rather too mild an
expression for those who break the law and disrupt the traffic and
throw and threaten those representatives of majority opinion with
which they disagree, A minority has rights which must be protected,
but it has no rights to seek to impose its will by any degree of
force on a majority which disagrees with it, .7 6 
Q Herschel Hurst. Melbourne Sun: Prime Minister. you said
in-your speech here today, in effect, '. that you believed the South
Vietnamese people wouldn~ t be sold out at the Paris talks, In the
course of your discussions with President Johnson in Washington
recently, did the President indicate to you just how far the United
States was prepared to go in concessions to the communists to end
the Viet Nam war?
PM: The President of the United States indicated to me both
privately and in public that he would not be prepared to accept
anything which he described as a ' face' peace; a " fake" peace as
I understand him to mean being a peace which was a formula designed
to cover a withdrawal without obtaining the objective of giving the
South Vietnamese people a change in freedom to express their own views.
He has said this privately, he has said this publicly, and I believe
that as far as he and his Administration are concerned he will not
make concessions which would lead to such an outcome, This
Administration. of course, has some six or seven months to run. He
spoke for himself as President, He made it clear he could not speak
for his successor as President and neither can I, but I did gather
the impression from the likely successors to whom I spoke that there,
too, there would be unlikely to be concessions which led to a disguishel
surrender and a disguished abandonment of the objectives which were
initially sought to be attained,.
Q Chris Forsyth: Sir, you mentioned a whole list of defence
hardware deliveries that we were going to get this year, It was
before your time that the decisions were made several years ago, Your
Government has delayed the Three-Year Defence Programme by a year, Sir,
Does this mean that Australia will have a years pause in defence
hardware buying and planning with obvious repercussions for deliveries
in the future?
PM: Well,. some of that hardware that you refer to wasn't before
my time.. In fact the submarine was ordered while I was Minister for
0the Navy, if you dont mind my saying so., Oh, you mean before I was
Prime Minister .,, but I do claim the ordering of some of that
hardware that will be in service during the coming year,, The point
of your question is should we not already have ordered a lot more
hardware for the subsequent year. and I don't believe that that is a
valid suggestion. When you order a ship., you are seeking to case your
mind forward to see what you want that ship to do for the next
twenty to twenty-five years, what part you want it to play in an
overall defence plan., When you order an aircraft you are seeking
to cast your mind forward to see what that aircraft is going to do
for the next ten to fifteen years, what part it is that you want
it to play in an overall defence programme, With such fundamental
changes as we have had and with the new strategic assessment coming
up, and with further matters to be resolved in the Five-Power Pact;
then I think it would be irresponsible until all the data is in
to order further hardware for immediate delivery,, It is more
responsible to wait until we have been able to assess and announce
where it is we believewe are going in five or six years time because,
after all, up until 1971, three and a half years' time it is known
what will happen there,, It would be irresponsible to assess beyond
that time before we have had a proper assessment and appreciation; and
if that is disagreed with, then it is disagreed with but it is the
view that the Government takes, C rc/ 
Q Frank________ ain Agence France Press and Macquarie
Radio: Can you tell us, Mr Prime Minister, whether this steady
rise in defence expenditure will lead to a steady decline in social
services and in national development?
PM: No. I don't believe the steady rise in defence expenditure
does mean a steady decline in social services and your other point
was national development because there will be a steady rise in
GNP, there will be a steady rise in national production and in its
value Indeed., we are now going through what I call the tantalising
years because two years ahead or two and a half years ahead, that
kind of period of time, we can see coming in to us the full benefits
of the minerals which are now being mined throughout the length and
breadth of this continent. We can see coming into to us the import
replacement value of the oil which is being discovered., We can see
coming in to us the benefit of the increased employment and the
increased industrial muscles which these will generate and which
other things will generate. So I not only see no decline in social
is services, but it is as I have said before, essential that we should
look at the areas of most need in social services and seek to overcome
them as part of a project of complete overhaul of our approach to
social services, Having said that, it is also clear that resources
spent on defence cannot be spent in other areas of national development
whether they be social services, whether they be education, whatever
they may be. It doesn't mean a decline, It does mean less capacity
to increase-
Q Jack Commins, ABC: Sir, has your recent visit led to any
rethinking on defence on your part? I refer to your initial statement
after becoming Prime Minister that the facts and future defence
expenditure must be balanced against internal development. I suppose
you answered that to a degree in the previous answer, but overall, I
think the question in all our minds is whether an increase in expenditure
will lead to an increase in taxation in the new Budget?
Now: really, do you honestly expect an answer which may
forecast Budget possibilities taxation. ( Commins: It was worth
a try') So youve tried, so thank you-
Alan Wood: Bearing in mind your reply to Mr Forsyth~ s
question,. I wonder if you could tell us where the defence hardware
already on order and ordered on the basis of an out-of-date defence
assessment, will fit into the new assessment?
PM: Before I answer that question, I would like to say that I
dont accept your statement that what has bee. n ordered has been
ordered on an out-of-date defence assessment, For example, I would
believe that the strike aircraft ordered would be necessary whatever
the future defence assessment may be-They have been ordered in the
United States you asked me, I think, where they had been ordered.
The submarine to which I referred and which also, I think, is an
integral part of a Navy however we may imagine that Navy to be
operating, has been ordered from the United Kingdom, as has its
predecessors. The Macchi jet trainers have been; or rather will be
built in Australia itself-The 12 Mirage fighters. which I omitted to
mention will be added to our defence capacity in the next year. will
be built in Australia itself. All the works programmes to which I
referred will obviously be handled in Australia itself, I cannot give
you them item by item because I haven't got it in my mind all the
pieces of defence hardware; but that would give various examples of
where this is coming from, and you will perhaps have noticed that we
have recently placed orders for electronic equipment for defence
purposes, again with Australian industry. 
QStan Hutchinson: " Mr Prime Minister, when you were abroad,
you made an enigmatic reference to an Israeli-type army, Now the
Israeli-type citizen soldier depends for his emotional stimulus on
virtually being able to look out his window and see what he can
identify as an enemy, What would you substitute for that to keep
the Australian citizen soldier keen and enthusiastic?
PM: We have had two world wars in which we have from the
beginning relied very considerably on that citizen soldier to which
you refer Indeed., I think, at the beginning of both the First and the
Second World Wars, we had no regular army worth the name to put
into the field.: In both those cases. we had time to prepare to call
the citizen soldier into camp, to weld him into a unit, to then send
him abroad whether he had chosen to join the AlP at the beginning or
whether subsequently he went as reinforcements. Now we do have a
Regular Army stronger than before, but it needs, I believe to be
backed up by Citizen Military Forces, adequately trained, able to be
quickly mobilised. I think it unnecessary to suggest that they need to
look out of a window in order to be galvanised into giving their
services in this way. I believe there are many Australians who are
prepared to devote their time to Citizen Military Force training
so that there will be able to be a back-up force for a Regular Army.
It appears to me, particularly in a country which for decades will have
a requirement to build its strength through development, that this kind
of back-up force is good, is effective and is necessary-
Q Harry Stein: Mr Prime Minister:, during your recent journey,
you were not able to obtain a non-aggression pact with some of the
nations, which you had indicated you would like-I put it to you, Sir,
dont you think that ata time when there are no Australian troops
fighting against Asians as they are doing now in Viet Nam, that it
will be easier to establish a non-aggression pact with our Asian
neighbours?,-
P Well I would put it back to you that I don't think anything
of the kind In the talks that I had with the leaders of the Asian
nations to whom I spoke.-that is in Singapore; in Malaysia and in
Indonesia, I had no indication whatevey that there was any suggestion
that Australian troops should not be engaged in seeking to protect, as I
believe they are seeking to protect, the rights of the people of South
Viet Nam It would have been a little strange, would it not, had it
been otherwise; because after all, the people of Singapore and leaders
of Singapore and of Malaysia are interested in their own defence and
in exercises to help their own defence, which will involve Australian
troops. So it would be quite an odd volte face if what you suggest were
so., By whatever name you call it, I don't think it matters, but I would
agree with what Mr Hasluck said in the House before I went away or
rather,-what I think he said in a conference before I went away that
non-aggression pacts in this area and the area fairly close to us could
do no harm and could indeed do good.. This was not a major objective
of my visit, but I have some hopes that as time passes, we could at
least obtain declarations from the countries in the region that they
respect. the one to the other, the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of each other.. While the cynics may say this means nothing; at least
it is; I think,' something which it would be hard to attack as wrong to
seek to obtain. / 9 
Q Mr Prime Minister, do you believe a resumption of the
bombing of North Viet Nam would necessarily jeopardise the Paris
preliminary talks?
PM: I haven't had any conversations or any suggestions
concerning hypothetical questions such as that.
Q Chalmers: Mr Prime Minister, this week Mr Holyoake was
quoted as saying thlat in lieu of a visit he was contemplating to
Canberra, he had a long telephone conversation with you. I was
wondering whether you could tell us anything of the telephone
conversation, particularly what he may have said, and in particular
whether that conversation contemplated a meeting between yourself
and Mr Holyoake either here or in Wellington?
PM: No, not really.. Mr Holyoake stayed behind in Kuala Lumpur
rather longer than he had intended in the hope that we might have had
a discussion there on what had transpired at the Five-Power Talks and
what he saw as the future after 1971 and matters of that kind. But
* there was a fa. irly split-second schedule arranged and except over a
dinner which was not a completely appropriate occasion, this kind of
discussion was unable to be properly developed. So he did ring me
up on the morning that I returned and he put to me then his own
tentative views, his own forecasts and asked me for mine and they were
purely discussions, exploratory and tentative in character. He was
seeking to find out what was in my own mind and I was seeking to find
out what was in his for some considerable time in the future.
QPeter Samuel: Mr Prime Minister, two months ago, our
delegate at the United Nations spoke on the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty and he expressed a lot of strong reservations about this treaty,
and this led to the expectation that we might join India and France in
not signing the treaty, Since then, you have been to the United States,
you have been to Asia,, I wonder if you can give us any more indication
of your thinking on this treaty?
Pie You will have noticed that the resolution which was passed
by the General Assembly was to comment the treaty. You will also have
noticed that we in Australia indicated that we agreed with the principle
of such a treaty but wanted to be sure before we signed it that it was an
effective treaty and that we would be requiring answers as to the
method of withdrawing from the treaty, questions as to control over
people from the international agency who might be sent to be stationed
here to examine various defence installations, questions as to the
rights one had for the civil uses of atomic energy, questions as to whd
in fact was going to sign the treaty and who in fact wasn't, and a large
number of related questions, So, yes in principle, we think that a
treaty of this kind, if it can be made effective, would be good, We
have therefore voted to commend it, it is open to signature, but we
would wish the answers to a lot of questions we raise to be given to
our own satisfaction before we would sign what we commend in principle.
Q Could I just ask a supplementary question to that one?
Will this our decision whether or not to sign depend to any extent
on the major strategic re-assessment that you spoke of and-expect in
August? 
PM: I don't believe so. No, I don't believe so. We have to look
decades ahead on this particular matter you have raised. After all, as
far as Australia itself is concerned, we have no nuclear capacity at all.
We have no nuclear plants at all, nor are likely to have any chance
of manufacturing any nuclear defence for at least a decade, so it is not
an immediate matter with which we are concerned. It is rather a matter
of seeking to see how it will work and, as far as one can, to look ahead
to the future of not you or I but younger ones living in Australia.
Q David Solomon: Prime Minister can you see any end to the Viet
Nam war coming other than through the Paris talks?
PM: Well, Mr Solomon, so far, I can see no end at all to the Viet
Nam war coming through the Paris talks because up to this stage there has
been nothing but an exchange of polemics, a refusal on the part of the
North Vietnamese to admit that there are any North Vietnamese troops
in South Viet Nam, a refusal on the part of the North Vietnamese to admit
that they are providing the rockets and mortar shells to bombard Saigon
in return for Hanoi being freed from bombardment, and this all carried on
in public0 So that is answer to a part of your question0 The answer
* to the second part is that it must merely be an impression and an
assessment. It cannot be taken as a clear indication of what will happen.
Of course it can't, looking ahead. But I believe, given sufficient will,
that the military objective of obtaining political freedom for the people
of South Viet Nam can be attained.
In the light of that answer, Sir, and in the light of your
earlier statement about the bombardment of Saigon and the build-up
following the cessation of American bombing, would you like to see, as
the American newspapers have suggested, some deadline put on the bombing
halt?
PM: I have already had a question similar to that from, I think,
the " Sydney Morning Herald" 0 This is a sort of hypothetical question
which I would not wish to give an answer to0
Sir, on the question of taxation, which you dismissed earlier,
Wcan I put it to you, how would it be possible to increase defence
expenditure by such a large amount and not neglect social services and
national development without increasing taxation.
I thought I had endeavoured to give an indication of the answer
Wto that, and I am not to be taken as forecasting anything concerning the
Budget this or future Budgets one way or the other, but as a country
grows, and as its population grows and as its GNP grows and as its taxable
income grows, so there is a capacity to increase not only one facet of
expenditure but a number of facets of expenditure0 Now, it is a matter
for decision as to whether they are increased sufficiently, or which ones
are increased sufficiently0 But there is not a fixed sum of Government
revenue which remains fixed year after year so that taking from that sum
a greater amount for Project A leaves lessfor Projects B and C and D,
rather there is a growing sum which year after year grows, and from the
growth, there can be distributed to Project A, B9 C or D that part of
that growth which it is believed contributes best to the national good.
Q David Gilmorgan: Mr Prime Minister, as there is no embargo
on culture, what is the point of having a cultrual pact between two
countries?. 0.00/ 11 
I think it a little surlxising,, Sir, that you should suggest there
is no value in a cultural pact merely because there happens to be no embargo
as you put it on culture I would have thought that if two countries,
who are as close together as are Indonesia and Australia, both indicated
publicly that they were interested in and would do what they could to
exchange artists; whether they be manual artists or performing artists
to exchange teachers, to exchange visits, to ( in the case of Indonesia
make known in Australia the materials they produce if you like, the
special batiks they produce the kind of ballet telling the stories long
rooted in Indonesian history, the sort of music which comes from parts of
that country and in exchange to receive the opportunity to hear music
of a different kind from our own symphony orchestras, to see dancing of a
different kind from our own culture., that this could do nothing but good,
and that it was rather a negative approach to say there is no embargo on
culture so let us do nothing, It is rather a positive approach to say
both our governments think that the more that can be done to see that each
country sees the culture of the other, the more each country may tend to
. understand the other, and that if that happens, this is not an insignificant
advance..
Q Stewart Harris: Sir.; I think next year Indonesia is going to
give West Irian an act of free choice to decide whether to stay under
* Indonesian administration or become independent. In the last six years
since Indonesia took over the administration of West Irian, Australia has
received in New Guinea about sixty-three refugees and their dependants from
West Irian,. Next year I think it is possible that the number may increase
for one reason or another., The frontier between West Irian and Papua/ New
Guinea is not defined on the ground and is not agreed to by the
Governments of Indonesia and Australia,. There could be problems on the
border-, I was recently up there.. There is no contact at the moment
between the Administrations of West Irian and Papua/ New Guinea. There was
i~ n the time of the Dutch:, Australia~ s relations with Indonesia are now
excellent-You were. in Djakarta yourself recently, Sir, so I was
0wondering if you could get contact going on the ground between the
* Administrations of West Irian and Papua/ New Guinea so that any problems
that might occur next year could be understood in advance?
IM: I think that is a matter, Mr Harris, that I would need to
* discuss with the Minister for External Territories and the Minister for
External Affairs. You surprise me a little because perhaps wrongly
but nevertheless certainly I was, and am, under the impression that the
boundary between West Irian and Papua/ New Guinea is on the map agreed
between the Government of Indonesia and ourselves. Certain exercises have
been carried out to demarcate the boundary and to seek to mark it insofar
as it can be marked. Cairns of stones have been built on the particular
parallel which,; I think, is accepted by both countries. But in between
those cairns, of course, there is just wild jungle, and so indication
of boundaries as one would find in more heavily populated areas, so that
one could easily wander across the boundary without knowing it, from Papua/
New Guinea into West Irian or from West Irian into Papua/ New Guinea-It
will take a long time before this can be stopped, All I can say in answer
to your specific question is that I would have to take that up with the
Minister for External Affairs and the Minister for External Territories,
But I do think that our relations with Indonesia are so good that if there
are problems there they are more likely to be overcome now than they might
ever have been likely to have been overcome in the past. 



3ARTOJ ELECTORATE DINNER
SANIS SOUCI, N. S. W. 2 JULY 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mvr John Gorton
M r Arthur, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
That was quite a list of qualities you laid down that you hoped
would be possessed by a Prime Minister and I would not pretend to
lay claim to all of them. All I can say is that I would try to do as well
as 1 could to fulfil each one you have mentioned.
When you asked me, Mr Arthur, first to come to this gathering,
I was delighted for two reasons. One was because it would give me an
opportunity, as it has given me, to meet, however fleetingly, so many of
the people in this area, such a cross section of Australians living in your
electorate, and some from adjoining electorates. This in itself is for me
something that I think a Prime Minister should try and do as far as it is
possible. I was glad because this was the electorate which, after a long
perid of aberration before they finally decided, sent you to join us in Canberra.
That meant that we had added to our ranks somebody who was prepared to
work hard indeed one of ' the most energetic characters I have ever met in
my life, who works, as I am sure I don't have to tell you in the electorate
and I think spends more time questioning, cross-questioning, arguing with
Ministers on policy in Canberra than almost any other private Member,
often with great advantage to the nation.
Secondly I was glad because it would give me a chance to meet
some of the people who had sent to us a Member who would help us to
further an attitude to government, an approach to the running of the nation which
over the last twenty years or so has, I think, proved itself to be a proper
approach. Of course, there would in any period of such a time be errors
made, mistakes made, but taking the thing as a whole, it has shown itself
to be an approach which has built a nation, which twenty years ago was small,
to a nation which is now standing on the threshold of real greatness and which
has allowed in that period of time a foundation to be laid on which the great
edifice of a future Australia can be built.
These things do not come about by governments or by politicians.
They come about by the presentation of programmes to Australians and the
acceptance of those programmes by Australians, and the work done by
Australians which enables the programmes themselves to be fulfilled.
We tend too much to underwrite what we have done. We tend too
much to write down ourselves as a country. We must now begin not only
here, not only in New South Wales or in Victoria or in Western Australia,
but throughout the whole of this continent to further the pride of being an
Australian wherever in this continent that Australian may live.
Things are really exciting in this country today. I am going to
weary you a little now, just touching on some of the exciting things which will
affect all of us and our children and our descendants in the future. 2 
-2
One company alone, in the Pilbara region in Western Australia
has export contracts for 32 million tons of iron ore of the total value of,
$ 260 million to be coming in to us over the next two years. Another foTF
105 million tons worth $ 800 million. Another for 160 million tons worth
240 million coming in in the period ahead. The port facilities that have
grown as a result of this, the railways that have been built are all exciting
examples of what is happening in this nation of ours. The new town at
Dampier 170 miles of railways new ports the oil being discovered in
Barrow and under the waters of Bass Strait. soon, together with natural
gas, to revolutionise the z~ spccity of Australia to live on its own resources and
' lot be dependent on the world outside. All these are the sinews and I think
they have come about for two reasons.
One is because of the philosophical approach which the Member
you sent to support us agrees with and furthers that is for this kind of
growth to tak!-e place, it is necessary that the fullest support should be given to
iheprivate initiative of Australian citizens and that they should be able to
take risks, lose, but get rewards if they win, and that in such a climate you
can without too much government direction leave to the initiative and good
sense and brains of individual Australians the development df their nation,
I think it has come about too, because this having been demonstrated
to have worked in that way, has led to an investment in this country from
abroad which this year alone was 100, 000 and which enables us to get the
benefit of the quick development which the changing world around us demands
we should achieve because of stability here and because of the climate here
created. Now I said we tend to underwrite ourselves. This does not mean
that there are not many things still requiring to be done. This does not mean
that we can afford complacency. What it does mean is that looking at what
has been achieved, let us look to the future and say, " This is just the
beginning. All the past is really a prelude", which I roughly translate as:
" fYou ain't seen nothing yet". And I do believe that in these years ahead we
will, those of us sitting in this room, look back in ten years' time and say
how much we have grown, how much our material strength has improved, how
much the living conditions of our people have been improved.
But we stand at this point in history in a position we have never
been in before, For 200 years or more, the Royal Navy has protected us
from any assaultf from overseas against our shores, and we, when called
upon, have rallied to the support of the United Kingdom, Great Britain, but
in between times, have had to expend but little thought on our own defence.
Those times have gone. The United Kingdom can no longer provide that shield.
We, ourselves, must take up and are taking up more and more of the burden
which any prudent country must take up to protect itself against threats which
may not as yet be foreseen but which history indicates are always likely to
be present. And in taking up that burden, we have to examine the situation
where the old theories on which our defence was built are no longer valid, and
examine new possibilities and bring forward new programmes.
This is one of the great problems facing us today, and one which
as you know, we are studying, working for, and providing for. But this is
not the only point of change. 1/ 3 
* 0 
3
We have to make choices as to what we will do in
the immediate years ahead from the resources available to us how much,
a government must decide, should be provided for defence purposes;
how much, a government must decide, should be provided for increasing
the requirements for universities, for technological colleges, for schools,
for more teachersi how muich should be provided for scientific work further
to develop the capacity of the land to carry more wealth, to produce more
wealth; how much, and this cannot be skipped, must be provided to see that
the aged and the invalidi the needy, the ill amongst us are provided with
sufficient to live on in moderate comfort.
And how much must be left in the hands of the private
citizens so that that further development we need can take place because the
incentive to the private citizen is there. . These are the things on which
we must make choices, These are the things on which governments choose
priorities-, These are the tasks before us. We will let you know relatively
soon what the priorities are for the coming year,
It is possible that what we think is right may by some
be thought wrong, It would be most surprising if that were not so. * But
we will say what we think is right, We will say why we think it is right,
We will keep arguing unless some better arguments, convince us we are
wrong which I think is most unlikely and we will then leave it to the
Australian people to decide whether in fact we wete right or We were wrong
in what we did. But whatever those choices of Priorities we decide may
be, I know from the atmosphere in this Itoomi from the people that I have
met tonight, that what we decide Is only the beginning of achievement, what
we decidewill only make it possible for each individual Australian himself
to contribute to the growth for which we provide the possibilities if we
make the right choices. Never has there been a time in this nation's history
when it has been more necessary for each Australian going about his,
ordinary occasions wherever he : may be to adopt as his motto that saying:
Whatsoever thy right hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might. Because
if that is done, then not only will the individual get satisfaction from what
he is doing in life, and the work he is achieving, but the nation will grow,
he will get a feeling of service, which I am sure our young want more than
anything else, a feeling of giving over and above his own personal requirements.
This is another task, an urgent task of leadership in government to give
to Australians that feeling of participation, that feeling of service, that pride
in achievement which is latent in them and which I believe, stirred properly,
will make us the greatest nation in the world in time, not only in terms of
material strength, not only in terms of opportunities to the individual to
develop himself to the top of his bent, but also in an approach to social
problems which I think we can and will overcome. This is the task before
us as I see it. This is the task I am going to call on you, and others like
you, to carry out. This is the task which, in fact, can only be carried out by
you and us together. I conclude by saying I believe above all there is
amongst the Australian people a will, an ability, a desire and a goodness
which, properly utilised, will make our children proud. I thankc you. 



ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RI HON. JOHN GORTON
AT THE CONFERENCE OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE
MINISTERS RESPONSIBLE FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, MELBOURNE .~ 4i
12 July 1968
AS a result of the 1967 Referendum the Commonwealth now shares with the
States powers and responsibilities for the advancement of our Aboriginals.
In fact, of course, the powers of the Commonwealth are paramount in the
sense that in any conflict of law its law will prevail, but there is no such
conflict at present and I have every confidence that none will arise. We are all
of us trying to do our best to advance our Aboriginals and I believe that we can
do this between us in an atmosphere of goodwill, and irrespective of whether
we are using a State or a Federal power.
Each State has a different problem-different numbers of Aboriginalsdifferent
levels of development-different priorities.
I take this'opportunity of congratulating the States on the vigour of their
approach to the question of Aboriginal welfare which has been manifest in their
policies over recent years. We recognise this and are ready and willing to play
our part, in full co-operation with the States, in the task of improving the pace
of our advance.
It will be recalled that the late Prime Minister, Mr Holt, had already made
some significant moves in this matter before his tragic death. He had appointed
a Commonwealth Council for Aboriginal Affairs, and had set up an Office of
Aboriginal Affairs within his own Department. It was as part of this plan that
the important conference of Federal and State officers was held early this year
to consider the whole Aboriginal situation.
At the end of February, I appointed the Hon. W. C. Wentworth especially
responsible to me for the development of Commonwealth policy and its cooperation
with that of the States and he is the Minister who will be working
directly with you.
Leaving aside the specific Commonwealth responsibilities for Federal Territories
I believe that the Minister and the Council, in their relations with the
States, should seek to discharge three main functions: 
1. To allocate funds from the Commonwealth to the State for Aboriginal
advancement, using State machinery to use these funds for an agreed
purpose to the greatest possible extent.
2. To gather information regarding Aboriginal matters ( especially welfare)
and to act as a clearing house for such information both as between the
various States and as between States and Commonwealth.
3. Where appropriate to assist the States in the co-ordination of their policy
and in setting the general direction of the Australian approach to
Aboriginal advancement.
We propose to give the fullest co-operation to the States, and I am sure we
will get the fullest co-operation in return.
Our ultimate objective is, of course, the assimilation of Aboriginal Australians
as fully effective members of a single Australian society. This policy was enunciated
by the 1965 Conference between the States and the Commonwealth on
Aboriginal affairs and, from the Aboriginal viewpoint, there is nothing arbitrary
about it. I think I should quote again the exact text there decided upon:
' The policy of assimilation seeks that all persons of Aboriginal descent
will choose to attain a similar manner and standard of living to that of
other Australians, and live as members of a single Australian community.'
In other words, without destroying Aboriginal culture, we want to help our
Aboriginals to become an integral part of the rest of the Australian people, and
we want the Aboriginals themselves to have a voice in the pace at which this
process occurs.
We will measure policy proposals against this objective, and will wish to
avoid measures which are likely to set Aboriginal citizens permanently apart
from other Australians through having their development based upon separate
or different standards.
We believe that if Aboriginal Australians can be helped, and encouraged to
help themselves, to develop their aptitudes more fully, to accept further responsibility
for their own individual activities, to become self-supporting and thus
re-acquire their dignity of life-that then they will be readily attracted to and
welcomed to the assimilation we aim for. In this way they could contribute
from their own traditional culture to the complex of influences so diverse in
origin which makes up our national life, and, while sharing in this complex,
continue to take pride in their own contribution to it.
However, we recognise that, despite progress over the last quarter-century,
many Aboriginal Australians are subject to special handicaps which impede
their advancement. We are ready, therefore, to support additional action designed
to help Aboriginals overcome these handicaps in the transitional phase.
We propose to assist State policies directed towards these ends in three
specific areas: Health Education Housing 
We have already had some information from the States on these aspects,
and we hope that some general principles in relation to them will be discussed
at this Conference. This will enable us to make definite arrangements with each
of the States without delay under each of these three headings.
We recognise that the needs of different States will need to be met in
different ways, so that a co-ordinated Australian policy need not be a uniform
one. It is because of this that we feel it is preferable to make individual arrangements
with the various States on the basis of the general principles which may
emerge from discussions at this Conference.
After we have received detailed proposals from the various States, and after
our own Budget has been brought down, we shall indicate to each State the way
in which we think we can best assist and the funds available for such assistance.
In dividing the available funds between the States, we shall get some guidance
from the size of their Aborginal populations, although we may not always conform
strictly to this rule.
Any amounts contributed by the Commonwealth will be in addition to the
normal annual allocations made at Premiers' Conferences and Loan Councils,
but we expect any Commonwealth assistance to be a net addition to and not in
substitution for any amount which would otherwise be spent by a State upon
Aboriginal welfare. And this will be a condition of the grant.
SWhile we believe that the major part of the application of this welfare policy
within each State should be done by the State Administration concerned, this
does not preclude the possibility of some independent Commonwealth action.
Clearly, in any such instance, we shall consult the States concerned before we
undertake any such measures within their boundaries.
It is clear that our Aboriginal population is now not only increasing, but is
also increasing at a faster rate than the Australian average. Unhappily, the
additional population is not yet self-supporting, but remains in large part
dependent upon charity, Social Service benefits and similar benefits. The continuance
of such a state of affairs is obviously incompatible with the general
concept of Aboriginal dignity which we all seek to foster. It should be a primary
aim of our policy to make our Aboriginals self-supporting as fully and as
quickly as possible. They are entitled to have the opportunity to attain their
economic independence. And indeed effective assimilation is dependent upon
Aboriginal citizens being able to stand on their own feet.
We are aware of, and welcome, the interest both of the States and of Church
and other organisations working towards this objective, and we propose to reinforce
what they are doing.
We have therefore approved in principle the provision of a Fund for special
assistance, including capital funds, for potentially viable enterprises to be established
for or by Aboriginals either indvidually or co-operatively. Provision of
such funds will not, of course, be unlimited or indiscriminate, and we shall be
glad of any comments which this conference may make upon the way in which
we should administer them. In due course we would hope to obtain advice and
help from the appropriate State authorities before approving any particular projects
within their boundaries. 
This capital assistance will be available on an Australia-wide basis, and will
be controlled by the Commonwealth through its Office of Aboriginal Affairs.
We regard this proposal as an essential part of our policy of assisting our
Aboriginals to become self-supporting, whether it be in the field of primary or
secondary industry. In parallel with this, the Commonwealth Department of
Labour and National Service will undertake detailed surveys of employment
opportunities for Aboriginals and of the necessary measures to expand them
and to provide incentives for Aboriginals to take them up. In this, we shall hope
to work with the fullest co-operation of the corresponding State machinery.
In short, we propose to apply ourselves constructively to the task of
Aboriginal advancement, with special emphasis upon making our Aboriginal
citizens independent. We shall rely very largely upon the State administrations
and we are ready to receive and evaluate any suggestions which the States may
make to us, either at this conference or subsequently.
Over the short term, the kind of proposals we envisage will undoubtedly increase
our outlay upon Aboriginal welfare, but in proportion as our policy succeeds
( and I believe, between us, it has every chance of success) our outlay will
diminish. In spite of the extra outlay initially involved, I consider this policy to
be not just an extension of the ' hand-out' principle, but in fact the very antithesis.
Finally, may I add that we have noted the efforts being made by the States
to involve Aboriginals themselves in the administration of their own affairs and
in the exercise of proper authority among their own people. This is also an
essential part of restoring Aboriginal motivation. We welcome these efforts, and
will ourselves emulate them.
We feel too that this Conference should now be established on an annual
basis, and the Commonwealth would be pleased next year to act as the host for
it, should this Conference decide that that is what they wish.
By Authority: A. J. A RTHuR, Cwlth Govt PrinteCra, n berra 



EXPO 70 L
ANNOUNCEMVEi-4T BY' TEE PRIME MI1NL* STER,
MjR1 N GORTON, OF DESiGN FOR AUSTRALLIN
PAVILION AT OSAKA JULY 1968
Admiral Morrison, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is an opportunity which I am glad to take to announce
the selection of the design for the Australian pavilion for EXPO 70. You
can see it, and I hope you will agree with me that it is an imaginative and
eye-catching concept and one which I think will do us credit in Osaka.
This design was chosen because it-was considered that it
had those qualities of originality and aesthetic appeal which are most
likely to capture the imaginations of those citizens who go through this
exhibition in Japan. I don't propose to dwell at any length on its interesting
features because these will be described to you later by those who know
them in -much more detail and who are able to give a much better detailed
description both of the building and of the tube in which the exhibition itself
is to be laid out. It is not surprising, but it is worth mentioning that the design
of the building, coming from the Department of Works, was due to the work
of the same architect who designed our building in Montreal a highl y
successful building in that exhibition.
Nor is it surprising that the layout of the exhibition itself,
as distinct from the building, has as its architect I expect that is the
word.... designer, whatever it might the man responsible is again
Robin Boyd who was responsible for the interior layout of the building
designed by Mr Maccormickc for Montreal.
I think the displays and I think you will agree when you hear a bout
, them. to be shown in this building, will be just as exciting as the
building is itself, and will be just as imaginative.
International expositions such as this bring together from all
parts of the world the most adva-aced innovations in design, architectq~ re,
in display of exhibits and in film techniques. To make an impact in this
kind of exposition, we have to be contemporary and we hrne to be imaginative.
I hope that as you learn more about the way in which the design is to be
laid out and as you examine the building, you will agree that we are being
contemporary and we are being imaginative in this instance.
I think all I wish to say in addition to that are some words on
the scale of our participation, as a nation, in this exposition. The
budget for this exhibit will be something of the order of $ 6 million ( Australian).
But we see this as well worth expending at a time when we are having closer
and closer contact with Japan in trade and indeed in many other ways. We
feel that the millions of people in Japan who will, we confidently expect, go
through this building, examine the exhibits and form an impression of our / 2 
-2-
nation from which the exhibits came and in which the building was designed,
will go away with. a better understanding of our nation-and will go away with
a feeling, perhaps developed above that high level at which it at present
stands. This, I think, is full justification for us, a growing nation,
and a nation to grow yet more, to take part in this international exposition
on the scale on which we propose and with the building you see before you
and with the exhibits that will be described to you. 



/ 71~ ~
S. C. B. G. S. ( SHORE) TRIDENT DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT LAUNCHING DINNER
SYDNEY, NSV# 22 JULY, 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Presiding Chairman, Mrs Dixon, Mr Headmaster, Member of Parliament,
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is extremely pleasant for me to have the opportunity to talk
tonight to a number of people who, for the most part, are directly
involved with Shore or, in the case of the female population present,
indirectly involved with Shore. The ladies, no doubt, have been regaled
with anecdotes of what happened when their husbands were at Shore. I
am going to add to some of those anecdotes, if you will forgive me,
because I am really a ring-in in a way.
Two or three years at a fairly early age, I suppose, is not
the same as staying for the whole of one's education'at the one institution,
but nevertheless, those two or three years left a number of indelible
impre. ssions upon me. As Tim Halstead and some of those others who
were with me in the old observatory, which was known as Robson House,
will bear out, those were days which one remembers.
I started as a boy, and that was wonderful, and then as
a weeldy boarder and that was not so bad, and then as a boarder, and I
suppose that was bearable. In those days and this is quite incredible
there was a system under which a housemaster in charge of a house was
paid a certain sum per head per pupil. And anything he could make on
keeping that pupil went into his own pocket, with the result that we were
fed, but I think that on the whole we would have been able to equate ourselves
with " yon Cassius" whom you may remember had a " lean and hungry look".
Tonight I have learnt in the dormitories in this house there
have just been installed carpets is that correct, Mr Headmaster?
Carpets really I don't know what the world is coming to, because my
mind goes back to when very large rats used to run over us every night
I assure you this is quite true:' and being young, and with all the things
that one has when one is young, we managed to buy ourselves these wire
mesh rat traps which we put on the bed. Every now and again somebody
would go " Clonk! I've got one" and we wo aid all rush out and drown it
in the bath and watch the bubbles coming up. This is perfectly true.
That was the way it used to be and I don't think it really did any of us any
harm. But I do remember by contrast between Shore and Geelong Grammar
one strange delicacy concerning Shore, which didn't obta in i~ n the later
schocl to which I went.
When one had somehow or other offended authority in Shore in
those days, they said, " V alk out in front of the class and get chastised"
and they had great canes in those days. They said, " Hold out your hiand"
and they would beat you on your hand. They were much more indelicate in
the later school to which I went. They didn't beat you on your hands at
all, though they beat you just as frequently and just as hard. / 2 
-2
I am sorry that tonight two people that I remember so
well and to whom I owe so much are not here. One is Pat Eldershaw, who
was a housemaster of distinction. He is a man to wthom I owe a great deal.
I am not sure that this wasn't in some way mitigated. You see, he did so
well at teaching me in Lower 4C that I managed to be sort of the top of the
class and was therefore promoted to Upper 4A, and that left a gap which
I didn't understand, and ever since that time, I have never been any good
at academic pursuits at all.
I did go to the Headmaster at the time, Mr Robson.. I was
a very small boy and this was obviously very wrong.... and I said, " I think
you'ye promoted me too far, I don't quite understand this, and he said,
" Take your hands off the desk and stand to attention. You will go where
you are told, so I went where I was told. But they were really, in spite
of these things all of which I said are true.... you didn't believe the rats
but it was true -it did no harm to any single one of us. I am positive of that.
0 The othaer m-an who I am sorry is not here tonight is Bingeye
tBoelSl, owehof ois a vhery alekanb, otakll Quaeennts lansddert whoe, rwnh en hoet first ocam ne dwown
Queenslanders weren't in those days, so on every possible occasion, he used
to take them off and tie the laces together and hang them around his nec.
But he turned into one of the best oarsmen and one of the best boxers and one
of the best house captains, and one of the best citizens that Shore or
Australia has ever had.
There we were in those days, and so many of you who are here
tonight were there with me, when we had education " reading, writing,
' rithmetic, taught with the aid of a hickory stick". And do you remember we
had thirties, the origin of which I never understood until tonight. If you
had somehow or other offended authority, you got one thirty and that didn't
matter you just wrote that in a book. If you did it again, you got two
thirties, and that didn't really matter. Nothing happened. But once you
b got three thirties, you had to go and drill under the sergeant. Do you
remember? On that asphalt place for half an hour. If you got four
thirties, you had to come back on Saturday mornings. I don' t know whether
that still obtains. I hope it does because I think it is a good disciplinary
application. Forty years ago there was a completely different approach to
education from that which we now have. In some ways, I think it was a
little better, because when you did wrong, you got clobbered, and when you
do wrong, you ought to get clobbered. But those days lacked the foresight,
the attempt to understand the individual chpracter and the individual capacities
of the schoolboy and this is now one of those hallmarks of schools such
as Shore, and of our general educational system.
Though I am a little sad I hope the Press won't take this down,
because if they do, it will be misreported though I am a little sad that
discipline and corporal punishment is not as freely. u sed as it was, and
instead people are given lectures which are much harder to take, never theless
the general approach to education mnust be agreed to be greatly improved.
Where, then, do the independent schools and where, then, does a national
as distinct from a state government come into the picture in endeavouring
to foster this improvement? / 3~ 
-3
Well, insofar as the independent schools are concerned, I
have no hesitation in saying this that there always has been in Australia
a right for people to choose whether they will, at some sacrifice to them ' selves,
send their children to a school other than those run freely by a government.
And there always ought to be a right for people to malke that choice. It is
a democratic right people ought to be alle to exercise.
Secondly, there is an educational advantage. I do not say
that merit lies in independent schools, or merit lies in government schools.
Quite clearly, as the development of education in Australia has shown, there
is no monopoly of merit either in the independent or in the government school
systems. But I think there would be a danger, if there were to be only one
system in a state or in a nation, that that system might become monolithic, and
because it became monolithic, might become moribund. Therefore, if there
is a chance of a different approach, of a different evaluation, of selecting this
method of education instead of that, then that can only be of benefit both to
the pupils at independent and to the pupils at government. schools. The
systems must interact upon each other, as they do, and the independent
schools must be prepared to take from the government schools the advances
which they have proved, and the government schools are prepared and have
taken from the independent schools the advances they have proved. This
reacts to the benefit of the children and the pupil. So this again is a reason
for the support by governments of independent schools.
I believe that Sir Robert Menzies as Prime Minister, and
if I may s ay so, myself as his first Minister of Education and Science,
and before that as the man to whom he gave the running of Commonwealth
intervention in education have fostered the growth, and the development
not only of independent but of government schools throughout Australia. In
doing this, we were not only motivated by the things I have put before you.
But also by another not insignificant matter, and that is that the economic
cost to the community of maintaining a pupil at an independent school of any
kind is much, much less than the economic cost to the community would be
if all pupils were to go to government schools and all were to be completely
supported by government taxation.
So there was not only a democratic, there was not only an
educational, but there was also an economic reason why schools such as Shore
should be supported and maintained by governments and by those who have
received the benefits of attending such schools and who wish their children
to receive similar benefits.
This is a great school with a great tradition in one State of
a nation, but little less than a fortnight ago, my wife was talking to another
great school in Brisbane, known up there as " Churchie", the Brisbane Church
of England Boys Grammar School. ' There are in Western Australia and
Tasmania and in every State of Australia, schools such as this, schools with
great and long traditions. It is my hope and my belief that those pupils who
attend these schools now will be taught that this country in which they live is
a nation and no longer a collection of six colonies... and that those who
come from Shore next year will in ten years be found working in Queensland,
or Western Australia or South Australia, or wherever it may be; and that
those who come from Brisbane Church of England Grammar School or from
Geelong Grammar School, or wherever, will be found working in New South
Wales because if there is one thing that is needed more than anything
else in this nation today in the situation in which it finds itself, it is the / 4 
-4
fostering of a national and not a colonial and not a state spirit. And I
believe that in schools such as this, and indeed not only in schools such
as this, this is the path of the future. But I air not sure, Sir, that schools
such as this have not led the way towards such a path.
This is another reason, I believe, why the Commonwealth
Government has come into the field of education, come into it not only for
the reasons I have already given you but because it is impossible to leave
such an important, such a significant field to be developed to different levels
in different parts of this nation such as ours. We could not now or in the
future exist if we allowed, for example, in Queensland, the standard of
educat-ion to fall below that in New South Wales or in Victoria, if we allowed
the basic standard of education in any one part of our country to fall below
the basic standard of education in all the rest.
It is necessary for a C-' ommonwealth Government to come in
and see that a child in any part of this nation of ours is enabled to be
provided with the facilities that the children in other parts of the nation have.
This is why there has been so much more involvement in education by
the Commonwealth than has ever occurred before. This is why in the last
three or four years the expenditure has increased three and a half times.
This is why, more importantly, in the last three and a half years or so, there
has been more advice given, more leadership given.
Let us try and get a little bit more agreement as to the
curricula between the various States. Let us try and get a little more
not uniformity, because that is not what is wanted a little more equality
of standards between the various States. Let us try and get to a situation
where a child educated in one State and his parents move to another....
can go to a university in that new State without having to meet special
matriculation requirements. This ultimately must be good for a nation.
I think there are only a-few things more, Mr Presiding
Chairman, I want to say. You will all know that the Commonwealth
Government for long has been interested in the provision of scientific
laboratories and science facilities in schools governmental and independentthroughout
Australia. Indeed, if you haven't received it, you are going to get
another offer of 000 very shortly for your science laboratcry's equipment.
We have heard tonight from a professor of physics, of the technological
requirements of a modern age, and these we can not undervalue, because
if our mterial standard of 1ivigi tpo increase if our capacity to increase the
material standarI of our neigriMus is to incredse, then we must use to the
utmost wivit is discovered by scionce and modern technology.
But I hope that none of us will ever believe that scientific
knowledge and technological knowledge can take the place of proper education,
because with a full and complete knowledge of science, two things are
possible. You can split an atom so that you can diagnose a disease and cure
it where previously it could not bce-diagnosed and cured; or you can split it
so that you can examine the material to be used in building to knaow whether
if it is used that building will stand up under any stress; or you can split it
so that from the isotopes you can discover how better to devel~ op the products
of your land and the products of your industry; or you can split it so that
you can devastate vast areas of land and destroy innumerable populations.
Science offers both those alternatives, 4 * 1 
Similarly with technology. You can use it so that you
can the better produce, so that you can with a smaller number of people
and gre-ter machinery, turn out more and more, or you can use it so that
you put your efforts into creating engines df destruction.
Now what is going to decide whether scientific knowledge
is used for the good or the bad? What is go ing to decide whether technological
advances are used to improve the lot of n'll of us and of our neighbours, or
to hold fears ov.-r the head of us an d of our neighbours? Is true education
the study of history because that shows us the problems which men have
had to face throughout the ages in tryiag to organise a society, and how in
one way or another, with this degree of success or that, they have managed
to overcome those problems, and how something which at first seems a
panacea has been tried and has not been successful. Or is true education
a study of religion, because that breaks the shackles of the present and
makes us look to the ultimate goal we all seek, and that has particular
application to a church school. A study of literature, perhaps, because that
shows the dreams and aspirations of the individuals who make up a nation,
half expressed or fully expressed, according to the capacity of the literary
figure one studies And the study of politics, which shows the duty owed
by a citizen to the community in which he lives, the duty not only to receive
from it, but to give to it. These are the aims of true education,
Fully understood, these will see that scientific and
technical knowledge is used for the furtherance of those aims and not for
the destruction which they make possible. Could anything be more impcr tant
than seeking to see that the forces which are now unleashed through science
and technology are through true education properly used? Can there be
any better way of seeing that this true education is provided to one's children
than by giving to schools throughout Australia the capacity to see that in
this way we become a great nation. This, I think, is what this dinner is all
about because here, in a small way, in one school, we can a little advance
the aims I believe we all have for the nation of Australia. 



THIRD MEETING OF THE ASIAN
AND PACIFIC COUNCIL
Opening Speech by the Prime Minister, 1. 5 AUG i968
Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, Mp
Canberra, ACT 3AR'
JULY 1968
It is my privilege to address you this morning on what is an
historic occasion for the Australian Government and people.
On behalf of the Australian Government, it is my pleasure
to welcome to Australia the distinguished representatives of the Republic
of China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the
Philippines, Thailand, and the Republic of Viet Nam as well as the
observer from the kingdom of Laos.
The Asian and Pacific Council is a young organisation, having
been established in Seoul just two years ago. It has had a promising
beginning and it is the Australian Government's conviction that it will have
an increasingly important role to play in the future of the region.
ASPAC includes a representative group of significant countries
in the area and we in Australia are proud to be members of it.
As a regional organisation, ASPAC has some unique
characteristics. It includes countries from North Asia, South-East Asia
and the South Pacific, but it do-es not include countries from outside the
region. A number of other regional organisations do include
as full members the great powers from outside the region and it is right
and proper that this should be so. The region in which we all live will
for a long time to come need the help and support of the adv anced nations
outside it. But the existence of ASPAC testifies to the fact that there ip
a growing recognition in our region that in the long run our destinies will
be determined by our own efforts.
Since the end of World War 11 there has been a steady growth
of regional consciousness in many parts of the world. Increasingly
governments and peoples have realised that their individual efforts can
be made more fruitful if they work closely with their neighbours.
We now understand perhaps more clearly than in the past
that goodwill between neighbours, and a readiness to look forward to
friendliness and co-operation rather than backwards to old hostilities, is an
indispensable requirement for that progress towards the decent standards
of living to which all our peoples asp4:-e. We must have cordial co-operation
among ourselves and it is to be promotion of this co-operation to which the
Asian and Pacific Council is dedicated.
The need for regional co-operation was recognised in the
Asian and Pacific region as early as anywhere in the world, yet in some
ways the translation of this into practical action has not proceeded as
rapidly as it has elsewhere. 9/ 2 
-2
The reason for this perhaps is that the peoples of our region
have rich and diverse cultures, and in recent times they have followed*
very different historical paths. In some cases their links have been with
European countries rather than with their neighbours. But now the basic
facts of geography and economics are reasserting themselves and none Of
us can doubt that ultimately the future of this region lies in the hands of:
the peoples and countries within it, so many of whom are represented here
today. It is true that before ASPAC was founded, bodies like the Colombo
Plan and the regional commissions and institutions set up under the United
Nations played an important part in stimulating the sftse of a regional
community. Indeed, if you cast your minds back, two remarkable achievements
in regional economic co-operation that come immediately to mind are
the Asian Development Bank and the Mekong Development Project; and a
complex network of other regional activities has already been developed.
The principal purpose of all these existing activities has been to apply to the
development of the area the resources and knowledge available from countries
jutside the area. This is where ASPAC differs somewhat from previously
established regional organisations. Its main concern is to promote
co-operation among the countries inside the region itself and to develop the
potential strength within it through our own efforts.
The prospects for practical co-operation of this kind are
steadily increasing. For example, the rapid economic growth in several
ASPAC countries will help to ensure that trade between them continues to
grow. It is important that the rate of growth of a number of developing
countries in ASPAC is higher than that of all but a few countries outside
thiis region. The annual growth rates among the majority of ASPAC countries
ranges from 5 per cent to more than 8 per cent. This compares with an
approximate average of about 4 per cent for ' he total Asian and Far East
region. Our own Australian trade with ASPAC countries is growing
rapidly. In 1966/ 67 about one quarter of our total trade was with our
fellow members of ASPAC.
We are particularly pleased that ASPAC countries are beginning
to benefit from the Australian scheme for tariff preference on certain goods
manufactured by developing countries, and we hope that they will tak-e
increasing advantage of the scheme and the opportunities which it presents.
Economic and social progress can of course only be maintained
in our region in circumstances of peace and stability. Unfortunately, the
region is one which at the present time in history is most exposed to threats
of direct and indirect aggression. While these threats exist, we must
welcome the support of our major allies in contributing to the security of
the region but must at the same time do our best to provide for our defence
through our own efforts, and we should do our best to ensure that no
internal differences of opinion upset the peace and stability which the region
requires. / 3 
-2
The reason for this perhaps is that the peoples of our region
have rich and diverse cultures, and in recent times they have followed
very different historical paths. In some cases their links have been with
European countries rather than with their neighbours. But now the basic
facts of geography and economics are reasserting themselves and none of
us can doubt that ultimately the future of this region lies in the hands of
the peoples and countries within it, so many of whom are represented here
today. It is true that before ASPAC was founded, bodies like the Colombo
Plan and the regional commissions and institutions set up under the United
Nations played an important part in stimulating the sose of a regional
community. Indeed, if you cast your minds back, two remarkable achievements
in regional economic co-operation that come immediately to mind are
the Asian Development Bank and the Mekong Development Project; and a
complex networlk of other regional activities has already been developed.
The principal purpose of all these existing activities has been to apply to the
development of the area the. resources and knowledge available from countries
jutside the area. This is where ASPAC differs somewhat from previously
established regional organisations. Its main concern is to promote
co-operation among the countries inside the region itself and to develop the
potential strength within it through our own efforts.
The prospects for practical co -operation of this kind are
steadily increasing. For example, the rapid economic growth in several
ASPAC countries will help to ensure that trade between them continues to
grow. It is important that the rate of growth of a number of developing
countries in ASPAC is higher than that of all but a few countries outside
this region. The annual growth rates among the majority of ASPAC countries
ranges from 5 per cent to more than 8 per cent. This compares with an
approximate average of about 4 per cent for ' he total Asian and Far East
region. Our own Australian trade with ASPAC countries is growing
rapidly. In 1966/ 67 about one quarter of our total trade was with our
fellow members of ASPAC.
We are particularly pleased that ASPAC countries are beginning
to benefit from the Australian scheme for tariff preference on certain goods
manufactured by developing countries, and we hope that they will tak&amp;-e
increasing advantage of the scheme and the opportunities which it presents.
Economic and social progress can of course only be maintained
in our region in circumstances of peace and stability. Unfortunately, the
region is one which at the present time in history is most exposed to threats
of direct and indirect aggression. While these threats exist, we must
welcome the support of our major allies in contributing to the security of
the region but must at the same time do our best to provide for our defence
through our own efforts, and we should do our best to ensure that no
internal differences of opinion upset the peace and stability which the region
requires. / 3 
-3
Lt may be appropriate for mre to say that Australia has
long recognised her responsibilities for contributing to the security of
the region. Indeed, since the end of the Second World War, the youth of
Australia has participated in the fight against aggression in Korea, in
Malaysia and in Viet Nam, and its armed forces have made a small but
valuable contribution to the security of other countries in the region.
ASPAC is in no sense a security organisation and in the view
of the Australian Government it should not attempt to become one; even
though we recognise that if our efforts under ASPAC to promote the welfare
of the region are to succeed means it is necessary for the region to be
secure from aggression. The answer to aggression is not, of course, to be found
only in the military arena. Military strength itself flows from a prosperous
and progressive community, but so does political stability and freedom from
subversion, and in order to achieve that prospercui s and progressive
community 4ad that political stability,. neighbourly co-operation in paths
of peace is we believe, essential,
So in ASPAC, we are seeking to establish a close comradeship
and a practical working co-operation in the political, economic, cultural
and social fields. We also will maintain an open door through which other
countries in the region can join us whenever they wish to do so. This, of
course, is a matter for their free choice.
But we hope, however, that as the real objectives of the
organisation are increasingly appreciated and understood, there will be a
growing inclination in all the countries in the region to realise the value
of the kind of co-operation that ASPAC stands for.
What we are seeking to establish is a genuine and deep
understanding in all aspects of our relations of one another's points of view
and of one another's problems. None of us is seeking to force the adoption
of a common view upon others, but rather to develop a common approach
to those problems which all of us share. In short, to identify the problems
which are common and to seek to discover whether there is a common
solution which we can together apply.
One of the great advantages indeed of ASPAC is that it is not
an organisation which meets to make proposals which are to be voted upon,
to have decisions which are to be done by majority rule, but rather to meet
in order to discuss, to identify and to see whether there are common
approaches which can solve the problems of the region.
We have already become in ASPAC a valuable forum for the
exchange of those views between government leaders and the officials of
our countries. They meet together not only in this Council, but regu larly
between Council meetings in the Standing Committees of ASPAC, and at
numerous international conferences, they take the '-pportunity of holding
informal consultations among the delegations from this region, representing
each one of the countries here present.
I believe the organisation must be congratulated on the
practical way in which it has set about its task,, s. During the past year,
my col-league, the Minister for External Affairs has chaired the regular
meetings of the Standing Committee and those meetings have been most
valuable in promoting that kind of understanding of which I have spoken and
which is the basic objective of this organisation. / 4 
-4-
Durirg the year, the ASPAC Registry of Expert Services has
been established in Canberra and is now in operation, and at this Council
meeting, Ministers will be asked to give their final endorsement to the
agreement establishing the ASPAC Cultural and Social Centre in Seoul.
I have no doubt that further projects of this kind will be developed, and
each will have some contribution to make to those objectives of which I
have spoken to you this morning.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my welcome to the
distinguished representatives here today, and by expressing the hope and
confidence that your deliberations during this Third Asian and Pacific
Council Meeting will further strengthen the ties that unite us, I hnpe by
seeking, peering down the paths of the future, to put into your minds a
vision of this region with its people, politically free and economically
prosperous, working together for the good of all human beings in the region,
perhaps partly as a result of conferences such as these and of the work put
into those conferences by the representatives of the countries who are here
today and by the backing they will get from the ordinary men and women
who in this region, and perhaps ultimately in the world, have a common goal
which ASPAC seeks.
I declare the meeting open. 



OPENING OF
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John Gorton, MP AUGUST 1968
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
You, Sir Grenfell, have told us something of the
history of libraries, and in particular of the history of this building in
which we today find ourselves. While you were telling us about it, I muld
not but thinik how fortunate you were to have been driven out by the ferrets
of the Treasury from the burrow in which you once found yourself, if the
end result of that was that you find yourself in this if I may so describe it
warren. I know that at one stage, you described or Sir Robert
Menzies described the storage places in which the books of the National
Library were placed as " elegant igloos", those being those Nissen huts
scattered around the place. No-one, Sir, would have the temerity to
describe this as an " elegant igloo". Rather, I think, the proper name for
it might be Xanadu, because you will remember it was in Xanadu that
Kubla Khan " a stately pleasure dome decreed", and this perhaps might be
a fair description of what ought to be a stately building, a national library.
Many hearts and hands and minds have worked
effectively and devotedly over the years to bring to completion this building
in which we now find ourselves Only on the rarest occasions does
some accomplishment such as this result from anything other than the
devotion of many people, and the contributions of many thoughts and of
many minds. I think that as the years go by, and the decades go by
in our nation, and as they go by give more growth, give more colour,
give more depth to our national story, this building having already gained
the recognition that it has, will be counted in the world as one of the world's
great libraries. You have given thanks, Sir, to those who have worked
so effectively to bring to fruition this projact, but what you have not done
and what I propose to do is to say hc~ w much credit is due to you and to your
enthusiastic work as Chairman of the Council of the National Library of
Australia. I have some knowledge of this, having worked with you in other
directions, and know how much devotion you have given to this task, even if,
if I may say so, the standard of poetry of which you gave us an example
has not got quite the finish of the building in which it is stored. 2 
-2-
The early libraries of the world, Mvr Chairman, as I understand,
tended to be temples in which holy books were kept and where the priests
were the guardians of the books, and no doubt, like most librarians, refused
to allow the books to leave, on the very good grounds that if they did leaye,
it was unlikely they would be brought back.
VWe here have passed on from that, but there still is in the concept
of a library, something of that original -assessment in that in a building there
ftestored books which are not merely dogma, but books which in the sense
in which they encompass the thoughts and wisdoms of the past could be
regarded as having some great significance, if not some holy significance,
in the present. I have spoken of you, M r Chairman, and those who have worked
with you in bringing this to completion, but I also want to speak a little of
those who make it operate, of those who will see that it will work for the
end for which it is designed. This is where we rely on the staff of libraries
not the directors of libraries but the staff of libraries who catalogue the
books, who index the subject matter, who supply a research service and
give easy access to any area of study which is required by somebody who
comes to a library. It is these people, working quietly and devotedly in
their chosen tasks who alone make a building such as this, and the books
in a building such as this, fulfil a proper, effective and efficient task.
Without them, there would be so many books here that not only c ould the
mind of a would-be scholar not encompass them, but the hanids of a
would-be scholar could not find them. This is the task of those who run
this library I think, Sir, that in its practical application, the Library here
serves and will serve the nation through a central government, the
Australian Government, the most important government, working in
conjunction with State Libraries of State Governments throughout the length
and breadth of this nation.
It will serve our Territories. It will serve our Missions abroad,
and it will provide one main strand in the network of library services which
covers the whole of the world.
I think the nations of the world will draw closer and have drawn
closer as communications have improved. No longer is it enough, as it
once was, to live in a closed community of ideas. It is necessary that
there should be an exchange of ideas to the greatest possible extent among
the greatest possible number of people, and libraries such as this in various
countries are the best means by which this can take place.
just over one hundred years ago, another man opening another
library said great library contains the diary of the human race"
This library, as part of a world-wide library service, will keep that diary
up to date for us to study the world's Todays, as well as its iyesterdays,
and by being able to study its Todays and its Yesterdays, perhaps enable us
to be the more wise in seeking to shape the world's Tomorrows. ./ 3 
-3
The insistent pressures of growth and the enlarging executive
functions of the national library made its separation from the Parliamentary
Library sensible and necessary and part of the orderly progression of
events. Here today, we mark that final act of separation.
But it hasn't created two separate worlds of scholarship, this
separation. There will still be the closest and most intimate relationship
between the two libraries, and that will in each case give strength to the other.
We are keeping before us, as sixty years ago the joint Library
Committee established by Sir Edmund Barton kept before it as an idea] l that
such a library as this shall be worthy of the Australian nation, shall be the
home of literature, a part of the world and a part of all time.
Eight years ago, Sir Robert Menzies, the seventeenth Prime
Minister, presented the National Library Bill which supported the Paton
Committee' s recommendation for this library. Less than six years later,
Sir Robert laid the foundation stone of this library, this relatively inexpensive
library, I think you said, Sir, costing no more than $ 8 million without books.'
Now, on the 15th August, 1968, there is given to me, the nineteenth
Prime Minister, the great and enduring honour of being asked to open that
Library for which so many other people have woriked for so long, and
which those of you who have eyes to see will agree with mie, is what I have
sought to describe it as today.
With just one more quotation, Sir, I propose soon to declare this
Library open, but I did want to say something about books, or ratLr to say
what some other great man had said about books or rather, some gre-at
man had said about books. That is Joseph Conrad, whom I quote:
" Of all inanimate objects, of all man' s creations, books are the
nearest to us, for they contain our vey thoughts, our ambitions, our
indignations, our illusions, our fidelity to truth, and our persistent
leaning toward error, But most of all they resemble us in their
precarious hold on life".
This building, and those who attend these books will see that the hold on life
is not precarious and that the influence on life is that which those who read
these books choose that it shall be. That is one of the great achievements of
today and one reasou wblI have such pleasure in declaring this National
Library open. 



PRESENTATION OF PRESIDENTIAL UNITCITATION
TO THE SI-XTH BATTALION, RAR
TOWNSVILLE, QLD. 18 AUGUST 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mvr. John Gorton
The award which I have just presented on behalf of the
President of the United States, and the streamer which I have just attached
to the colours as a result of that award, is one which is not lightly given,
and one which is rarely given outside the Armed Services of the United States
itself. it has perhaps a special significance, something different
from the awards which we in the tradition of the British and Australian
armies give for service in the field, for it is an award not to an individual
for some specific act of bravery, but to a team, to a unit, who together
supporting each other in full comradeship, won the right to obtain the
award. You have heard the words of the citation itself, and I.
want you to form in your minds, those of you who were not there and 1 know
that a number to whom I speak were there I want you to form in your
minds the pictures that lie behind the words. The picture of a Company in
the green gloom of a rubber plantation in Viet Nam, with tropic rain pouring
down, curtaining the distance, causing discomfort to the individual, turning
the ground underfoot into mud and into morass. And to imagine that
Company pushing out from the ruins of a derelict village called Long Tan,
and suddenly in those circumstances being attacked and engaged without
warning with a storm of small arms, machine gun and mortar fire.
To those who thus launched this attack on the company,
with its platoons dispersed, it must have seemed as if the stage was set for
another classical exposition of guerrilla warfare as written by the enemy's
General Giap. For here was a small force by itself, able to be engaged with
overwhelming battalion strength by the enemy, and encircled on three sides
already, front and both flanks, shortly to be completely encircled from the
rear as well. So it must have seemed that here again was a situation where
one small force would be engaged by overwhelming enemy forces properly
entrenched, properly prepared, and that that small force would be overrun,
decimated and destroyed. But it did not turn out that way. Instead was a coolness w'Mch
must reflect the greatest credit on the unit, on the training the unit received,
and on the characters of those more than half of whom were National
Servicemen who made up the unit. The attack was received, the perimeter
was formied; thle attaclk1 was repulsed and repulsed until finally as other
companies camne to the assistance of Company, and as such succour as
could be given from the glowering skies was dropped from helicopters,
finally the enemy withdrew, with over 200 dead, plus over 500 wounded.
This in itself is a significant engagement, but over and above that, I think
it has this significance. / 2 
-2
It adds to the rich fabric of tradition of the Australian
Army which can look back over the years to those engagements in the First
and Second World War, and in Korea ( where indeed another Presidential
Unit Citation was wn by Australians). Such initiative, such courage, such
coolness,' such steadfastness contributes to a tradition which, should the
time come, will sustain the Army of the future in all its parts because that
is what traditions built by armed forces do.
It would be presumptuous of me, I think, to congratulate
those men in Company now. Some of them were not in Company then,
but they can wear this Presidential Citation while they serve in the Company.
Those who were in Company on that day will be able to wear this proud
insignia as long as they serve in the Army and wherever they serve.
i merely wish to express, speaking I believe for the
Australian nation, the admiration that we have for what then was done, And
the belief we have that what was done will, should need recur, be repeated.
It is my deep conviction that this addition to the annals of Australian arms
will keep thenm furbished, bright and keen in the years ahead of this nation.
And that is of great significance, for until the millennium arrives, we mpust
rely, in the ultimate, on those men and women of Australia, coming from
civilian pursuits, trained by those who give their lives to the Army, ready
when necessary to defend this country.
That is all I wish to say to you, concluding with thanlks
from Australians for what you have done. 



01 CZECHOSLOVAKIA_
COMMENTS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON
FEOLR EISINANRADIO 22 AUGUST 1968
I want to talk to you tonight about a matter which, though
it does not immediately impinge on the Australian people yet is of great
moment to them and to other free peoples throughout the world.
At approximately eight o'clock yesterday morning, Canberra
time, large forces of Russian troops, together with forces from other
satellite nations crossed the borders of Czechoslovakia in force against
the wishes of the Czechoslovakian Government and while most of the
citizens of Czechoslovakia were asleep. By the time morning came, they
were in military occupation of the country.
The Russian Charg6 d'Affaires called on me this morning
in order to present me a message, the gravamen of which was that
these Russian troops and other troops had entered Czechoslovakia at the
request of the Czechoslovakian Government.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I informed him
that I found this impossible to believe, and impossible to believe
particularly in view of the protests of the Czech Foreign Minister and
of the broadcasts from Prague indicating clearly, before the broadcasting
station was overrun, that this invasion was against the wishes of the legal
Czechoslovakian Government.
I said that I beliewd that the Australian Parliament and the
Australian people would share my disbelief. I asked him to convey to the
Russian Government this feeling on behalf of my Government, and I asked
him also to express to the Russian Government the distress and the
revulsion which my Government felt at -this action by the U. S. S. R.
This, I was told, is the message that would b. e conveyed.
The Parliament of Australia will be debating this matter
tonight, and while a Parliamentary motion may be a frail weapon to set
against the tanks and tommy-guns of the invaders, nevertheless, there
has been a message from the Parliament of Czechoslovakia before it
was overthrown, asking for the mobilisation of support from parliaments
and peoples throughout the rest of the world. This we are trying to do.
NOTE: The PM undertoolk this recording at the request of TV
and radio stations, to provide them with the substance
of his comments in Parliament this morning. 


14 September 1968
Mr Chairman, Mr Fox, Mr Southey, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is pleasant to be with you tonight. I hope later to have an opportunity to meet more people individually, but while it would be impossible to meet all individually, I do want you to know that it is delightful to be able to meet you collectively, and to meet you in Max Fox's bailiwick. Max has been with us for a long time. He did take over this seat from one of my greatest friends who was then in Parliament, Joe Gullett. He has represented it perhaps not as flamboyantly in some directions but certainly as solidly as Joe did. He is the Chairman of our Private Members! Social Services Committee, and social services, as I think you all know, is something which I believe goes to the heart of the running of P. country that we should take care of those who cannot take care of themselves, and he takes the approach that we must do this without discouraging thrift.
I think that perhaps today in Australia we live in the most exciting time that this country has ever known. There have been changes over past years of course, but on the whole they have been gradual. Was it a hundred years ago perhaps a hundred : years ago don't hold me to it, when Melbourne was served by square-rigged brigs and barquentines, and sailing ships coming slowly from other parts of the world, when we had horse-drawn transport, when those of you who have seen the paintings of what Burke Street used to look like, will know they represented a small and sleepy town, Gradually We became a city, but for so long we stood as a nation with a small population of 4 or 5 million. For so long we stood not really as a nation in our right, but as a nation the people of whom spoke of " home" and meant some other nation, meant Great Britain. My father used to do that, and I daresay there are some people in this room who used to do that, or whose parents used to do that. And it was taken as a natural thing that that was home, and Australia was a different place away from home small, distinct, colonial.
Again, the Second World War made some erosions in this approach, but just recently there has been not a gradual rate of change but a sudden explosion in this nation, an explosion which has not yet reached its height, and the end results of which we can only dream about.
 Who would have thought that suddenly at this point in this nation's history, all the old conceptions would have to be taken out, have to be re-examined, to be re-assessed because the world had changed and we had changed. No longer and I know these things are well known to all but no. longer, as was the case until a short time ago, do we live under the protection of Great Britain and the British Navy. That has gone. No longer do we live in a part of the world where all our neighbours were ruled by European powers British, Dutch, French and where the people themselves who were born there had no say in what happened. That has gone. There are now new nations all around us with new aspirations and new desires; a revolution in the area of the world in which we live is taking place at the same time as a revolution in the kind of protection t o which we used to be able to look.
 Well, that's all right. That happens. That poses difficulties and poses problems because it means we must reassess things and be more prepared to stand on our own feet in matters of defence, and give more of our substance to providing for matters of our own defence and make new approaches to the neighbours so close to us. Those are problems, but the solutions are also with us, or if not with us, within our grasp.
Let me illustrate that by telling you something of what is happening in this country something of what my wife and I saw in one brief visit in one week-.
We travelled around this nation. We saw in Gladstone a town in Queensland which we had visited before and which then was just a small, sleepy village with no future in front of it an alumina plant costing millions of dollars already increased by fifty per cent as to its capacity and now planned to be increased by another fifty per cent; coal loading wharves, a new harbour, and a prospect, provided cheap power can be given, of turning that alumina into aluminium, of smelting nickel, of putting in plants of half a dozen different kinds, of turning a town into a city, and turning a town into a city which has a chance of being a great city where previously there was none. That is happening now.
We went to Mt Isa, long-established of course, but suddenly discovering new ore bodies, owned, I am glad to say, as to about fifty per cent by Australians, and with another hundred years of earning export income for this country, which export income will enable our standards of living, here in Victoria, or in New South Wales, to rise as much as if it were earned here.
We went to Weipa, where the bauxite which has lain for hundreds of years is now being used to be turned into what the world wants, and to earn for us again millions on millions of dollars of overseas export income. On this frontier, as on the other frontiers I will tell you about, we saw the towns that had been built. No longer do people have to go into. the outback with a Coolgardie safe as we used to go and with kerosene refrigerator. Rather there are provided the most modern houses, air conditioning, electric stoves, everything that you would get in this blessed corner of the world, at a charge of about $ 6 a week by the company which provides these to those who work for it.
 We went to Cove, another enormous expansion for Australia, not yet producing, but which when it does produce, will provide in the present under-populated North, another city, another city which must strengthen our own security and help us to cope with the problems I have mentioned before, of defence and of our relations with our neighbours.
 And to Groote Eylandt, to find there again a thriving township, a growing township, and a company employing aboriginals from Groote Eylandt on precisely the same award wages as were available to Australian white-skinned people who went there, including a special hardship allowance for having to live on Groote Eylandt these people having been born there, and having lived all their lives there.
 Then on to the Ord, that still controversial irrigation project, where cotton may or may not be grown successfully, but where as I believe ultimately in this nation, there must be advantage from bringing some hundreds of thousands of acres under irrigation for whatever purpose.
 And then through the West ………….Mt. Newman not yet in producticn because there is a 270-mile railway line to be built by the company, a port to be completed by the company not by the State Government. This has already been done at cost to the company itself, which is mostly owned by Australians. A town built; Goldsworthy sending iron ore down; plans for producing iron pellets from the iron ore, and ultimately, I am sure, another iron and steel industry. There may be an offshoot here in Victoria of an existing iron and steel industry, but there will be another one in the west in time to come.
 And to Port Hedland, and Mt. Tom Price, through to the entirely Australian -owned Western Mining Corporation with some of the richest nickel mines in the world. These things will bring us in, within a measurable time at least one billion dollars a year of export income. Now what does this mean?
 Does this mean that because these things are situated in Western Australia, that Western Australia will get the benefit of this, or does it mean that because some of them are situated in Queensland, that Queensland will get the benefit of this? No it doesn't. What it means in terms of the export income it earns is that the whole of this nation will get the benefit and that a demand can be built up in this nation, all parts of it, which if our own resources cannot meet it, can be met in all parts of it by imports because of the export income so generated. And it means that of all the profits earned by all these companies now and in the years to come, all Australians are fifty per cent partners because the tax taken from these companies is 45 per cent of their earnings and the tax taken from all those who work in them is also flowing initially to the Australian Government and eventually perhaps there may be argument whether in large enough quantities or not but eventually to the other governments scattered around Australia.
 What I want to get into your minds by this very brief and necessarily insufficiently detailed catalogue is that there is now going on in this country something which ten years ago, five years ago, nobody could possibly have thought would happen. And this is probably only the beginning of other things which will be discovered, of other things which will be developed, of things which will be developed by billions of private capital and by, quite possibly, hundreds of millions of governmental capital which must necessarily be provided by the Australian Government.
 This will so transform this country that in a decade, or a decade and a half, we will be able, even more than we are now, to play a full full part in our own defence, we will be able to carry a population perhaps twice as great as that which we have now, and we will be able materially to be significant or more significant is the proper word in the councils of the world. I hope and believe that being more materially significant, we will also be able, if we adopt the proper approach, to present a society in which freedom for the individual is maintained, perhaps more than in any other society in the world, in which racial tensions have no part, as they have a part in too many other countries of the world, in which those who are not strong enough or who have not had the opportunity to provide for themselves in their old age or in their illness will, as a matter of right, be looked after by the community as a whole, properly looked after. A society in which we will have abandoned the philosophy that a pension for old age is not one which is intended to keep somebody but merely an addition to what would come from charity or a family. I hope we can abandon that and indeed, I have abandoned it so that there should be nobody provided with a pension which will not give them at least a modest standard of living so that they do not need blankets to be provided for them in the winter, so that they at least have enough to eat and a roof over their head.
These are the things that we can do because of the changes that are taking place, because of the possibilities that lie before us, and as we meet these challenges, it is essential, and I hope I don't offend anybody by saying this, and if I do, I don't much care, it is essential that we should develop a feeling of nationhood. Everybody wherever they live in Australia should say first, " I am an Australian and I am glad to be an Australian, and I am proud to be an Australian, and I am working for the Australian nation", and this) too, is in a sense a ' change from what would have been the situation ten years ago. I will illustrate it perhaps by a true story of what happened in Mt. Tom Price.
 Mr. Heath was out here, you may remember, and he went up there and he wanted to meet an Australian, and he was taken round by Mr. Court who is Minister for Industrial Development and they went to a gang of men working and he said to one, " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I am a Finn, and he said to another, " Are you an Australian?" and lie said, " No, I come from Germany", and he said to another, " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I come from Holland", but one was quite clearly identifiable as an Australian, and he said to him, " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I am a Victorian", and so he gave up:
But don't get me wrong. It is important to be a Victorian, or to be a New South Welshman, or to be a Western Australian, or to be a Queenslander, provided the overriding feeling is to be an Australian, and that we are going to build a country we will all be proud to belong to and let it be run in its divisions by those who have the responsibility for doing it.
I hope you will all help me in the years ahead to foster this feeling of real nationalism and I believe you will. I believe the Australia. n people want it, and I believe that with it and with the opportunities that lie within our grasp, we will be able to bring into existence on this continent a nation which will redress the sad balances in Europe and some countries in Asia and which, given wise material management and proper spiritual approach to the responsibilities towards individuals, will become a nation the like of which may never have been seen on this earth before.
Question: . As I understand it, the Chowilla Dam was intended to serve three purposes (rest of question mostly inaudible but dealing with purposes of Dam, salinity of the water; and shares by the States) . In recent South Australian elections, I am assured by friends in Renmark that Labor lost that seat solely through the failure of Mr. Dunstan' s Government to assume that the Chowilla Dam project would grow bigger. In the light of an impending Federal election, I have been asked by my friends in Renmark to find out whether the Commonwealth Government has any thoughts upon that particular project
 PM. Thank you. I don't know whether everybody heard that question. It was concerned with the Chowilla Dam which was a dam projected to be built virtually on the South Australian border near a place called Lake Victoria in order to provide a large storage of water which South Australia felt was to its advantage. Because the Murray River Commission agreed to it, that meant that it would be financed not only by the Commonwealth, the State of Victoria, and the State of South Australia, but also by the State of New South Wales, all of whom were to put some water in for it. It was considered wise to see whether ore could not build higher up in the Murray, in the head waters of the Murray, a dam more cheaply which would provide as much water and that that water could be earmarked for South Australia. That is under consideration now by the River Murray Commission and the engineers’ connected with that Commission. I wouldn't undertake to say what the recommendation of the Commission might be. But I think it likely that if the recommendation shows that a dam can be built for half the cost of Chowilla and can provide the water that South Australia wants and can provide it so that it runs all the way down the Murray and flushes it out and doesn't allow the salinity to build up, then I should imagine that the Commonwealth and the Premier of Victoria and the Premier of New South Wales would think that was a better proposition than building the dam at Chowilla.
Q. Question on Russian ships trading with Australia.
PM. I was asked a question on this in the Parliament last week. On Russian ships, the information that was provided to me by the Department was that there were some 13 Russian ships which had come to Australia to pick up wheat or wool or something like that and that only of those ships had in fact called at Hanoi before it came to Australia. There was no information provided nor, to the best of my knowledge do we have any, that that ship had delivered arms to Hanoi, but it had called in to Hanoi, and the legal advice given to us by the Attorney -General) by the Minister for Shipping and Transport and those concerned, was that there was an international convention that unless there was a state of hostilities declared, one did not shut one's ports to the entry of ships from any country, and there was therefore no reason for us to prevent the entry of such ships to Australian ports. I don't know the freight rates at which these ships would carry from Australia wheat or wool or any other of our primary produce, but considering the difficulties in which so many of our primary producers are now placed because they cannot pass on rises in wages and rises in costs the way other people can, I could not regard with disfavour a reduction in freights on produce of Australia to other countries because such a reduction in freights means an increase in incomes to those who produce things on the land in Australia. This must be read against the background that it is necessary to have a shipping conference in order to be sure that you have a guarantee that a number of ships will arrive in order to pick up your produce. Against that background, I think that the lower we can keep overseas freights, the better it is for us as long as it is not just a fly-by-night operation in which somebody rushes in and cuts prices and gets out.
Q. Question on Government policy for the Ord River scheme.
PM. I am not quite clear what you mean by a short term or a long term proposition, but the provision of a dam, the main dam, once it is made is there forever so it is clearly a long term scheme. At the moment, in the Ord there is the initial dam opened by Sir Robert Menzies and they have
been growing cotton there with some success. But it is still a matter of dispute and argument as to whether the growing of cotton is economic or not, that is to say, the growing of the kind of cotton they are growing at the Ord at the moment, but I don't know of any irrigation scheme anywhere in Australia which, at its inception, was not said to be uneconomic, which in many cases did prove for a while to be uneconomic, but which eventually proved to be a great boon to the country. If you have read the history of Mildura, for example, or of Renmark, you will remember that that was controversial. You will remember a lot of people went broke, and you will balance against that the development around Mildura and around Renmark which has since been made possible.
In a country such as ours, where perhaps our greatest disability is a lack of sufficient rainfall and a lack of sufficient water, I personally believe that it would be impossible in the long run to store water in an otherwise dry area which would not become an economic asset to the country. The choice, I think, is not whether one stores water, but where one stores it on a cost effective basis. There is no doubt in my mind at all, for example, that the Nogoa Dam, the Emerald Dam will produce 17 per cent to 27 per cent return on the capital investment in it. That is not a bad return, leaving out altogether the fact that in drought times it-will save in that area cattle and livestock which would otherwise die.
 I wouldn't predict the long term way in which the Ord will continue. It may well be that it will work in with the big cattle stations around and provide protection for the breeding herds there or provide some safflower or some other thing which will help to increase the carrying capacity of the cattle. It may well turn out that they will get a different kind of cotton. It may well turn out that a number of possibilities are open and I cannot believe that in a country as dry as Australia the storage of large quantities of water, the possibility of irrigating thousands of acres, will not, in the long term, be cost effective and be of advantage to us.
 Q. Question on future of Australia's sterling balances.
PM. The question was: In view of our relationship with sterling and the agreement that we have recently made with England to keep a proportion of our balances in sterling, are we guaranteed against a loss from that should England again devalue. Let me answer this way. Sterling has been under considerable pressure, and England felt that in order to strengthen sterling, in order to keep its credibility if I can use that word in the monetary system of the world it needed to have a significant guarantee from central banks. It arranged a $2,000 million guarantees from central banks throughout the world for sterling, but that arrangement was contingent upon those who were prepared to lend that money, or to make that money available if it were required, being assured that there would not be a flight from sterling by those countries who held their balances in sterling.
It was essential in the monetary markets of the world that sterling should not again have to devalue. This would have had repercussions throughout the dollar area, throughout the sterling area. It could have had grave repercussions on international trade, and so England came to us and said, " Will you help us? Will you keep some of your overseas reserves in sterling and will you guarantee to keep them there for a number of years? If you do this and other countries do this, but more particularly if Australia does this, then we will get the 000 million guarantee from the International Bank."
Because we thought it was responsible, because we thought it was to Britain' s advantage, to our advantage, to all trading nations' advantage, we said, " Yes, we will. We will keep a minimum of forty per cent of our total overseas reserves in sterling not all our reserves in sterling but at any given moment there will be forty per cent of our overseas reserves in sterling and we will do this for a period of three years. You can be assured we will do it, and then we will have a look at it again". And perhaps because we are a little tough, I don't know I carried out these negotiations myself I said we would do this but of course we have always been able to raise loans on the British market and there are a number of loans which are falling due for conversion. We would expect to have access to that market in order to convert those loans, . and should for any reason that access be impeded and should we be unable to convert, then by the amount by which we were unable to reconvert our loans we can reduce the sterling holdings that we have. That was a protection for us which I think was necessary. We also felt that we did not wish to have an interruption in the outflow to Australia of British capital for development and for portfolio investment, and we raised that matter and should there ever be a British Government impediment on that outflow, then there is provision for the thing to be discussed at once.
Now coming to the final points you have made as to whether we had protection against a further devaluation of what we agreed to keep . in sterling, the answer is yes, we have, to a very great extent but not entirely. We have received a guarantee that should Britain devalue# then she will repay or she will make available to us the dollar equivalent of sterling before it was devalued up to, I think eighty or ninety per cent of the total amount that we have over there. So we have got a guarantee against devaluation for by far the greater amount of the balances we will keep in sterling. We have got other advantages to ourselves. We are helping England, we are helping sterling and think we are helping the monetary system of the world by doing that.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY u b
,16 i~ 4
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
OVERSEAS INVESTMENT IN AUSTRALIA
( Ministerial Statement)
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 16 September 1969]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
by leave -The importance to
Australia of a strong and continuing inflow
of overseas capital has never been questioned
by my Government. During the years
after the end of World War HI, the accumulated
total of private overseas investment
in Australia has been about $ 7,000m. Without
that investment, it would have been
impossible for us to develop as quickly as
history demands we must. Our immigration
programme would have been restricted.
Import replacement and a growing independence
of many overseas commodities would
have been curtailed. And we would not have
grown the industrial muscles which we need.
This overseas flow of investment has
developed resources which were previously
not utilised. It has contributed to the sustained
growth in our export income, and
it has raised the general level of efficiency
and therefore of real incomes in many
sectors of the economy. It confers great
benefits on us and it is essential that it should
continue. It is, however, also true that overseas
capital does not come to Australia
merely because of a wish to confer these
advantages on us. Basically it comes here
because we are a politically stable country,
because there are great opportunities for
new development here, and because there
are good opportunities for profit, and for
growth as the nation grows.
Naturally, at a time when great new
possibilities are opening up in this country
22 179/ 69 we wish to see Australians get as good an
opportunity as possible, within the limits of
their resources and capacities for saving,
for participation in these developments and
growth and profits. This is not an attitude
that can or should be carried to the point
of discouraging people from abroad who
are willing to bring here their money and
their energies and their know-how. But it
is an attitude on the part of the Australian
community which overseas interests have to
recognise. To a very large extent they
already recognise and are prepared to
accept it. And many of them indeed, in
increasing numbers, have seen that it is an
attitude which is basically helpful to them
and can be turned, in a co-operative spirit,
to their and our good account.
As we see it, the central aim of policy
must be to provide, on terms which are fair
as between overseas investors and the Australian
people, the conditions under which
investment will be attracted here. Those
conditions should be such that overseas
enterprises can operate securely and
effectively, making the greatest contribution
they can to our development at a fair
return to themselves. And above all, conditions
under which they can work in
harmony, on even terms, and so far as
practicable on a joint basis and in close
collaboration with Australian enterprises.
We do not believe that we can or should
seek to legislate, in such a complex field. 
But we reiterate our wishes and have little
doubt that overseas companies of repute
will note and respond to those wishes.
Mr Uren-They have not in 20 years.
Mr GORTON-Yes. They are doing it
more and more. GUIDELINES
The Government has, as its general
objective, the encouragement of Australian
participation in and partnership
with, overseas enterprises. And in speaking
of partnership 1 place emphasis upon the
offer of equity participation to Australians
by overseas ventures. As encouragement
towards this end we have recently completed
a review of the restraints imposed on
overseas companies seeking to raise fixed
interest borrowings in Australia-or the
borrowing guidelines as they have come to
be known. These guidelines apply only to
proposed fixed interest borrowings, not to
the raising of share capital in Australia for
the purpose of financing operations by
enterprises incorporated here.
At present overseas interests proposing
any form of borrowing within Australia are
requested to consult the Reserve Bank and
Australian lending institutions are requested
to satisfy themselves that overseas interestsor
companies in which more than 25% of
the shares are held by overseas interestshave
received approvals from the Reserve
Bank covering any proposed borrowings.
This will continue. Generally speaking companies
will be allowed reasonable access to
Australian borrowings for financing normal
requirements of working capital, bridging
finance, and continuing carry-on requirements.
Further, in accordance with the
Government's general policy of ensuring
that every effort is made to increase exports
of Australian goods, ready approval will be
given to borrowings for the specific purpose
of financing export transactions.
In calculating the new local -borrowings
that will be approved to finance fixed assets
in future, the base will be the local borrowings
approved as acceptable as at 30th
June 1969 under the existing guidelines.
Companies that are now regarded as having
been established in Australia for a period
of 4 years or longer will be allowed to
borrow up to 10% of any increase subsequent
to June 1969 in the total of shareholders'
funds, other funds from overseas sources, and local borrowings excluding
those to finance increases in working capital
or to finance exports. For the sake of
brevity I will refer to those amounts as
the increase in funds employed.
Companies wholly overseas-owned and
established in Australia for periods of less
than 4 years wil be allowed local borrowings
of up to 2J% of the increase in funds
employed for each year that they have been
established. Such companies will henceforth
have a new base and a new percentage
applied each year until they have been
established here 4 years. From that time
onwards they will be allowed local borrowings
of up to 10% of subsequent increases
in funds employed. For companies in
which Australians have a share of the
equity, additional borrowings to those set
out above wil be allowed. The extent of
the additional borrowings wil be determined
by the share of the total equity in
the company held by Australians.
To meet requirements of funds additional
to the proceeds of new share issues and the
local borrowings in accordance with the
preceding paragraphs, a company will be
allowed to raise in Australia a proportion
of its total new borrowings which will
accord with the proportion of shares in
the company held by Australians. Australian
equity will be weighted on a four
for three basis so that the proportion for a
company with 30% Australian equity will
be 40%. If for special reasons overseas
loan funds to match local borrowings cannot
be arranged, access to local borrowings
will nevertheless be increased to take
account of the extent of the Australian
equity. In the application of this aspect of the
guidelines, the Reserve Bank will take into
account, for purposes of calculating the extent
of Australian equity, offers to Australians
of new or increased equity ( other
than through convertible notes) which have
not been taken up but which are considered
to have been genuine and reasonable offers
of local equity participation in the company.
If new or increased Australian equity
is offered bona fide through the issue of
convertible notes, the Reserve Bank will
take into account in calculating the extent
of Australian equity one-half the future
increase in Australian equity that would
result if the notes were converted. 
It should be mentioned here that
approval will not normally be granted for
borrowings that would facilitate the remittance
of funds abroad. Consistently, moreover,
with the longstanding exchange control
policy of requiring overseas interests
taking over enterprises in Australia to bring
in cash to the full extent of the purchase
price, approval will not normally be given
to borrowings intended to finance a takeover.
Overseas interests seeking exchange
control for a takeover are reminded
that on completion, the changed
ownership of the enterprise taken over will
necessitate discussions with the Reserve
Bank of the extent of local borrowings by
the enterprise as a whole.
CONVERTIBLE NOTES
I move on to discuss convertible notes.
During the developmental stages of many
major projects there are either no earnings,
or no surplus earnings available for distribution
to shareholders. This, of course, discourages
would-be investors who need a
return on their capital at once and limits
the amount of share capital which those
promoting the venture can raise. Therefore
the alternative of fixed interest borrowings,
with a guarantee of income, has had more
attraction to many lenders as well as to
those seeking to borrow. For the borrower
believes that by offering immediate return
on the investment as income he will increase
the likelihood of borrowing successfully. He
also knows that the interest he must pay on
fixed interest borrowings is cumulatively
deductible for income tax purposes, thus
substantially reducing the effective cost of
his borrowings.
As a step towards attaining our goal of
increasing Australian equity participation in
Australian development, we sought means
of diverting these fixed interest borrowings
into borrowings with a chance of equity
participation. It was for this reason that the
Treasurer ( Mr McMahon) announced in
his Budget Speech our proposal to amend
the Income Tax Law in order to restore
deductibility of interest for income tax purposes
on convertible company securities.
Before 1960 interest on all convertible securities
was deductible; but it became evident
that convertible notes were being widely
substituted for equity issues and that, in
the majority of cases, the plain purpose of
this substitution was tax avoidance. So to protect the revenue, deduction of interest
on all convertible securities was disallowed.
We do not intend to go back to a pre-
1960 situation. We shall minimise the scope
for tax avoidance and will lay down conditions
to which convertible securities must
conform if they are to qualify for deductibility
of interest. These conditions are:
1. The lender or noteholder, and not the
issuing company, has the option to
convert;
2. The noteholder's right to exercise the
option is not deferred longer than 24
months after the date of issue of
the security;
3. The convertible note has a currency
of not less than 7 nor more than
years but the company may make the
terminal date for the exercise of the
option as much as, but not more than,
12 months earlier than the maturity
date of the note;
4. The terms and conditions of the issue
are fixed and not subject to any variation
throughout the period of their
currency; and
5. The conversion price for shares is not
less than 90% of their market price
when the convertible securities are
issued, qr par, whichever is greater.
We believe that these conditions will have
a twofold advantage. They will give companies
adequate scope for using convertible
securities to their best advantage in business
financing and they will offer to Australian
investors a new opportunity to participate
in the equities of overseas-initiated
ventures in Australia, especially those in the
extractive industries. If such ventures issue
convertible'notes to finance development or
expansion, Australians who take up these
securities will have an assured rate of income
during the developmental period of
the project with the option to acquire equity,
and thus share in the growth of the business.
The opportunity that convertible notes opens
up for wider participation by Australians
in the ownership of such overseas-initiated
ventures has been a major consideration in
the decision we have taken to restore tax
deductibility of interest on such convertible
notes. In so seeking to widen opportunities for
Australian participation in ownership we
have sought to ensure that the opportunities
would be real and nQt merely nominal and 
that they will not be too long delayed. We
think that the option to convert to shares
should remain open long enough for ' the
company to have established itself and for
its shares to have value enough for noteholders
to take them rather than opt for
repayment of their loan in cash. It is in
order to provide adequate time for development
and profitability that we propose that
convertible notes should have a currency of
at least 7 years and that the option to
convert should not terminate earlier than
12 months before the maturity date of the
note. We also believe that 10 years will
for all practical purposes be long enough
for convertible notes to remain outstanding.
Certainly, if the development or expansion
of an overseas-initiated venture is to lead to
an issue of equity to Australians, it is
reasonable to expect this to be resolved
within a period not longer than 10 years.
Convertible issues proposed to be issued by
companies in which more than 25% of
the shares are held by overseas interests
will be subject to examination by the
Reserve Bank to determine that the terms
of issue are reasonable and genuine.
COMPANY TAKEOVERS
The question of Australian participation
in Australian development is not confined to
expressing a strong Government desire for
joint ventures, or to encouraging the offer
of equity to Australian shareholders through
borrowing guidelines. The question of protection
of Australian companies against
overseas takeovers also arises. The Government
has given special consideration to this
question of takeovers in general, whether
such takeovers are by overseas or by other
Australian companies.
We have been especially concerned to
prevent the use of takeover methods which
are unfair to a company's shareholders as
a body. I refer to such practices as the
large-scale purchase of shares through
nominees, to first come first served offers
and similar manoeuvres. These problems
were reported on by the Company Law
Advisory Committee and in March of this
year the Standing Committee of Attorneys-.
General agreed to adopt the report in
principle. As the Attorney-General informed the
House on 20th May the Commonwealth
Government has considered that report and has decided to amend the companies Ordinances
of the Australian Capital Territory
and Northern Territory to give effect to the
Advisory Committee's recommendations,
namely: Disclosure
A person having a beneficial interest of
10% or more in the voting capital of a
company listed on an Australian stock
exchange will be required to give notice of
that interest to the company. The company
will be required to enter this information in
a special register which will be available
for public inspection. The new provisions
are to apply to, but without discrimination
against, persons resident, or . companies
incorporated, outside the jurisdiction, as
well as to persons or corporations within
the jurisdiction of this Government. The
proposed provisions are generally in line
with the existing law in the United Kingdom
and the United States but, in view
of enforcement difficulties, are to be
accompanied by certain sanctions not provided
in those countries. A registered holder
who is aware that he holds on behalf of a
non-resident will be required to furnish to
that person information as to the requirements
of the legislation.
THE TAKEOVER CODE
A. The code will be made applicable to
offers by natural persons.
B. An invitation to make an offer-as,
for example, in first come first served
invitations will be treated as if it were
an offer.
C. The criterion for application of the
code will be 15% of the voting power,
instead of one-third as at present.
D. An offerer who increases the price
offered in respect of some shareholders
will be obliged to pay the
increased price to those who have
already accepted.
E. Provision will be made to prevent a
bid for less than the provided limit
of 15% of shares being used to
acquire shares in excess of that limit.
F. It will be an offence for a person to
make a takeover offer, or to give
notice of intention to do so without
having any reasonable or probable
grounds of expectation of being able
to provide the consideration for the
offer or proposed offer. 
G. All aspects of a takeover will be
governed by the law of the State or
Territory in which the offeree company
was incorporated.
It will be noted that the report does not
recommend the prohibition of first come
first served offers as such but the Eggleston
Committee reported that these changes will
ensure that this kind of offer will not escape
the control applicable to other kinds of
takeover offers.
There were additional proposals from the
Associated Stock Exchanges and although
these were not covered by the Committee
because it considered they were outside its
terms of reference, they will be incorporated
in the companies ordinances of the Australian
Capital Territory and the Northern
Territory. I1. One of the amendments will provide
that any amendment to the articles of
association restricting voting rights
shall require the affirmative vote of
not less than 51 in value of the
shareholders of the class of shares
affected. A similar requirement
already exists in the listing requirements
of the Australian Associated
Stock Exchanges. The present position
under the uniform Companies Act is
that any amendment of the articles
of association of a company requires
a special resolution, which in turn,
requires a three-fourth's majority of
members of the company voting in
person or by proxy.
The proposed provision will be in
the nature of an additional requirement,
which will recognise the
significance of a restriction on voting
rights. Shareholders who do not vote
affirmatively for a restriction-including
those who do not vote at
all-will, in effect, be treated as
opposed to the restriction.
2. The other additional, amendment
relates to the notice of intention that
must be given before a takeover is
made. The present position is that this
notice must be given not earlier than
28 days, and not later than 14 days,
before the offer is made. The amendment
will require the notice to be
given not earlier than 42 days and
not later tha 28 dlays. Th4 additional notice provided for by the amendment
will allow an offeree corporation a
better opportunity of considering the
terms of the offer and of taking steps,
if it so desires, to amend its articles of
association to restrict voting rights
attached to shares held by overseas
interests.
I turn now to takeovers which, irrespective
of the method used, mnay be judged
contrary to the national interest. In the past
the Government has acted to preserve
Australian ownership and control of enterprises
which for special reasons of national
interest or importance could not be permitted
to pass into foreign hands.
For many years we have opposed the
entry of overseas banks into the local
industry. And in the areas of television and
radio broadcasting the acquisition of control
by foreign interests has been excluded by
statute. Further statutory control is not at
present contemplated and we do not believe
that it is possible now to define further
classes or fields of enterprise which we
believe should not, in the national interest,
pass to overseas ownership.
However whilst our general experience
over the years has shown that almost all
overseas investment in Australia accords
with our country's interests it has also shown
that there remains a need for the Government
to be ready to guard against the
transfer from Australian control of established
companies in particular areas of
actii'ty. For example some few years ago
there were thought to be attempts by overseas
investors to take over an important
and long-established Australian mining company,
while more recently it was believed
that there was an attempt to take over
one of the principal Australian life assurance
organisations, which would have carried
with it the right to determine the
investment policy of assets totalling some
S700m of Australians' savings.
Although we expect the need to. arise
only on rare occasions as a Government
we reserve the right to do all in our power
to prevent particular takeovers when, in the
circumstances of the case, we would consider
it to be bad in the national interest.
The strengthening of the takeover code
through amendment of the Uniform Companies
Act should ensure not only that takeover
proposals proceed in a fair and open 
manner, but also that the Government will
have more time to intervene, or express a
Government view, if it considers the
national interest calls for it.
To sum up, Mr Speaker, we seek to encourage
the flow of overseas capital into
this country. We seek to make it crystal
clear that we look with favour on joint
enterprise and on the offer of Australian
equity in new ventures-and that we will
be disturbed where the opportunity for Australian
participation is not given. We seek
to encourage the growth of Australian
equity by offering more access to the fixed
interest borrowing as Australian equity in a
company increases. We seek to protect
companies against unfair methods of takeover
and to reserve to ourselves the right
to intervene in such takeovers when we
consider it is in the national interest, and
we seek the acceptance of the basic principles
of a code of good corporate behaviour.
Such a code was adopted by the
Canadian Government three years ago.
Speaking of overseas companies, and paraphrasing the language to our own environment,
I think there are three essentials for
which we look as a nation:
1. A high degree of Australian autonomy,
with Australian citizens participating
on the boards of directors
and in the management of companies;
2. The objective of a financial structure
which provides opportunity for equity
participation by Australians;
3. A sensitivity to the reasonable
national ' aspirations of Australia
which whilst somewhat indefinable in
detail are known quite well by all
those in this House and by anybody
who is at all sensitive to these aspirations,
and who as a company has
intentions of investing in this nation.
By the means outlined in this speech we
believe that we will, without interfering
with the flow of capital we need so badly,
offer considerable encouragement to greater
Australian equity participation and that,.
Sir, is the objective of this Government
and, I believe, of most of the citizens of
this country.
Printeo for the Government of the Commonwealth by w. G. MwuRRAaYt the
Government Printing Office, Canberra 



STATE VISIT BY PRESIDENT PARK( OF KOREA
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, 2SP98 N
17 SEPTEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mvr John Carton_
Mr President, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This function in our National Parliament gives the opportunity
to do you and your country honour. You represent a country with a history
which goes back much further than ours, and : you represent a country which,
in the course of that history, has had to face much harsher tests than ours.
You have known forcfign rule which we have not. You have
suffered direct armed aggression on your own people and your own land
which in any comparable way we have not, arid you are still subject to the
threat of aggression and indeed to the infiltration of armed commandos with
missions to kill those significant in your country including, Sir, yourself,
In recent history, you gained self-government in 1945,
after some thirty-six years of foreign domination which you could not, by
force of arms, resist or overthrow, but which you never at any time accepted
in your hearts and minds, which you consistently rejected and which ultimately
you managed to see removed.
Then, within but a short time of that, you faced an incursion
across your Northern border of well-armed, well-organised, well-prepared
military formations seeking to subject your government or the Government of
South Korea and the South Korean people by force. It took years for that
attack to be repulsed and for those who made it to be sent back from whence
they came. We remember the great sacrifices and devotion which the South
Korean people made themselves to throw back this assault and which the
United Nations, to its credit, helped and which we, as a nation, contributed
towards, as I believe, to our honour and to the honour of the United NatJons.
You are, Sir, as I have said, still challenged, and I believe
that that challenge is real. We have seen in recent weeks what can happen in
a country when the forces of suppression can walk in and can deny the
expression of the free will of the people of that country. What we saw happen
in Czechoslovakia could have happened and could happen in South Korea.
You have got to face this threat and are facing it a nation of 30 million
people with 600, 000 troops under arms because of this ever-present pressing
threat. You are providing those twin deterrents against aggression
and against subversion the willingness and ability to resist by military
force the breaching of a frontiiqr or a demarcation line, and the determination
to improve the economic living standards of the peoples of your country so that
by these both methods you will together prevent the dangers which threaten
you. 2 
-2-
We have admiration for both of these efforts on your part,
great admiration in particular for the determination you are showing to
increase your economic capacity and the living standards of your people.
Your first Five-Year Plan, I am told, was a great success. Your G NP
rose by an average of something like 10 per cent a year, and as a result, the
employment capacity and the wage capacity for the people of Korea rose with
it. Your second Plan is now off to what appears to be a
magnificent start. You are working towards complete self-sufficiency by
1980, and that, bearing in mind the war-torn recent history of your nation
and the way it had to be lifted up industrially by its bootstraps is, as has
been said in one of our journals, something that approaches an economic
miracle. And so you are engaged in these two great tasks, but you
have not only a determination to resist aggression, not only a realisation
that wherever a demarcation line or a border is violated that is a danger to
all small countries, not only an insistence on providing self-help in your
economic growth, but also beyond that an eye for the future in that it was on
your country's initiative that ASPAC came into being, That is an organisation
of which we in Australia are proud to be a foundation member and which is
designed towards regional co-operation in economic fields and in other fields
for the good of all and which will be far more effective and far more able to
advance the good of all if that day ever comes when those threats posed to
the region by communist aggression are removed.
For all these things, for all these efforts on your part, we
in Australia and the Australian Parliament are proud to do you honour.
Sir, you are a very welcome guest. 



RENAMING OF U. S. NAVAL COMMUNICATION
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
I must begin, your Excellency, by thanking the President of
the United States, through you, for the message, which through you, he
delivered to us today. It is a unique thing for a United States Naval
Communication station of this kind to be named after the national of another
country. But I thin'k for a number of reasons, it is entirely fitting that in
this case it should be so.
For one thing, it is fitting because I do not think that there was
any Australian statesman or any statesm ' an from any other nation who
established such warm, close, personal relations with a President of the
United States as were established by Harold Holt. And this is a matter
which goes beyond a mere personal satisfaction in such relations and
extends into national benefits that flow from them.
It is fitting too because this station, as part of a giant network
keeping watch and ward on all the oceans of the world, is a station which
will enhance the military capacity, not only of the United States but also
of our own nation, Australia.
Military caepacity can be used in many ways. It can be used to
subjugate peoples and overthrow feeedom as we saw it used by Hitler and
Mussolini. It can be used to stifle freedom of expression as we recently
saw it used in Czechoslovakia. It can be used for invasion and aggression
as we saw it used in Korea, and as we are seeing it used by North Viet
Nam in South Viet
But military capacity can be used in other ways. It can be used
as a shield for freedom, It can be used as a method of deterring aggression,
of maintaining freedom, of succouring the weak. An d the United States
and Australia has used, and in my belief will always use, its military capacity
merely for the latter purposes. So it is fitting again that these purposes
should be served by a station named after a man who had these ideals as
those he would wish to see all over the world.
Finally, Sir, it is also fitting that this should be a Naval
Communication Station because the late Prime Minister was a man who loved
the sea and who was happiest when close to the sea.
We feel honour, Sir, at what you have done. We feel confidence
in what this station will help our countries to shield, and we remember that
a year agq the man after whom this station was named stood here and opened
the complex. I hope you will convey to your President the gratitude of the people
of Australia that this gesture has been made, and the resolution of the p eople
of Australia that in co-operation with the United States, we shall seek to
secure that peace with freedom of which, Sir, you have spoken.
I thank you. 



68TH ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF
WEST AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
PERTH, A" er~ ISEPTEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, _ NfC16n Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Premier, Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen:
This, I think, is the fourth, or possibly the fifth address
that I have made today in my visit to Western Australia. It will consequently
not be very long and, for those of you who may have been attending any of
the other occasions, I daresay it might tend to be a little repetitive.
First, Sir, may I say this. In the course of an address to
myself and to the Premier you said rather more nice things than nasty
things, which is quite pleasant but not altogether usual, but you did, and
for that I want to express my appreciation. But you also raised some
interesting points and I know that since you always, quite properly and
rightly believe that it is a good thing for the Chambers of Mauufactures
and others to tell governments what they ought to do, so you would not
object too strenuously if occasionally a representative of a government
suggested to Chambers of Manufactures what perhaps they ought to do.
This may have a little more relevance to this particular
State of Australia at the present time than it would have for many others.
You raised the question quite early in your speech of Commonwealth/ State
financial relations and how important they were, with perhaps some tinge
of a suggestion that Commonwealth/ State financial relations ought perhas~-
to be revised. But you went on to say, and to say quite properly, that the
developments that are taking place in this part of the nation today call for
vast amounts of capital from overseas and also call for large amounts of
capital from the State Government. And, you will agree with me, I am
sure, that the level of those requirements is far more than this State
Government could raise from the resources of this State and from the
taxpayers of this State, if those were the only resources on which they
could draw. If you would agree with me in that and I think it is
incontrovertible then there is one thing at least about Commonwealth/ State
financial relations with which you must agree. That is a system of uniform
taxation throughout Australia under which an Australian Government collects
all the income tax available and under which an Australian Government
provides for the states that are developing and that cannot from their own
resources get all that is needed.... this system cannot but be for the good
of the smaller developing states.
This is an argument, as I have said earlier today, which is
not always received with universal approbation in states like New South
Wales and in Victoria. But if this Chamber of Manufactures wants this
State to get as much capital as possible to progress, then the system at
present in existence is the best and indeed the only one. I hope, Sir, you
won't go too far in endeavouring to upset the basis of Commonwealth/ State
financial relations at present existing. / 2 
-2
You also mentioned the recent completion of the railway
line, which I think was opened the other day, and just as you gave credit
to that former product of Western Australia, Mr. Snedden, for pushing
ahead with the immigration policy, so may I be allowed to give credit to
that present product of Western Australia, Mr. Freeth. He didn't beg&amp; n
this project because it was begun by Mr. Opperman, but ever since, almost
ever since its inception, Mr. Freeth has been engaged in seeing that it'
was done at not more than 300 or 400 per cent above the initial estimate
for the cost of the railway:
You have spoken, too, of your problems, not least the
problem of labour, and you will I know you and the other manufacturers
here realise that in examining this two thoughts are thrown up. One of
them is and this is true for the whole of this nation and not just for this
State that if all the labour -one has available is in employment, and by
and large throughout Australia, all the employable labour is in employment,
and if all the material resources that can be produced are demanded and
are used, then, Sir, it is no use merely saying let us have more money
and then we can do more things. Because if that were acceded to, the
sole result of providing more money, all labour being employed, all
material being used, would be to push up the price of labour and push up
the price of materials and not in fact to get anything more done.
It may well be that resources should be diverted from
something to something else, but when all resources are used, that is the
only way in which some new things can be done, and you as manufacturers
would know that. The second problem, as you mentioned, is one for which I
think all in this room, in a way, would be grateful, and that is that you are
facing the problems of growth. Now, the problems of growth can be quite
uncomfortable, but surely they are more exciting than the problems of
stagnation or the problems of decay. Surely there is a knowledge that in
applying new managerial techniques, and if it is possible and I am not
suggesting it for a moment better managerial techniques to manufacturing
processes, then this help s to overcome the problems of growth, and once
that is overcome then new ones will arise because new growth will
immediately evolve. Indeed, new growth will evolve here and nothing can
stop it. But since it will evolve here, since nothing can stop it, then here
is a very great responsibility, not only on governments but on those charged
with the management of factories, on those charged with the supervision of
the production of the goods. It is a responsibility to see that in the
circumstances in which we find ourselves, every possible effort is made
to ensure that these goods are produced in the most efficient way and with
the most efficient management. I am sure you won't mind me saying that
to you. As I said earlier, this appears self-evident.
You mentioned another matter, that of tertiary education,
particularly tertiary technological education, and with w~ hat you have said
with one exception I completely and utterly agree. And I know, because
I have worked with them on this, that your State Government completely
and utterly agrees. You have created here in Wlestern Australia in your
Institute of Technology, which we now call the College of Advanced Education,
a technological institution separate from the universities, which is a blue
print for this kind of institution throughout Australia. You have given it,
your Government has given it autonomy. The courses in it will provide
the sort of people whom you said manufacturers wanted. There is no reason
/ 3 
-3
in the world why sandwich courses of the kind that you suggested should
not be provided there and every reason why they should. And if there is
to be some argument about whether the end product of this, the man who
is the end product, should be given a degree or a diploma, well, that is
an argument for another time and another place. What really counts,*
surely, is not his description at the en( I but what kind of an education hp
has had, what kind of a product that institution produces and what kincl
of a judgment you people in this room make of that end product. Because
that judgment will be translated into employing that end product at a
remuneration you think he is worth, and if he is worth what I believe he
will be and what I think you believe he will be, then these institutes will
be, as far as parents are concerned, something which will take the place
of universities, not altogether, but for those better fitted for this kind of
education. Sir, it is an exciting thing to come to Western Australia.
You can be sure that there will be visits from me as long as I maybe
destined to remain Prime Minister, not only annually, but more often than
that, just as in the past I have spent so much time here, either as Minister
for the Navy or as Minister for Education. But because I have been here
so much in the past, because I helped to start because I did start the
Leeuwin Naval Station, because I worked so closely in the Institute of
Technology and the Secondary Teachers' College and the science blocks
and the technical schools which jointly the State and ourselves built here,
I have been able to notice the increasing tempo of development. And on
this last quick tour of your North, it was for an Australian I would not
claim to be a West Australian for an Australian a most exciting thing to
see what is happening in Hamersley, in Mt. Tom Price, Port Hedland, in
Dampier, Kambalda, in all the places that you know so well. It was
exciting not only to see what is happening but to feel in the air the vibrancy
and the forward -look ing drive which is so evident and which has as one of
its results the growth of Perth and the growth of industrial opportunities
for those of you engaged in manufacture in Perth.
Not only does this feeling of excitement exhilirate the spirit,
but it makes somebody charged with the conduct of the nation's affairs realise
more fully how much overseas exchange is being earned by what is going
on here, and in Queensland, and in the Northern Territory and in other
similar places. But here tonight I speak of Western Australia of how much
this contributes to our defence capacity because so much of what we buy for
defence purposes now I am sure less in the future but so much of what
we buy for defence capacities now is bought from overseas, has been bought
from overseas, calls for overseas exchange, which on current account we
cannot earn, but which the overseas earnings you are making will help us
earn. This overseas exchange contributes to our capacity to help the nations
closest to us because there again it is an expenditure of overseas funds wvhich
we use in order to try and raise their living standards for purposes of
humanity and I suppose, if the truth were to be told, ultimately for purposes
of our own. Because as their living standards rise, so will their markets
become more available to us, so will their demands for our products rise,
so can we join together with them in trying to improve the general prosperity
of the whole region. So do we realise what is being done to help to build the
population which we must have, and must have as quickly as possible,
possibly for survival, certainly for arrival at that future which still lies
before us. / 4 
4
So these things, these things which contribute not only to
what I have spoken of but, as I am sure you West Australians would be
the first to agree, to contribute to the capacity of factories in Eastern
States to grow and to use the foreign exchange so earned though they
earn a little themselves, you know, from exports, from mining oil and
from things of this kind but it does . contribute as a whole. You would
agree with that and so would 1. But its importance I hope this has come
a little out of what I have said is not an importance confined to this part
of Australia, but because of the things I have just enumerated, an importance
to the nation of Australia which, on the whole, I think most of you here,
if not all of you here, wou] ld regard as being greater than any single part
of the nation. Having said that, I ask you also to remember this. What
you have done and what is happening here contributes, what happens in
Queensland contributes, what happens in Bass Strait contributes, all of
it together is going to build all of us together into a nation in which your
manufactures are wanted, but that is just a small part of it. I know each
one of you here wants to increase his factory, wants to increase his
production, wants to improve methods, but I don't believe that that is the
basic drive of any human being or of any Australian. Necessary? Yes.
Basic? No. I think you want to do these things for a purpose, and that
purpose is to feel that as you increase your production, as you improve
your manufactures, as you improve your factories, so you are not only
getting benefits from this yourselves, but so you are contributing to the
sort of life your children can lead, the sort of nation you want to see.
You want not only the satisfaction of achievement but the satisfaction of
contribution. This, I think, is happening here. This, I think, is happening
throughout Australia. How it may best be continued must, of course, be
a subject of debate and it would be a pity were it not. All kinds of
suggestions, Sir, I have no doubt will come from you as the President of
the Chamber of Manufactures or your successor, and will come from
other presidents in other states. Some of them will be sensible. Some
of them may be open to question Governments themselves will make
suggestions. It is possible that some of them may be sensible. It is
certain that they will all be open to question.
But one thing I am sure of, and forgive me if perhaps I am
just a little personal as I conclude on this note. For somebody who does
have a resp~ onsibility to try to see that we follow the proper path in Australia
economically and in other ways, there are from time to time burdens, there
are from time to time decisions to be taken which one cannot be sure are
correct decisions because there is so , nLuch on one side and so much on
another and one has to balance and take a choice. But the sustenance of
somebody who has to do that is very great because it comes from the
Australian people who I have found have been willing to accept honest
mistakes, have been willing to support what they believe to be honest
policies, have been in fact thoroughly decent as one would expect the
Australian population in general to be.
With this knowledge, and with this experience, I can but
tell you this, that the Commonwealth Government, with the State
Government, listening to but not necessarily taking all advice offered will
do what we can to make proper judgments, to choose the priorities we think
are right, to put on one side, if necessary, things that ought to be done but
which cannot yet be done because things clamour with more need on the other 
side. And I am certain that we will altogether go ahead, not in all parts
of Australia perhaps as quickly as we are going in the West now, but in
all parts go ahead, and that on the path on which we are moving, we will,
step by step, arrive as a nation which for strength and industry, for
compassion to its ill, for moral approach to world problems..... well,
perhaps, be a nation better than has been known before.
These words were written some time ago:-
" All of the past is prelude."
Sir, I translate that in my own words for Australia and Western
Australia, I translate:-
" All the past is prelude."
into:-" You ain't seen nothing yet."
And you haven't. 



0~/ 152
EXTRACT FROM PRIME MINISTER'S REMARKS
TO THE CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE RECEPTION
PERTH, W. A. SEPTEMBER 1968
There is just one other point I would make.
There was some discussion the other day as to action
which was taken over preventing an insurance company known as the
MLC from being taken over by capital from abroad. Some questions
were asked as to whether this meant there was a nalteration in the
Government's policy about overseas capital inflow. Well, it doesn't.
Our policy for a long time has been predicated on the
fact that we need to get as much developmental capital inflow from
abroad as it is possible to get if we are to develop as quickly as we
should. If there is any doubt about that, then let any West Australian
look at what is being done here and see whether it could possibly have
been done from capital generated within our own resources. But we
do want that capital to be overseas capital so that it is matched by
goods so that we don't lose our overseas balance. We don't want it
to be debenture capital raised inside Australia to be used by overseas
interests, and the overseas interests own what is built. And so we
wish to see that large amounts of Australian capital generated here
at present under the control of an Australian company don't fall under
the control of people outside. We saw no percentage in somebody
being able to spend $ 40 or $ 50 million to gain control of $ 750 million
of Australian capital. This desire that overseas capital should come
from overseas still persists, as does the desire that Australians
should be given the chance of equity participation in new developments.
But remember this. It's no good Australians expecting
to go along after risks have been taken, after a company has been
developed, after some years of input has gone on and dividends are
beginning to flow out and say, " Now we want to buy in. Not a bit.
They need to be offered the chance to take the risks at the beginning
and that is what we seek to see happen.
k 



PATERSON FEDERAL ELECTORATE CONFERENCE
ANNUAL DINNER AT MAITLAND TOWN HALL
MA rILAND, N. S. W. SEPTYEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Allen, Sir Alister, Distinguished Guests and Ladies and
Gentlemen: When I first received a suggestion that I might come and
talk to you tonight, I saw with a certain amount of horror that it was
suggested that there should be no limit on my speech.
Before I come to talk to any gathering of this kind, my wife
keeps reminding me of a quatrain which I think it would be a good thing
for all politicians to remember all the time, and that quatrain is:-
" I love a finished speaker,
1 really, truly do,
I don't mean one who's polished,
I just mean one who's through.
And so it won't be without limitation of time before I am through.
I would like to say some few things to you. Cne is that
speaking for my wife and myself, we have felt, on this visit to Maitland,
both during the Civic Reception and during the time we have spent with
you and during the time we have talked with the too few of you with whom
we have been able to converse, that in a way we feel at home because we,
too, come from country areas, country areas not quite so blessed as this,
After all, we have where we come from, an eleven-inch
annual rainfall -when we get it, and we don't often get it -and you have an
annual rainfall which apparently varies very considerably, but which by and
large enables ( except when you are sailing dinghies in the Town Hall here
where I stand today) more production and more ease of production than occurs
in the rather hot dry area we come from.
But the feeling has been the same, the feeling of people who
are out, by and large, on the land, doing things on the land, coping with
natural disasters, coping with the difficulties of price, of production, of
season, and carrying on, as Australians have carri~ d on for a couple of
hundred years now. Carrying on against the flood and fire and famine which
are a part of what is, basically, a rather hard land, and people who perhaps
as a result of that, or perhaps because of some innate Australianism I
don't know say, " All right. Well, it's tough this year, but it will be better
next year. There is always going to be another season. Maybe the prices
will go up. Maybe there will be better production, and who through it all
have a kind of friendly relationship which extends throughout the areas of
the country of Australia. We have felt at home with you, and I can only hope
that during this brief visit you have begun to feel at home with us. 
-2
You have got, if I may say so, one of the best Federal
representatives in Canberra of any electorate in Australia. Indeed, for
myself, who tends to fly off a little at angles, who tends to get swept
away with enthusiasm, it is of immense advantage to have somebody who
says, " Yes, that's wonderful, but just a moment, let's look at the
practicalities of this situation. Let's see whether it will work or not.
Let's see whether this in fact is going to turn out the way you want it to
turn out. It is of enormous advantage, and I am always prepared to
recognise that there can be two points of view mine, and onae that is
probably wrong: I am happy to say that on most occasions, mine and
Allen's tend to coincide, and those who as he explained to you happens
in a Cabinet those who have quite properly other questions to raise are,
for the most part, probably wroing. When they are not wrong, I think
both of us agree with the majority and we come out as he has said we do,
with a Government policy backed by all of us, whom you have elected, to
try and govern this country.
We both came in, Allen and I, and Sir Alister, in 1949, and
this is now some twenty years ago two decades. We only came in under
the leadership at that time because people who are in this room today, or
people who have taken the place and had the same ideals as people who
were in a room like this in ! 949, brought us in to off ice at that stage, and
we took over a nation which then was comparatively small. I don't know
the precise numbers maybe seven million, maybe seven million and a
half but we took over a nation which our opponents at the time said was
a nation which if it had seven per cent of unemployed, then had reached
the best ratio of employment the nation could hope to have; took over a
nation in which government interfered, greatly, in almost all aspects of
individual endeavour; took over a nation in which development had hardly
started. And because of what those who are now in this room did, and the
ideals they had, and the ideals their successors are still propagating, we
have in the course of two decades, we and you raised the nation from
seven and a half to twelve million, stopped interference in too great detail
with the individual initiative which alone can enable a country to progress.
Given a climate which enables those who are prepared to take risks, to
take risks, and to garner the fruits of the risks they take or accept the
losses of the risks they take personally, and which because individuals
are enabled to do this to garner the fruits or to talke the risks have
brought this nation to a point of international take-off which would have
been unthought of two decades ago.
I don't mean that in that period of time there have not been
some mistakes made by government. If there is anybody in this room today,
whether he be an industrialist, a manager, somebody on a farm, who can
look back for two decades and say at no stage did I make a mistake, then
that man is a miracle man because almost always, over a long period of
time when decisions have to be made, some of them will, in the light of
future circumstances, be wrong. But I believe that I can say on behalf of
the Government to which Allen and I and Sir Alister belong, that though
there have been on occasions some decisions which might not stand up to
examination afterwards, there have probably been fewer decisions of that
kind than have been taken by any government I know of in any country in the
world. And when I say this, this is no tribute to me, for I have just lately
taken up this position. This is a tribute to the people you have elected to
the national parliament and to the way they have worked together and to the
vision they have had of what Australia ought to be. And this is something
which in the future can only be continued and will be continued, I know, from
this gathering tonight, by the support given by those who say, " I think these 
S.
people have the right idea. I think these people have an objective for our
nation which is the objective which I in my heart have got. I will work for
them. I will ( as somebody said to me tonight) come hail, come snow, come
rain, hand out how-to-vote cards for them. I will argue for them, because,
in the main and on the whole, we have the same objectives. This is one
of the great sustenances of a Prime Minister that there are, throughout
Australia, so many people of the kind who are here tonight who will do this
work, who will give this trust because they believe that what they want will
eventually be achieved. We, as is common with all nations at all times, have great
problems before us at the moment. It is probably true that in Australia
we have reached a watershed, a time of decision in many, many fields,
and that those tenets on which previously we built our policy are not any
longer to be accepted without question.
In the field in which your Member is particularly interested,
that of Defence, we find ourselves in Australia in a completely changed
world situation. For almost two hundred years we lived under the protection
of the British Navy and England, and we did little or nothing to help ourselves
in between the crises that occurred in the world. We left it to others to
protect us, except, of course, that when the Boer War'broke out, or the
First World War broke out, or the Second World War broke out, or the
Malayan emergency broke out, or the Korean war broke out, then we came
in as a people, wholeheartedly and completely. And though in between
times we did not pay much attention to it, I still think, looking back on that
history that " if blood be the price of admiralty, Lord God we have paid
in full". But that has changed. We do not have and will not have this
protection from abroad any more. We ourselves must protect ourselves,
and this calls for resources which I do not myself wish or like to give
resources that must be diverted to ships and soldiers and aircraft and
guns and ammunition resources I would prefer to devote to development
and to social progress. But these resources must be diverted, according
to the judgment of your Government if we are, in the changed situation of
the world, to be able to take the first brunt of any attack which in the
future may fall upon us and to help in maintaining stability in the area to
our north a situation which has never faced this nation before but which
now faces us in all stark reality.
And as that occurs, we have before us the challenge of
developing the nation itself, a challenge which holds before us a vision
that previously was never known to the people of this country. Gradually
we have grown since the first settlement was made at Port Phillip, gradually
the tempo of our growth has increased, but latterly the tempo of our growth
has almost got out of control. We are growing in geometric progression.
The things that we need to do and can do, and the opportunities before us
are flowering in a way they have never flowered before.
And so we find that in Bass Strait we strike oil which gives
us defence capacity, which gives us a saving of overseas exchange, which
gives us a control of our own capacity, which people once thought we would
never have. And so we have in Western Australia, in the Northern Territory,
in Queensland, great new mineral prospects opening up which will require
billions of dollars orf private capital to bring to fruition, which will require
not only the tearing from the earth of the ore and the resources which are
there but the fabrication of the ore and resources through the various / 4 
4-
processes to the finished product. This will make us, God willing, one
of the great industrial nations of the world, but requiring billions of private
capital, hundreds of millions of governmental capital something which
two decades one decade previously was unthought of in this nation.
And we have, I think, a public conscience which has woken,
and which says, yes, in the years past we have said a government ought to
take note of those who are ill and those who are aged and those who are
handicapped; a government ought to contribute towards the maintenance
of these people, but it should only contribute, and it should take the stand
that families and charities should provide and a government should only
add the topping to what is provided; a public conscience which says this
is no longer good enough we ought to see if we are an affluent society,
that there is no-one in this land who does not have the capacity for a frugal
living when they are old or when they are ill or when they are in some other
way suffering the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.
For myself, I have left the concept of a contribution towards
the living costs of people of this kind and accepted on behalf of the
Government and of the Liberal Party that what is required is to see thal
nobody starves, that nobody has to have blankets bought for them, that
people of that kind can live in reasonable dignity and with frugality and
are provided with enough for that. And this is something which is different
from that which previously was accepted.
I have sketched in only a few of the challenges which face
us now. With these before us as a people, it is necessary to look again
at some of the dogmas which two decades ago were uncritically accepted,
because perhaps two decades ago, they were valid, they were reasonable,
and this is something which we as a party have got to do. I speak as a
party now, not so much as I have been in the past few minutes, as a people.
When we formed the Liberal Party in 1945, when we came
to Government in 1949, two decades ago, all of us accepted and all of us
believed that the sole task of an Australian Government was to act in a
sense as an honest broker, and that the governments of the various divisions
of Australia ought to take the full responsibility for the educational requirements
of a State, for the hospital requirements of a State, for the road
requirements, for all the other matters which were then, and still are, for
a large part, their responsibility.
But in that period of two decades, there has grown up in
the minds of the Australian people, as I believe I may be wrong, but
as I believe a requirement that an Australian Government should see
that no matter in what part of this nation a child may be born, it should
have the same facilities provided for its education as are provided i~ n any
other part of this nation. There has grown up as I believe a requirement
that if a person gets ill in any part of this nation, then an Australian
Government should see that the opportunities for treatment of that illness
are the same in any part of this nation. There has grown up a requirement
for an Australian Government to take a responsibility, a financial
responsibility to see that these things happen.
And what we need to question now are the dogmas of twenty
years ago and to see how, if a change is necessary and I think it is how
such a change can be worked out, to see that the facilities for education,
that the facilities for health, that t-he facilities for roads, that the facilities
in other directions are the same, while avoiding centralist administrative
coatrol from Canberra. This is going to be one of the siginif icant questions
to be decided in this nation of ours in the future. This 
is one of the questions that those who support the Liberal Party should
consider and to which they should direct their minds, not with adherence
to dogma, but with questioning of everything, with questioning of what a
State Government puts forward or a Commonwealth Government puts
forward, but with an attempt to arrive at a solution which will in the end
be best for the nation as a whole.
For if there is one thing of which I am convinced, it is this,
that we have reached a stage in our national history when there is in the
hearts of Australians in Western Austrcalia, in Quee-nsland in Tasmania
or wherever it may be, a burgeoning belief in our nationalism, a burgeoning
faith in ourselves as Australians first. There is a knowledge that what
happens in great development in any part of this continent benefits all parts
of this continent, and a feeling I believe a justified feeling that we should,
as nationals of a country which has much to be proud of, hold up our heads,
be proud of what we have done in the past, look forward with faith and hope
to the future, not as New South Welshmen, not as Victorians, not as West
Australians, but as people who belong to the nation of Australia first.
If I can spread throughout the confines of this continent
that belief which I think is held in the hearts of the people who live in it,
if you can help me spread throughout the confines of this continent that
belief, then I think we will have made the greatest step forward since
this nation was first founded so short a time ago.
I remember and for light relief I tell you this story
something which was told to me when I was at Mt. Tom Price not long ago,
when Mr. Heath, the Leader of the Opposition in the United Kingdom, was
out here. He was being taken around Mt. Tom Price by Mr. Court, the
Minister for Industrial Development in Western Australia. Mr. Heath
particularly wanted to meet an Australian working at Mt. Tom Price.
Mr. Court took him to a group of men who were working there, and he
went to one and said " Are you an Australian?" and he said, " No, I come
from London. He went to another and said, " Are you an Australian?"
and he said, " No, I come from Poland. I only came out here a short time
ago. He went to another one and he said, " No, I'm not an Australian. I
come from Czechoslovakia. Finally, they came to somebody who clearly
was an Australian. I don't know how to describe it, but you know what an
Australian is he talked like an Australian, he looked like an Australian,
he rolled a cigarette like an Australian, he leant against things like an
Australian Finally Charles Court thought he had got Heath to meet an
Australian. He said, " Well, here you are. Surely you're an Australian.
The bloke said, " No, I'm a Victorian. So he gave up. But I haven't given
up. You haven't given up. Because the real future of this country, the
achievement of what is possible for us is if we all first say we are Australian,
and then we are New South Welshmen, and then we are people from Maitland
but first, we are the members of a nation destined to be great.
This is what, I think, the Liberal Party as such should seek
to achieve, and in achieving it because, perhaps, I have spoken in
generalities must keep in mind what was one of the first tenets of this
party when it was formed, and that was that it was dedicated to individual
freedom and the greatest possible amount of individual initiative, that
people could take risks and reap rewards, or that people could take risks
and if they made bad judgments, reap the consequences.
But what do people want? What do those Australians of whom
you are representative want? What should a-political party seek to give
them? Well we know some of the answers. We know the material answers.,
/ 6 
6-
We know they want more development. We know they wan,,-t better hospitals.
We know they want better education. We know they want better townplanning.
We know they wiant more sewerage or at least I am told so
by the Leader of the Cpposition well, it may turna out that we have
an argument as to whether we want an affluent or an effluent society. But
I think that over and above these things on which we can argue, and discuss
and argue properly, that people want more than that.
They want, I think, a feeling that in what they are doing in
their daily life they are not only seeking their own material advancement,
they are not only wanting to improve the farm on which they live or expand
the business in which they are employed though these are important both
for themselves and for the nation but they want a feeling, I think, that
the efforts that they put in are for an end which is above and beyond their
own particular material advancement. They want a feeling that what they
are doing is not only helping themselves but contributing to the community
in which they live, that they are helping the advancement of the community,
that they are bringing into existence, perhaps, a nation which can be great
materially, which can be great in terms of strength of defence, which cans
be great in compassion, which can be one step forward along the road
towards which nations throughout history have striven but so far have
striven in various degrees in vain but which I think we here have the
greatest opportunity of any nation in history, ultimately, to achieve.
This is what I think people want to be called on for sacrifice
as well as to be given the opportu-.-ity for individual betterment, and this
is what, w~ ith your support and the support of my colleagues, this Government
will seek to bring about and will seek to evoke in the hearts of the Australian
people. A long time ago somebody it may have been Banjo Paterson
think it was wrote these lines about Australia:-
" We see the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended
And at night, the wondrous glory of the everlasting stars."
We can and are gettinrg ito our hearts and minds the vision splendid of what
this nation can be, and if we do not reach the stars, at least we can aspire
towards them, and strive towards them, and according to the degree of our
competence, of our efforts, according to the degree to which we reach them,
so we will have contributed not only to this nation but to the evolution of
mankind towards the kind of world we all want to live in.
You have helped in this. You have helped me tonight by
coming here. I look to you to continue this help in the future.
Thank you. 



QOULBURN LILAC TIME FESTIVAL
CIVIC RECEPTION
GOLJLBURN, N. S. W. 4 OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the-Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Mayor, the Mayoress, Members of Parliament and Distinguished
Guests:-The first thing I must do, Mr. Mayor, is to thank you for
being kind enough to extend to me this civic welcome and to give me the
opportunity to meet some of the leading citizens of Goulburn and its
surroundings. I must make clear though, Mr. Mayor, that this is by no'
means my first visit to this city, although it is my first visit as Prime
Minister. On more than one occasion in the past, I have been here and
have had a chance to tour the city and have had a chance to see it. One
occasion that stands out in my memory was when the State Member and
myself attended the opening and dedication of a science laboratory. at if
remember rightly St. Patrick's College. This also gave us an opportunity
to learn. something of the city of Goulburn. But this is the first visit as
Prime Minister, and it is therefore doubly important to me.
I should have liked to have been able to come earlier today.
In fact it was possible, but extremely difficult. After all, my wife and I
have just spent three days over in Western Australia, du~ ring which I think
we had one fifteen minute spell to ourselves. We arrived back at about
half past five last night in a state of almost utter exhaustion, and I really
did have to do some -work in the office today before I could come.
Nevertheless, I do apologise for having passed up the opportunity to come
earlier and to see Supertex and the other industries here.
It was a pleasure to me, for a variety of reasons, when
Dugald Munro asked me wouild I come to attend the Lilac Time festivities.
One of them, of course, is that it is so pleasantly named. Lilac Time
has got some aura of nostalgia about it for all of us or for most of us,
particularly those who were born about the same time as I was when we
remember Schubert and " Lilac Time" and the songs that came over and
we used to bash them out.
But also for another reason, because it seems to epitomise
a community spirit which is so utterly necessary in towns * such as Goulburn
or in towns such as the one in which I grew up. That was where, for a
while, I was Shire President -Kerang a smaller town, but nevertheless J/ 2 
-2-
one that needed this kind of community spirit. Because what is means is
that you began how long ago? fifteen years, sixteen years a long time
ago to work towards attaining something for the town and the citizens who
live in it. You began building that which you now have, the Festivities Hall,
which I haven't seen, but which, judging from the pictures of it, is a real
addition to this or any other community.
Rather than just say, ." Well, we hope someone will give us
the money for this" whether it be a state or whether it be a Commonwealth
Government you did something about it yourselves. You began to get
together as a community and to raise the funds and to build a hail, and you
have been doing it ever since, and.. I can't remember blt $ 70, 000:
or $ 80, 000 or something of that order has already been raised. Here is
this concrete result in this city of the effort that is being put into it. Really,
I think perhaps a manifestation of a community spirit of this kind means
more than the mere bricks and mortar which are seen in the form of a
building. It means,, I would have thought, great satisfaction to all those
who over the years have given something of themselves, something of their
time, in order to see that the community in which they live can be improved.
For these reasons, it appeared to me pleasant to be asked
to attend on this occasion.
I don't know, Sir, that I can comment very much on your
remarks about the development of Canberra and the development of Goulburn
because I haven't had the chance to study them, and therefore anything I
said would be just an immediate reaction.
But what I would hope would be that as the National Capital
develops, and develops as it will to a quarter of a million people before
very long, then it would be inevitable, whether some kind of light industries
were established in it or not, that all the region would benefit if it were only
as a market for what the region surrounding it could produce, if it were only
as a provider of opportunities for employment of young people at a centre
closer to the region than Sydney or Melbourne. I would think that kind of
development must have complementary development in the region around it.
Other than that, Sir, I can do nothing more than join in your
general approach that regional development is good. And when I say that,
I am not just talking because I do claim.. I don't know whether credit is
the right word.. I do claim some involvement with the decision which led
to the building of a teachers' college in this city of Goulburn. I was the
Minister at the time, and if you remember there was some question as to
whether it should go here, or whether it should go somewhere else, or
whether if it went here it would upset going to Canberra, or if Canberra
built one it would upset this one. But it didn't. There is one being built
here, and that will bring undoubtedly, not only those who will be attending
it as students and people who will be teaching the students, but the others
/ 3 
S3-
who will be required to meet their needs to maintain their motor cars,
do their laundry and provide what they eat and all the other things
which follow when an accretion of population happens in any particular
district. So at least one small act has been done before these words
were spoken. I finish because I was told I must not talk too long, and I
probably have already. I finish by thanking you once again for the
opportunity of meeting the citizens of Goulburn. I finish by expressing
the hope that in Goulburn and in the centres like it throughout the length
and breadth of Australia, there will be a growth, there will be a fostering
of community pride, of community service.. and through that, pride
and service to the nation. This nation is being built as the centres are
being built, and the centres are being built to a large degree by community
effort by people such as you. And I thank you for that.
r 



6/ 155
AUSTRALIAN'INDI GEOUS CRUDE OIL'
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MI NISTER
I n September 1965 the Government announced certain policy
decisions regardin--the use of Australian indigenous crude oil.
Those decisions were a re-affirmation of the policy that the
Government was determined that local refineries use all the crude oil produced
in Australia, and an announcement that the price to be paid by refineries for
* Australian crude would be $ 3.14 cents a barrel at the customs port at the
refining centre nearest to the producin-field. Included in this price was 67
cents a barrel as an " incentive" payment.
This arrangement was to finish on September 17 197-and no
W" Cisions were announced as to what would happen after that date.
At that time the Moonie field was the only one in operdtion.
The production of the Moonie and Barrow fields was, and is, comparatively
small and the extra cost resulting from the crude oil they sell at $ 0.14 cents
a barrel, together with freight costs is already included in petrol prices in
Australia. Subsequently, very extensive oil fields were discovered in Bass
. Strait by Esso/ BHP. Oil from these fields should begin to flow in Aarch 196
and by September 1973 it is expected that the fields will be producing at over
253, 3 barrels of crude oil a day. During that period, this field may well
produce in the vicinity of 61 million barrels. The prospect of such large
quantities of oil which refineries had to buy at a price so much higher than the
O price of imported oil, obviously created a new problem and led to forecasts of
considerable rises in prices of petrol and other petroleum products.
0 Because of the effects that this would have throughout the
economy the Government has most carefully studied the various problems raised
and I nave for some time been engaged in a series of negotiations with Australian
oil producers and refiners.
I now wish to inform the House that the Government re-affirms its
policy that for a period of ten years beginning on September 18 1Q73 refineries
in Australia are to process Australian crude oil in order to provide the full
requirements of the Australian market for petroleum products.
This is of course subject to the need for sufficient imports to
meet the requirements in Australia f3r bitumen, lubricants and fuel oil in excess of
quantities that can be realised from Australian crude.
Secondly the Government announces as policy that for a period
of five years after September 17 1573 when the present policy arrangements
terminate the price that refineries will be required to pay Australian producers
will be import parity. Import parity is defined as the posted prices of overseas oil as of
today, less the discounts allowed off those posted prices as of today, plus
overseas freioghts at the most efficient and economic rates prevailing today, 
plus wnarfage where applicable.
To this price will be added a sum for quality differential worked
qut by the modified Nelson method.
From the import parity price so arrived at will be deducted
a sum representation the averagefreight cost. ofAdelivering Australian
oil to the refineries from the port of delivery by the most economical means
possible. This will mean that as from September 1972, for a period of
five years, the price payable for Australian oil should generally be neither
higher, nor lower, than the price now payable for overseas oil except for the
effect of Australian coastal freights.
I now come to the period between March 1969 and September 197?
during which the present arrangement operates, during which the presently
applying high prices for Australian crudes were agreed to be paid, and during
which significant increases in the cost of petroleum products have been
suggested. SI have already said that the cost of oil from Moonie and Barrow
at these hi ; h prices has been absorbed in existing petrol prices, and no
alteration is to be made to the prices payable for oil from those fields until
after September 1970 when the import parity prices which I have described
will apply. In the case of the oil fields discovered by Esso/ BHP we have
agreed by negotiation that there will be a reduction in the prices Australian
refineries are required to pay up to September 1973.
Our agreement is that Esso/ BHP will altogether forego the 67 cents
a barrel known as the " incentive" allowance. In addition, Esso/ BHP will allow
refineries a further discount of 5 cents a barrel.
The result is between vlMarch 1969 and September 1973 the price
to be paid for this oil will be reduced from 14 cents a barrel to $ 2.42 cents
obarrel at the customs port at the refining centre nearest to the producing field.
After September 1970 the price payable for this oil will be import
parity as already explained. This will reduce the price payable still further.
To sum up, Mr. Speaker, the new arrangements made will mean
that the large newly discovered quantities of Australian oil to be used between
March 1369 and September 197 will cost 72 cents a barrel, or a little over 2 cents
a gallon, less than was previously anticipated.
After September 1972 the price payable for Australian crudes will
be no more than the price of imported overseas crudes today except for any extra
cost involved in coastal transportation.
This will not between March 1969 and September 197'. in
itself prevent any increase in the price of petrol. But it will undoubtedly
materially reduce the size of any rise that might take place. 
I t. Ave so far spoken only of the pricini policy for Australian
crudes and of the Government's requirement that the Australian market should
be supplied from such crudes.
But we need to discover more oil in Australia.
The Government is therefore currently studying the sep t'rate
question of the need for incenitive for oil exploration in the period after
September 17 19711 Various proposals are under examination and we will in due
course announce the form of incentive, if any, which we will adopt.
In the meantime the arrangements I have just announced will
provide a firm basis upon which industry can plan ahead for the use of
Australian crudes and will reduce any future rise in the price of petroleum
j oducts.
CANBERRA-
* 13 October 19' 6!.. 



OPEvii4G OF NATIONAL EXPORT WEEK el OTl96
11 OCTOBER 1968
Seech by the Prime Mviinister, Mr John Gorton
This is a week of the year which . means something to
every Australian. It is one week'% in the year when, I think',, all of us here,
Federal and State representatives, primary producers, manufacturers,
miners, businessmen agree on one thing. Vie need to " export to prosper"
and we need to develop if we are to achieve what is within our grasr. in
national development. For that reason, I am glad to be honoured to be asked to
be present today and to have the opportunity of supporting you and all those
who have so energetically and enthusiastically organised this National
Export Week. W. hat Sir Charles has said has been to the point. L-Ie has
been perh'aps, I think, a little chilling, a little difficUlt in his assessment
of the future, but that is all to thle good. Let = i accept what he has said as
a warning of what could happen, not necessarily as a warning of what will
happen, but what could happen if we become backsliders in the export drive.
I agree entirely that Australia needs to do more in exports
and that the greatest danger we face is, as has been pointed out, complacency.
If complacency is an offspring of the success so far achieved, then let us
strangle her offspring at birth.
The whole purpose of National Export Weelk is to make the
nation more export-minded, to convince producers and mnanufacturers that
there are great benefits, direct and indirect, to be won from increased export
activity. I believe in this nation we have the will and the capacity to dQ more.
I think we have the will and thle capacity to succeed.
I want to say a little about the Federal Government's role in
this task. There is a lot we can do and indeed have done, but there are also
limits to tile Government's role because we live in, and believe in, a free
enterprise society. Governments can lead by example, by facilitation,. by
co-operation and by giving incentives of one kind and another. But with
industry itself primary or secondary lies the final response.
At national level, the Federal Government has a duty to
create, by the sensible use of the powers it has, the right climate for
stability and growth, a climate which will allow development at home and an
opportunity for access to world markets on reasonably competitive te tr-s.
It has to do this in full co-operation with State Governments.
Today the Australian economay is fundamentally sound, and the
base onl which we can build anl increased export effort is there and is expanding.
The problems which arise are, I think, only shiort term problems, providing
we accept the challenge that is inherent in this National Export Vleelc. .. s/ 2 
-2-
There are always incipient dangers in any expanding econprny.
W/ e can't control the weather not yet anyway and this can have a gie at
effect on export incomes and on production. We have no, or little I think
perhaps the proper word is " no" Government control over wage structureaand
wage levels. We have to compete in overseas markets where the n4. tional
self -interest of countries which provide those markets inevitably takes
precedence over the fortunes of the foreign trader which in this case wouldd be
us. We need more people and we need more capital.
None of this is a new phenomenon, nor have we been slow
in recognising our problems. The very existence of the Export Development
Council is evidence of a recognition by the Government and by industry; of
these problems. which I have set out. And may I say that I think the Cotancil
has done a splendid job for a good many years now as an adviser to the,
Commonwealth Government on exports.
The picture I see is this. If our export effort just paddles
along, then we are creating problems for ourselves and doing that with our
eyes open, and not achieving all that may lie within our grasp. When the
terms of trade ( as you have pointed out) broadly are against us, we cannot
afford to be casual about those balances of payments or to depend too heavily
on capital inflow to offset what we are losing on current account. I do hope
nobody will assume that that sentence means that I don't want as much
capital inflow as I can possibly get.
We have to earn more foreign exchange, and the best, the
safest, the most secure way in the long term is to build up an expanding
export programme. In that we can be sure of paying our import bills.
In that way we can develop our home industries by giving them new outlets
for their products. I look forward in our national planning to what Australia
will be in the year 2, 000, and I believe the 70' s here in Australia will usher
in for us a thirty-year period of quite remarkable change and of extraordinary
opportunity for growth, but we have to get moving now to be " with it".
By the end of this century, if all goes well, we could be
a nation of around 28 million people. To achieve that, though, we need to
sustain our birthrate and to develop our migration intake on the lines of
pre * sent planning. -If we do, this figure of 28 million is a reasonable figure
for which to aim. But this will mean a continuous pressure on our resources.
We will continue to need overseas capital, but insofar as you are successful,
we will be less dependent upon it. Our economy is vulnerable if we become
too dependent on it, and our solvency could be at risk because of factors
entirely beyond our own control. The best insurance policy, the only valid,
long term safeguard is that sustained export effort which I believe this
Ccuncil is dedicated to achieve,
The 70' s will bring us not only the population of which I have
spoken and indeed, these things, many of them will come before the seventies.
The 70' s will bring us the jumbo jets and supersonic airliners; it will turn
friends into next-door neighbours in terms of time. Perhaps man will land
on the moon, and what may result from that, even in terms of industry, can
only be guessed at. Perhaps nothing, perhaps a great deal. These are all part 
-3
of the drama of our age. They are going to affect us in ways we can't measure
now, but one thing is certain. They will draw us deeper than ever into the'
international community, where the current for freer trade between nations
has been flowing quite strongly for some time past.
The Australian exporter will acquire a new status and a'new
significance. He must be ready to respond, not only to the rising demapdij
of the large, recognised markets of the world, but to the emerging marlef@
which will be there as the developing nations of Asia establish viable
economies and, like us, become hungry for imports Some forty per cent
of our exports now go. to Asia, but as. you said, Japan takes the greatesv
share. But there will be opportunities among the others as their resoucs
increase, as their security is estalished, and I hope and believe that the'
members of this Council will recognise those opportunities as they ari~ e and
will work to take advantage of them for their industries' benefit and fov the
benefit of the nation. Whatever excitements the seventies bring, they won't $ submerge
the hard facts of economic life the business of meeting and paying
international bills. We are, in this field, deeply committed to a costly
Defence expansion programme and much of the defence " hardware" Jiich
is the term, for some reason or other, usually applied to anything to do'
with defence defence " hardware" has to be purchased abroad because it
can't yet be made here. This has been taking, and it will continue to take, for
some time yet, large bites from our foreign exchange resources.
It is essential spending, absolutely essential, but it is not
income -producing in business terms. It is not developing, in terms of
adding industrial rather than military muscles. It gives a dividend, of
course, in the form of security to the nation and ability to discharge treaty
obligations, and I suppose that without that, business could not prcaper and
exporters could not export, but those requirements being laid upon us are
added reasons for increasing our earnings by exports from this country.
Sir Charles has given you figures which show we are making
progress but that other nations, admittedly much bigger than ours bigger
in terms of population and bigger in terms of size of industries in many
cases has given you figures that other nations bigger than ours are doing
better. I believe that we can do better and that is why my Governm-ent supports
tis National Export Week up to the hilt.
Our policy, in basic terms, is constant. We stand for
economic growth, we stand for national security and we stand for full
employment. We aim to maintain what we already have, and that is one of
the highest living standards in the world. That is to say we aim to maintain
that, provided the workers, the manufacturers of this country take advantage
of the climate which has helped this situation to come about.
I think we are the thirteenth largest trading nation in the
world today. I don't know that it matters a great deal how we rank, but I
think we are. What matters more than how we rank is the contribution our
trading makes to our balance of payments.
We have proved ourselves to be one of the world's most
efficient producers of temperate farm products, and by a tariff poikcy of
protection for economic and efficient industry, we have developed a
sophisticated and diversified economy. I -" think it is hardly necessary to ./ 4 
-4
mention mifleralq oil and gas because we read about them every day at
breakfast. Now all this provides exports and export potential. We
have already penetrated, in some form or other, most of the recognised
mnarkets of the world, but there are still new ones to be found and there are
still opportunities for stepping up sales in the markets we have. There is
plenty of scope for Australian ingenuity and originality. Although we have
displayed quite a lot already, the more we can display, the greater will be
the success of the efforts you are making.
I know that some of you know, but did you all know that we
export stainless steel cutlery, for example, to Sheffield, that we export
tulip bulbs to Holland? Di d you know we export spaghetti to Italy, ball
bearings to the Ruhr and windscreen wiper bla~ ies to Iceland? Did you
knww xotchqebost Angok Our responsibility fiishes though
with providing the cheque books! We export waffle-making machinery to
America, safari suits to Zambia and Irish stew to Scotland? I could go on,
but I think these examples are enough of the ingenuity and the taking advantage
of opportunity of which I have spoken.
The pattern of our trade has already changed significantly
and it will continue to change. Vie have to adjust to that change and it is
the individual exporters, the . meni in the field, who have ultimately to do the
job. So I appeal to you today under five headings
1. Be adventurous
2. Aim for higher productivity
3. Improve your products in such cases where it is
possible for a product to be improved
4. Research your industries and the Government is
prepared to help research in industries.
Double your efforts.
I daresay you could well appeal to me under exactly the same headings, but
well fair enough, let us both try.
You, Sir Charles, ackmo w ledged the part the Gover nment
is ptaying in encouraging exports. This will go on, through the commercial
services of the Department of Trade and Industry, through insurance
facilities, export incentives of one kind and another and by research and
development grants. These are constantly under review to meet changes
as they occur, and I think, Sir, that you bring suggested changes to our
notice without noticeable inhibition.
I would add that mñ-y Government has always looked
syrnpathetically at proposals from industry designed to give Australian
exporters a stronger competitive position overseas. It has also given
leadership in negotiating commodity agreements and access to world markets
under international trade arrangements. But I stress again at this point that
this is where we hand over to you. 
There is only one more thing I want to say and it concerns
an export less tangible than the ones we have been talking about, It is*: the
status of the Australian nation.
W-e have, I think, a reputation among the nations of tIp
world for stability and responsible administration; we pay our bills a-Ad
we honour our obligations. This is an export commodity we must nourish carefully,
just as carefully as we must watch the standard of the goods we prod~ ce
to sell in the tough, competitive markets of the world. This again helps
us to attract capital and market oppo rtunities.
I believe we have the resdurces and the skills, and our
people you people have the character and the integrity to be a really
great nation. This is a period of bbilding Which in itself carries its own
excitement. We are one peop le, living in an area of change and
opportunity. I am confident we can make our future secure and also make
a significant contribution to the peace and stability of thc Asian and
Pacific environment in which we live.
This we can do, not only by our industry at home and the
development of our own country, but as a trading nation sharing the export
markets of the world on a fair, permanent and enlarging basis. This is
your objective, this is the objective of those who are attending this Week,
this is the Government's objective. M-,-ay I express the hope that t~ og--ether
we achieve those objectives for the good of us all. 


FLINDERS ELECTORATE LIBERAL PARTY LUNCHEONMORNINGTON, VIC." IA 14 OCTOBER 1968Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonMr. President, Mr. Minister, Councillors and Members and Workersfor the Liberal Party:-I think perhaps the first thing I should say is that it ismore than pleasant for me to be here in an electorate represented byPhil Lynch. I suppose it is not inappropriate for a Minister of theArmy to have begun his tasks by having to undergo a certain baptismof fire, not only from the matters which happened in the Army, notonly from difficulties with the Opposition, but with various otherdifficulties which many of you here will understand as well as I do.He has overcome them all and he is accepted completely and thoroughlyas a hard-working and dedicated local Member and as a Ministersomebody who has met and overcome the problems so far inherentin his portfolio, and who seems to me to be avoiding new problemswith great skill. I suppose before I say anything else, Sir, people herewould expect me to make one or two general comments, because Ihave gathered from random remarks appearing here and there in thenewspapers over the last few weeks that there appears to be somediscussion or some speculation as to whether there is likely to be anelection before the due time at which an election has to take place.Now, the one thing that I really want to say about that is that it isquite fascinating that I have never said a word about it, one way orthe other, up until this point of time. And I don't propose to sayanything about it at this point of time:' But I will let you into thissecret. I made my mind up about it some time ago and I will beinforming my Party about it tomorrow. I think that is the proper wayfor this information to be conveyed to a party meeting.It has been quite fascinating to me to discover how peoplecan suggest and build on things, speculate about things without reallygetting any indication whatsoever from people who have to decide them.But we will find out about that all in good time.What I do want to say to you, so many of whom I havemet before, so many of whom I have known over such a long period oftime, is this. Nearly two decades ago, you got tired of a governmentwhich seemed to regard five per cent of unemployment as a reasonableamount of unemployment, which seemed to regard controls as a substitutefor progress, which soemed to ra-rd stagiaatian as a substitute forexpansion. You suddenly got tirW-of that and you changed it. There werepeople who came out and asked you to help them to-change it, and I was oneof them, but it waat you, ind people like you. throughout the whole of Australiawho made that change. I think you can take some satisfaction from the results ofthat change, and in saying this I am speaking of the results under SirRobert Menzies and under the late Harold Halt, indeed under theadministration which you substituted in 1950 for the previous Administration. o / 2
2-It is true to say that beginning then and progressing ever more andmore quickly, those old concepts have been discarded. So that nowwe have, to all intents and purposes, every employable person inAustralia gainfully employed, so that now we have as this shireindicates an upsurge of growth, an upsurge of development, throughoutthe length and breadth of this, our nation; so that we have anabandonment of oppressive control; so that we have more than wasever possible then, an opportunity for that individual initiative ofwhich Phil Lynch spoke, the opportunity of people to take risks andreap rewards if they are successful, take risks and reap theconsequences if they are not successful, but at least use their ownjudgment and advance the nation in so doing.And for nearly two decades this progress continued.It continued without a great deal of basic change in Australia's posit ionin the world or in the problems Australia had internally to face.Things have changed now. We have come to a watershed in Australianaffairs. No longer can we, as we have done for I suppose two centuriessay, " We are Australian. We are protected by the British Navy. Wedo not need to protect ourselves. We are available when a First Waror a Second War or a Korean War breaks out. We send our contingents.We make what sacrifices are needed, but in the meantime, we areprotected by one of the great powers of the world."Now that has gone, gradually at first, and then suddenlyand quickly with the decision by Great Britain to withdraw from Eastof Suez altogether. So that now, besides the efforts we ourselves canmake, we are, for our own security, dependent more than ever beforeon the United States Government providing the protection understood tobe provided under the ANZUS Pact. This is a change, a basic changein the history of this nation, and it means, among other things, thatwe must devote more and more, not of our gross national product,but more and more towards building up our own defences, so that wecan, should the time ever arise when it is needed, meet any first.shock of attack upon ourselves or the territories for which we areresponsible, meet it, hold it, perhaps beat it back by ourselves, butif not at least meet it, hold it, until further assistance can come.That is why the vote for the defences of this country hasrisen from what for so long was about $ 400 million, to 250 millionthis year. It is not something which can bring joy to the heart of anyof us because there are so many other requirements for this money,and for what this money could provide. But while it cannot bring joy,it is an -inescapable obligation. I do not propose to provide as muchas some of our opponents or some of our I don't know what they aresome of the people who stand between us and our opponents, wouldrequire to be provided for defence because I believe we need to buildup the nation as well. But there is this requirement we are meetingand there is this change in Australia's position in the world and whatit has to do. We have another change, I think, a change in socialconscience. Up until recently, even during Liberal administration,we took the view that those who are old or ill or invalided or in someother way the subject of the slings and arrows of outrageous fortuneshould be helped, yes, but should be helped only to a certain degree.
-3We expected that the families of those persons, the charities outside,should contribute to what a government, a people was prepared to do,and that therefore a government and a people were only prepared tomake some gestures of help towards those who were so handicapped,towards those who were aged. I don't believe that any longer this isa tenable philosophy. I have abandoned it myself and I have abandonedit on behalf of the Liberal Party. I feel it is necessary to see thatpeople such as this are -provided with enough to live on without havingto depend on outside assistance, enough to live on in a simple, frugalway, because after all, we do want savings to continue as well, andself-reliance to continue as well, but at least enough to see there issufficient to eat, and that there is no requirement to donate blanketsin order to keep people warm. This is one of the things this Governmentwill seek to do, is seeking to do. It is a change in approach from whatwas previously that of the Liberal Party.We have another change. We have suddenly discoveredthat it is possible to develop this nation far more quickly than everwas thought possible before. I speak not only of the enormous mineraldiscoveries which have been made, though they are of great significancein the development of areas which previously had nobody living in themat all, enormous significance in adding to our overseas earnings. Ispeak also of the development of new industries. I speak of the increasein production from each acre of farm land in Australia. I speak of whatnew technology can contribute and is contributing. This is progressinggeometrically. It is not going slowly. It is bounding ahead, and thisrequires enormous amounts of capital, and enormous amounts ofenthusiasm and energy and understanding from the Australian people.This takes me, particularly at this Liberal gathering,to a need to examine some of the basic tenets which, since 1949, havenot been examined at all. I speak of a need to stand and quitedispassionately survey the relationships between the various levelsof government in Australia the Australian Government, the StateGovernment, the Municipal Government. There was a time, whenthis party was formed, when it was believed, and when it was a dogmaand when it was unquestionable that all an Australian Government oughtto do was to hand out particular sums of money to Queensland, or toWestern Australia, or to whoever it may be and say, " Spend these inthe way in which you think best. I do not think that those conditionsprevail any longer. Is it or is it not necessary that an AustralianGovernment should be charged with the responsibility of seeing thatthe economy of Australia as a whole is managed as a whole so thatinflation is kept under control, so that deflation is met by an infusionof credit, so that overseas investment keeps coming in?These are things that need to be examined and argued anddiscussed. Is it necessary now and here I am going to put my ownviews and say that I think it is to see that an Australian child, inwhatever part of Australia he is born, is offered uniform facilities foreducation? Is it necessary to see that somebody who falls ill in anydivision of Australia has the sam e opportunity for treatment in hospital,has the same opportunity for care as he would have in any other part ofAustralia? / 4
-4It is my belief that the Australian people believe thatit is necessary to see that this should happen. But how it is to bebrought about is something for discussion by an Australian Government,by State Governments, by Liberal Members and by workers for Liberalparties. Because I do believe that while it is necessary to see that theiethings happen, it is also necessary to see that centralist administrationfrom Canberra should not take place, but rather the goal having beenset, the achievement of the goal is left to those governments closer tothe people than is the central government. This is not to be taken asan abdication of the responsibility of setting the goal:There is something else beyond that, something I havebeen preaching and something I will continue to preach. That is I thin~ kthe time has come, indeed perhaps it is past time when we, whereverwe may live in this nation of ours, should begin to feel a real sense ofAustralianism. We should begin to feel a pride in the nation to which.we belong, begin to look ahead to what this nation should achieve in theway of helping other nations abroad, in the way of compassion inside itsown boundaries, in the way of social justice between its people, f eela belief that whatever we may be we belong to an exciting country. Webelong to a nation which in a mere blink of an eye by the end of thiscentury will be 28 million, and then we will go on and on and begin tothink with a sense, not of chauvinism, but of national humility how wein this lucky country, as Liberals and as Australians, can best use theopportunities presented to us. We must see that when' we grow to thatsize, we will not only have mighty industrial muscles, we will not onlyhave vastly increased defence potential, we will not only have, as I hope,an internal compassion for our ill and sick which might not have beenseen in any nation before, but we will have also as we go abroad a lightin our eye, a fire in our heart, as we hold up our heads and say, weare Australians. And this, in a sense, is a watershed. This in a sense isa goal, and this is something with which you, as you have helped in thepast, can help immensely in the future.What is it that Australians want? What is it thatindividual human beings ought to want? Not only though this isimportant the opportunity for material well-being, not only thechance to improve the farm on which they live or expand the businesswhich they run or do better work in the factory in which they work andreceive more wages; not only that but also a belief which we must instilin them and which we must make real a belief that in improving afarm, in expanding a business, in working harder and getting more wages,they are not only materially improving their position but they arecontributing to the sort of thing that I have tried to outline for you.That they are contributing to that kind of country in which their childrencan grow up, and in their turn contribute for their children. These arethe things, the tasks before us some easy, some hard, some specific,some not easy to spell out because they are matters more of feeling thanof direct figures. These are what we are after. These are what I think youare after, and judging by the success that you have so far had, if youcontinue the help you have so far given, I will try to see in the shorttime I am here that your expectations are fulfilled. They won't be
fulfilled without mistakes being made from time to time because allpeople make mistakes. Indeed, one would need to be a superman notto. But the attempt that will be made will be honest and I believe thatthe team we've got will advance along that road which I've tried topoint out. I come now, Sir, to a remembrance of something mywife always says to me before I make a speech. She says, " Alwaysremember that those people who are sitting in the room would thoroughlyendorse these four lines of poetry:-" I love a finished speakerI really truly do,I don't mean one who's polishedI just mean one who's through.I'm through



66/ 161
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
ROBERTSON ELECTORATE
TERRIGAL, N. S. W. 18 OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President,. Mr. Bridges-Maxwell, other Members of Parliament
and Members of this Federal Conference:-
it has been very pleasant for me today to come to this
electorate. I was able to meet too few of the people because time was
so short, but, nevertheless, it has been, insofar as I have been able
to meet some people, quite delightful. It has been doubly delightful,
in a way, because I am with a member of the Federal Parliament who
I think perhaps more than most members, more than almost all members,
0 is really concerned with social welfare questions in Australia.
He has given a great deal of time to this, a great deal
of thought to this. He bombards me with memoranda about this, and
much of what he has to say not all but a great deal of what he has
to say has been extremely significant, and some of it has found its
way into something that we are going to carry out. This is important
to us, I think, as a country, as I will develop later.
What I really want to say to you all here tonight is that
you are, some of you initially, some of you as spiritual successors,
the same sort of people who, over two decades ago, decided that Australia
was going in the wrong direction. Those people who came together
in 1945, nearly twenty-five years ago, decided the type of government
they had, the philosophy which that government was following, was one
0 which would neither make our nation great nor give to the individuals
in that nation the full chance to develop their own capacity. They
therefore formed a new political party, and subsequently changed the
government. This has been significant, I believe, because if that
change had not been brought about by those who belonged to conferences
such as this throughout all Australia then we would not now be withincooee
of the kind of nation that we are. It was because you and your
predecessors did this that we were able to get away from a conception
that the individual existed only to serve the state, and rather to accept
the unalterable truth that a state ought to exist, and the only proper basis
for a state to exist, is for that state to serve the interests of the individuals
who make it up. So you got away from all the controls, you got away from
all the dogma, you got away from all the old-fashioned thinking which, had
it continued, would have prevented us from being what we are now.
And I believe that what you did then has already -paid enormous
dividends to the nation in which we live. At that time people were saying,
if you have five or six per cent of unemployment, that is reasonable, that
is the sort of thing that we can expect. At that time, people were saying,
we ought to have profit control. It doesn't matter if somebody invents
something new a new patent, a new way of doing things, a better way
let me use this example in this electorate a better way of growing oranges
so that we get more cases per tree, more trees per acre that doesn't matter.
/ 2 
-2
And we moved away from that, and during the period
between then and now, we have advanced because of the assistance
you then gave and are still giving.
But there has been a change now. We are facing a
period of change almost comparable with that period we faced two
and a half decades ago, because there are new problems facing our
nation, there are new courses we have to chart, there are new decisions
we have to take. Some two and a half decades ago, there was no question
about who would defend Australia. Great Britain would defend it. When
the time came that she was in danger, we would go to her assistance
and we went to her assistance in 19 14-18, in 1939-45 ( even before that
in the Boer War), and th flower of our manhood. died in those two
conflagrations. But in between times, we had no worry about defending
ourselves because we were defended by the British Empire, as it then
was, and the British Navy which ruled the seas and secured our
independence. All that has changed.
Now Britain has withdrawn, or is withdrawing from this
part of the world. Now those countries to our north, which for so long
were ruled either by Britain or by Holland, or by France, or by some'
other European power, have become independent nations in their own
right. Now there lies behind those indpcpendent nations the threat of I
won't say communism but the threat of expansion on the Marxist-Leninist
dogma that communism must be imposed by force over the whole world.
We find ourselves contiguous to new nations and we find ourselves with
this new threat, and we find ourselves without the shield on which, as
long as we have been a nation, we have depended.
This is one of the great changes we must admit has
happened. There are two things that flow from it.
First we must cement our relations with the United States
under the ANZUS pact, for our own protection. Second, we must see
what we can do to maintain the stability of those nations to our north,
and thirdly we must contribute to our own capacity for our own defence
more of our resources than we have ever had to contribute before.
So we find ourselves requiring not $ 400 million for our
own defence, but in this year 250 million, and we will find, as the
years go by that the amount of money required for this will increase,
though the amount ' of GNP for this, as far as I am concerned ( the
percentage of Gross National Product) will not. I do not li be this. I
doubt if you like this, because this kind of expenditure, thwje kind of
resources could go into schools, roads and developments, and that area
in which my opponent seems to be so engrossed sewerage and many
other fields which are important and significant, but no so important and
significant as this. This is one great change which recently has come about
and which we must face, and are facing.
Then I believe I do not necessarily put these in order of
priority, but they are all important that we must adopt, as a nation in
the situation in which we find ourselves today, a new concept for looking
after those who are old or ill or handicapped or in some other way the
subject of the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. / 3 
-3
. Up until very recently, the Party which I lead and which
you support accepted the philosophy that what we had to do in the field
of social welfare was to make a contribution, that we gave something,
but that we didn't expect that something which we gave to be enough to
meet all the needs of the human individual who was in need. We expected
that the family, as it used to do, should be able to look after, to some
extent, people who were in need.. We thought the charities from outside
should contribute too. I don't think, in the nation in which we find
ourselves today, we can any longer accept this. For myself, and for
the Party which I lead, and I hope and believe for you, I am of the opinion
that we must accept the philosophy that we need to be sure that the
contribution the community makes to people in this position is enough
to enable them to live in frugal comfort without any assistance from
outside though if that assistance from family or charity omes, well
that is so much the better. But there should be nobody who, in need,
in illness, perhaps without a family, perhaps without access to a
charity, does not have einoug h to eat, does not have enough to heat their
home, does not have suff icient blan'kets to keep them warm at night. This
we must stop, anid this will stop because that is another new approach
that we must make. It is not easy to make it because the requirements of
people of this kind vary so enormously. Some who live in aged persons'
homes can save on what the community gives them. Others who live
by themselves in small back streets and pay high rents cannot, but
these are problems we are now examining. These are problems the
Welfare Committee of the Government is trying to work out, and I
believe will work out. These are problems to which your member in
particular is turning his attention. These are problems which present
again a change in the attitude which we must take as a nation to those
who have served the nation well in their time, and who deserve, in my
view, at least a decent, respectable self-respecting chance to live in
their old age or in their invalidism.
Then we have, here now in'-this nation, a sort of
excitement, an opportunity for development which has never been
known in it before. For a long time we grew gradually. Yes, there
were gold rushes. People suddenly came here. They built ghost
towns. They mined the gold. They went away, and the population
increased as they came and decreased as they left. Apart from that,
there was just a gradual development of industry, a gradual development
of agriculture, a gradual lzcrease in the size of towns arnd c2&gt; s.
All of a sudden, we are finding all throughout Australia new
things iron ore, which will bring us in enormous overseas income oil
in Bass Strait maybe oil in this electorate, who knows? We hope so.
AMuasytbrea loiail. ofIfr sohno roer ef rfoomr Athuiss trealleicat. o raNteic. kelI t fdoor eAsnu'st trmaliaat. t erN.. e.. w tooiwl nfsol~ r" ips
being built, new ports being dredged, new railways being constructed,: the
whole face of the north of Austradlia being changed. Along with it, we . have
the great development in our own industrial capacity inside Australia, the
great requirement for people with new technological skills, the desire for
people who will work and who have knowledge. This requires billions
not millions but billions of dollars of private investment and millions,
perhaps hundreds of millions of Government investment.. But the point
is that instead of the gradual progress which for so long continued, we
are now progressing geometrically. The sky is the limit now, as long
as we can get the capital from outside, or from inaide, and the manpower
from outside, and the technological skills from inside to take advantage
of all the opportunities which suddenly have opened up to us. / 4 
4-
This is a thing that has only happened in the last few
years and this is a thing we must reach out and grasp because in
grasping it and in using the opportunity so grasped properly lies the
decision of what we will. be in two or three or four decades ahead as
a nation. We will be by the turn of the century, twenty-eight million
people not the twelve we are nowo and the turn of the century is only
some thirty years ahead which, in the life of a nation, is but the blinking
of an eye. Yet what we do now to seize that opportunity will decide
whether, at that times we have achieved all that it is possible for us to0
do or whether th,= e living then will -say " Thirty years ago people didn't
have vision. They didn't see what was possible. They didn't t-r-ke the
measures that were necessaryi They fell short, and we would have
been a greater nation had they not fallen short.
There are some other things that are changing too. I
did see, Sir, on my way here, as you pointed out, the great roadworks
which were taking place in order to enable people from here to get to
Sydney quickly, and people from Sydney to get here quickly. These 1:
have seen in quite a number of places in New South Wales and indeed
in other States, and it made me think about whether in fact it was quite
so impossible for a State Government to run its requirements, as has
sometimes been suggested to me.' But I put that aside and what I say
quite seriously to you all is that you are all Liberals, you are all people
who, in the long run, will make a considered opinion felt not accepted
by direction but felt, considered, and if reasonable, accepted. When
this party was formed two and a half decades ago, there were certain
dogmas accepted concerning the relations between an Australian
Government and the State Governments which made up the divisions
of this nation. They may have been right I think they were then; they
may have been wrong, but surely you cannot ossify, surely something
which has been accepted two and a half decades ago, it is reasonable
to say ought to be taken out and looked at and examined again to see
what a nation twenty-five years later now needs if it is properly to be
a nation. I do not tonight wish to argue philosophical cases, merely
to ask you to think about them. But I don't believe that in a nation of the
size we are and in a nation with the destiny we have, it is possible for
any other government than an Australian Government to have the overall
control of the economy, to say whether a deficit should be large or small,
to let credit run free if that is necessary or to constrict credit if that
is necessary, to control taxation, to see indeed that the economic management
of all our nation is run in one way.
I think there is growing in our population as I think there
ought to be growing in our population, a requirement that the educati onal
facilities available to a child should be of roughly comparable standard,
whether that child is born in Western Australia or New South Wales or
Queensland or wherever it may be. I think that there is growing in our
population a requirement that if somebody becomes ill and is in need of
care, then they should be able to get roughly comparable care, no matter
in what division of this nation they may become ill. If I am wrong in this,
then I am wrong, but these are things you should think about because they
are things that I am thinking about, because they are things the Liberal
Party will have to think about if it is to move with the times. 
I 
I give only those examples there are many others but
in giving them, I do not want to be accused, as I have been accused, of
being a centralist. I am not. I think the administration of all these matters
should remain in governments closer to the people than any government
in Canberra can be, But think about whether the goals that I have suggested,
the provision of finances that I have suggested for special purposes in
education or in roads or in transport or in health ought not really to be
something in which an Australian Government has a leading part and in
which a state government has the administration and the disbursement
of the funds. This is heresy if it is to be compared to the 1945 Constitution
of the Liberal Party. What I am asking you to do is to put your minds on it
and see whether you think it is a reasonai-. e sort of heresy or not. I think
it is. But in the long run, it is conferences here and in all the other
electorates in Australia who will have a great voice in deciding just what
ought to be done. Certainly I am sure of this. The whole matter needs
examination and discussion because this is another of the great changes
facing us as a nation today.
The rest what is it that a political party such as ours
should seek to hold out to the people of Australia? Full employment?
Yes, we have done that. A chance for material benefit? Yes, we have
done that. The opportunity to take a risk and lose if the risk was not
wisely chosen, an opportunity to take a risk and win and keep one'ss
winnings if the risk was wisely chosen, an opportunity for material
benefit, for harder work and greater rewards for that harder work? Of
course these things we need to hold out, and I believe these things are
now available. We need to give to people more than that because this is
not enough. This material benefit, this material advantage, these
material advances are not for individuals. People want something more.
They want a chance not only to get but to give, not only to accumulate but
to contribu te, a feeling that in what they are doing they are not only,
improving the farm on which they live, expanding the factory which they
manage, getting a better business, but a feeling that in doing that and in
the other community work in which they may be involved, they are enabling
their children to inherit a country which is a better one than the one they
inherited themselves. They want a country with better opportunities for
those who are willing to take them, with a requirement, and indeed a demand
for sacrifice and contribution as well as material benefit from what they
may do in their daily lives.
I think that people want this. I am sure they ought to want
it. I believe it is at the basis of Liberal philosophy. I think this kind of
feeling in one way or another, with whatever nuances there may be about
it is what has drawn you to support the kind of political philosophy which
we apply and which has brought you to this dinner tonight. And if I am
right in this, then I think that at the turn of the century we will 1.5 not
only twenty-eight million people but that we will be twenty-eight million
people who are materially great, who are becoming a power in the world,
who are able to defend themselves, who see the horizons towards which
they are going and who are in themselves fulfilled individuals. */ 6 
6-
If this is the end result of what we are trying for, then
it is an end result which I think has not yet been attained by any other
nation I can think of in the world. So it is not only these material matters.
It is the chance * to provide along with material advancement self -satisfaction
that is the wrong word self-fulfilment and at that time a horizon which
is quite unlimited. If you and others like you believe in this and help us
in this and see that we have a chance to do this, then while you will not
see the results any more than I will, you can, I think, have faith that
those results will be great in the annals of the world.
I believe that you are contributing to some thing which
will be greater than anything we have seen before. You know, it was
said, " A man' s reach must exceed his grasp or what's a Heaven for."
I'd translate that as saying, " A nation's reach must exceed its grasp
or what's a future for?", and a great deal depends on you to see whether
our nation's reach does exceed its grasp and the future that is possible
is attained. I will do my best; those with me will do their best, but
we depend in the ultimate on you, and I hope you will give us your support. 


1 69/ 158OPENING OF OLYMPIC SWIMMING POOLWOY WOY, N. S. W. 19 OCTOBER 1968Mr. President, Distinguished Guests, Members of Parliament, Ladiesand Gentlemen: There has been one lesson I have learnt during theltimethat I have been opening various buildin gs, swimming pools and thingsof that kind. That lesson is that I am usually so pleased and relievedto have reached the end of whatever it is I have to say, and I know thateverybody sitting around is so pleased and relieved that I have reachedthe end of whatever it is I have to say, that I generally forget to declareopen whatever it is that is supposed to be declared open! Now somebodyhas got to remind me on this occasion because there is a button therewhich I need to press.This occasion has something quite unique about it. Veryoften one comes along and opens whatever it is, and in fact it has beenin use for weeks or even months before one gets there. I gather that onthis occasion this pool has not been in use at all and that this really willbe an opening. That is another reason for me not to delay too long soall those excited children who want to get in can do so. All of you, too,who I am sure want to get in and se~ e how magnificent it is, will in factbe able to do so. Those members of the Pool Committee, must feel somesense of pride and satisfaction today as their minds go back to the timewhen they banded together and decided they would do something to helpthe community in which they live, and as they remember the work thatthey did and the time that it took. I am sure many evenings were engagedand much travelling was entailed I hope that today they feel a full senseof satisfaction and a full sense that what they have done has been worthwhile,as indeed it has been.
We, as Mr. Bridges-Maxwell has said, are going to build between us all a really great Australian nation for Australians, and that will require from those of us who are now able to work and from those who are at school and being taught, that will require a considerable amount of effort, a considerable amount of concentration, a considerable amount of  hard work. But a life for a country is no good if the whole of it is engaged in hard work and effort, necessary though that is. There must be room along the way for play and laughter and gaiety and song as well as the hard work; and for the provision of sporting facilities. such as this pool, or football ovals or the beaches that you have and I hope will preserve. These are the things which give. to our growing generation that opportunity for healthy recreation, that opportunity for building up their muscles which will in turn enable them to turn their minds and efforts to building a country and advancing it for their children.
paricuar ote think this has been a magnificent effort. I have taken paricuar oteof a suggestion that at some future time I might be invitedback. Now that appeals to me not because I have seen much of the Shire of Woy Woy, but because I have felt since I got out of the car today' that Ihave met a great number of people who are friends and whom I would liketo see again if I could come back here. So all I need is an invitation again from the Mayor. Now amnot going to delay you any more. I remember fourlines of poetry which my wife keeps dinning into me whenever I am aboutto become engaged in making a public speech. What she says is: " Listen,look at those people out in front of you and something like this is runningthrough their minds:-" I love the finished speakerI really, truly do.1 don't mean one who's polishedI just mean one who's through."And I think it's time I was through and the pool opened. So I do declare the pool open.. I remembered'



FEDERAL~~~ COUNCI OFTELBEA AT
OF AUSTALI
HoeCaner CabraACT
DlgHtoeCla imCnab ra: aberA . T
It is in some ways a very awesome thing to stand here in
front of you at a place where two great leaders have previously stood and
to address a Party which for so long has kept in power a government which
has enabled Australia to be transformed. I think that most of you will
understand the humility with which anybody must, for the first time, appear
before you in a place where those other leaders have for so long appeared.
I don't propose to talk to you for very long tonight, but there are some
matters I think we must regard, as a party, as new matters for Australia
to consider, as new matters for the members of this Party to solve.
Some of them, of course, are not entirely new but they are
new in the degree to which they impinge upon us, and one of those is the matter
of defending our country. it has been since the last Federal Conferencq Of
this Party that the final decision has been taken for the accelerated withdrawal,
and what appears virtually a complete withdrawal, of the United Kingdom from
the countries to our North and from East of Suez. And though for a lor~ g time
we have been talking, all of us, of the need for more defence for Australia,
of the need to look more to ourselves for our own security, yet this has only
recently been brought home in the starkest terms.
It may be traversing ground which ought not to be traversed,
but yet we should have it in our mind that for nearly two centuries we lived
under the protection of Great Britain. It was her Navy that kept us safe,
and it was only when crises arose that young men and women flocked from all
corners of this Cornonwealth and made sacrifices, at whatever level was
required, during the time of conflict. In between little attention was devoted
to defence. Now that has changed and must be accepted as a new situation
facing Australia. So we find that we have had, as a government, to raise a
vote for our own defences which was running at some $ 400 million a year
to a vote which is running at 250 million and which in terms of money,
I think, will over the years ahead need to Ire raised still more ( though not, if
I can help it in terms of our gross national product).
Not only has this new situation forced this vast diversion
of resources upon us but it has exacerbated the solution of the other new
problems to which as a nation and as a party we are pledged. And yet
some of these problems cannot just be put aside. I hate, and I believe most
of the peop le in this room would hate the thought of all those resources
devoted to defence. When we think of the number of schools, of the number
of hospitals, of the new freeways, of all the things for which the people of
Australia are calling which could be provided with that sum of money, we 
-2
must regret that it is necessary for that sum to go to defence. However,
schools, freeways, hospitals and all these other things are of little use
unless they can be safely held and defended by the country which has them.
But there are matters which cannot, in a modern nation
with a modern conscience, be put aside or denied. Here, too, though these
are not new matters yet, Sir, I think there needs to be a new approach, a
new examination. You have all heard me speak from time to time of the
essential need to care for the old, the ill, the handicapped in our population,
But up until very recently we, as a Liberal Party, took the view that our
contribution towards such people should be just that, a contribution, and
that we would expect them to receive from other sources, from their
family or from some charity, or from another source somewhere,
additional assistance to enable them to live in reasonable self-respect.
I don't believe that is an approach that can any longer be accepted by the
Liberal Party. I believe that the new and necessary approach and the one
which my Government will take must be to see that a contribution made to
such people is sufficient for them to live in frugal comfort and with
reasonable self-respect, so that there is no need for appeals to be made
for blankets to keep them warm or for fuel for their houses in the winter
or for additional food because they do not have enough. This, in a sense,
is a new approach but it is an approach, Sir, that we must make.
In its application it is not simple. Again, always in the past
in seeking to help people of this kind, we have dealt with a broad buh. we
have said, " Let us raise this pension or that pension by so much across the
board. This approach, I think, is wrong and wasteful in that it on occasions
leads to the provision of more than is required for the standards of which
I have spoken to be attained, and on occasions leads to less. For that.
reason we have, as a government, a Welfare Committee researching and
searching into the requirements of people of this kind so that the aid ca * n be
given where the need is greatest and so that there will be, from the resources
available, sufficient to meet those areas where the need is great.
This Committee, which has already resulted in your
Government removing one great fear that was in the hearts of the Australian
people and that is the fear of a long-continued illness being unable to be
paid for by the community, is bringing down recommendations to us which
will seek to attain the ends and ideals I have been putting before you. And
while they are seeking to do that, they will also, as I believe from the ' work
they have already done, ensure that in doing what I have suggested shoul d
be done, they will not remove the incentive, will not remove the rewaroi for
those who have saved to assist themselves over and above what the com~ munity
may give them when they retire.
We have, you have, all this period of time since 1949,
created a climate in which, gradually at first, then with ever-increasing
speed, Australia has become transformed. All that time ago, you rejected
a concept which I believe was inherent in the philosophy of our opponents,
and that concept was that the individual existed to serve the state and that
the state did not exist to serve the individual. And from that grew an
insistence on controls, unnecessary controls, and from that grew a .9/ 3 
-3
stagnation which became so impossible to bear, which resulted in a rate
of unemployment of five per cent which was said to be all that a developed
country could expect to attain, that you revolted against it and changed it
and changed the philosophy. As a result, you brought about that climate of
development, that Possibility for the individual to take his risks and reqp
his rewards if he were successful and to take the consequences if he wasn'tt,
according to his own efforts and according to his own ability and energy.
So in that period of time, this country grew to the stage of incipient gr~ atness
in which it now finds itself.
It finds itself now in a position it has never been inbefore.
This again is something new which faces the nation and which faces
us as a Liberal Party. You all know of the enormous developments now
taking place in the North of Western Australia, in the seas off the coast
of Victoria, in Queensland, and of the immense material benefits which will
flow and are flowing from them nickel, iron ore, oil, minerals of all
kinds, requiring not millions, but billions of capital for their full and
proper -development; another call upon the national resources which is
new, a requirement as I believe, Sir, for this Party to accept that it is
necessary, with these possibilities before us, with the capital required for
their full development being hard to get, that priorities of development for
the good of the nation need to be examined and need to be decided.
Then we come to another matter, on upon which, Sir,
we touched this morning, one which will be the subject of future discussion
by the Party, and that is, in your own. words: What sort of a Federal
system do w want, and how can we best make a Federal system work?
Is it right and proper that nearly a quarter of a century after a general
philosophical programme was adopted in a country which was then different
from the position in which it now finds itself, in a country which had
problems not measurable against those now to be faced, that we should look
again to see whether the philosophy then adopted meets the requirement of
a nation a quarter of a century later.
This is new. It is good that it is new. It is good that
it is going to be discussed. WV ith one of the points so long ago adopted', Sir,
I believe there can be absolutely no question, and with that all here would
agree, and that is enshrined in the words.. " the development to the fullest
extent of a national spirit in Australia". It has been growing. I am su* re
it will grow, and I am certainly going to do all that is within my power, as
a leader of the Liberal Party to see that this national spirit is fostered and
is developed and that everybody in Australia now, or in thirty years' ti me
wnen we will be twenty-eight million people, will feel some kind of fire in
the heart when they say, " I am an Australian" first, foremost and all the
time. Then the next point which will be the subject of discussion
is this phrase... " the maintenance unimpaired of a Federal system of
government with appropriate divisions of power". We will need to examine
what is meant by " unimpaired" because quite clearly it doesn't mean
" unchanged'" or else we would not, as a Liberal Party, have changed as
we have in such things as passing a referendum on aborigines and in other
ways. What we need to work out in our philosophy is not the question of
divisions of funds. This of course comes later. This of course is importart,
but this of course is different from what I am now talking about. / A 
-4
What we need is to consider let me put it rather not
in terms of what we need, but the kind of approach which I have in mind and
with which some may agree, others may notj but which it is time for this
Party to thoroughly examine.
In my view, Sir, it would be unthinkable for an
Australian Government not to have the overriding power over the maintenance
of the Australian economy as a whole. It would be unthinkable to have a
nation where an Australian Government could not assess the resources and
materials available throughout the nation and could not, if necessary, let
credit run so that all materials and all resources were used, and if necessary,
restrict credit so that cost inflation because of an over-demand on materials
and resources availabledid not occur. I don't really * think this is a subject
of dispute, but it is the starting point from which I begin.
I think that it is necessary for an Australian Government
to be able to effec t the division of resources in the nation betweL:. 1 the public
and the private sector according to its requirements of private development
or of public development, and I know of no other way in which this can be
done but by an Australian Government.
I think that it is necessary, if these tenets I have put
forward are accepted, that the major fields of taxation in Australia should
be, as they are now under the Constitution, the responsibility of an
Australian Government, both as to their use and as to the rates of taxation apphed
within them. It would seem to me to be silly, if to meet some particular
economic situation for the good of the nation, the Treasurer for example,
lowered the rate of income tax in order to enable more to be available to be
spent by the private sector and private people, and burdens to be taken
off those who are now so heavily burdened, the middle range, and were to
do this for economic reasons, and those taxes were to be arranged again
by some other source. These are all matters o f overall economic management.
These are all matters which now, under the Constitution, are the responsibility
of an Australian Government. There are, of course, other fields in which much
discussion can take place. I will deal with only one of them. I would ike
the conference to feel, as I hope they do feel, that what I am saying to jhem
is what I feel is for the good of Australia as a whole and a necessity if:
Australia is to progress in the way it should. They are not just light or
random thoughts. There is a need for an Australian Government to be ' able
to move to a field of special assistance somewhere in Australia if that field
of special assistance is going to be of benefit to this nation, and it cannot,
without an Australian Government, be exp loited.
if, for example, there is to be a requirement for cheap
power to be provided somewhere in Queensland and it is known that if
that cheap power is provided then there will be twenty other industries
established to use it and a port will grow into a city as a result, but it
will cost $ 200 million, then there would be a requirement for an Australian
Government to be able to assist in that way. If there is to be a requirement
for a pipeline to bring natural gas from somewhere in Australia to Adelaide
and it cannot be achieved without assistance from a national government, then
a national government needs to be able to have the right and the capacity to
assist in that way. 
I don't think I need to expand this list, but I would ask the
conference to put this question in their minds. But for the use of grants
such as Section 96, Sir, do you believe that we would now have a uniform
system of rail gauges throughout Australia? You answer it in your own
minds. I don't believe we would. ^ o there is a need, too, for this kind of
assistance, and this kind of capacity for an Australian Government.
Let me refer to another matter, another aspect of the same
matter because these are all things that this Party must look at and malke
up its mind about and they are important and they need not be the subject
of snap judgments. I think that there is a demand from the people of
Australia as a whole, and I think it is a just and a proper and a necessary
demand that after general purpose grants have been provided to State
Governments as they have been and will be in increasing amounts, there is
a need on behalf of an Australian Government that certain responsibilities
to the nation are met. There is a need, for example, to see that the
facilities for the education of a child are roughly the same, no matter in
what part of Australia that child may be born and grow up. There is a
need and a requirement to see that the facilities for the care of the ill are
roughly the same in Australia, no matter where it may be that a citizen
falls ill. These, if they are demands and I believe they are and
if they are proper demands and I think they are are again matters in which
an Australian Government must concern itself.
If it is true and I believe it is true, that in the world of
today we must grow, not only economically but technologically, if it is true
we must develop our own technology and train people in methods of operation
and methods of building and methods of application of time, if this is
true, then it is a national requirement that proper technical and technclogical
education is applied throughout the whole of Australia. If that is a national
requirement, then no national government can sit baclk and wash its hands
of that responsibility and say, " Oh, but general purpose grants have been
made and there is nothing further for us to do, even if this requirement
isn't met. So I am glad that amongst the other new things that I have
mentioned and the other problems which we face and the other calls upon
us which prevent us from being able, because of a shortage of manpower and
material to do all we want to do, that this other matter is to be a subject of
discussion. I have sought merely tonight, because I thought it was my
duty, to give an insight into some of my thinking to those of you who are here.
I don't believe it would be true or right or proper to describe that thinking
as the thinking of a centralist or a unificationist. It is the thinking of somebody
who believsthat national requirements do exist, there is a responsibility on a
national government to see they are met, but that after that, then the
general grants made and made in increasing quantities are used and
administered by those governments nearest to the people.
So it will be an interesting discussion, a necessary discussion,
a new approach. I think in any case that on the record of what we have done
we ought to be able to solve the problems still before us With you, I
look forward to that day I spoke of when we are not twelve but twenty-eight
million and growing more rapidly to forty million and becoming a great
material power, a power with a social conscience, applying those principles
we are now working out and will begin to apply again in the next Budget, and
giving to our people the feeling not only of material greatness but a capacity
and an opportunity to develop themselves and their own individuality which
after all was one of the reasons, if not the most important reason for the
foundation of this Liberal Party. I think, Sir, we will be able to achieve these
things together. 



TT. I
CLOSING SESSION OF INTERNATIONAL UNION K69CJ~%
OF BUILDING SOCIETIES CONGRESS
SYDNEY, N. S. W. OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Members of Overseas and Australian
Governments and Delegates from many countries:-
For a week now, you have been devoting yourselves to
discussing the questions of how to build houses, how to provide good
and healthy accommodation and how to harness savings and use the
thrifty instincts of individuals in order to see that these ends are
attained. Your gathering here in such numbers, the roll calls of your
distinguished-delegations, the professional and technical nature of your
discussions all bear great witness to your understanding and dedication
to the issues before you. And yet in a sense perhaps, your work has
only begun with these discussions.
Throughout history until very recent times, men have
lived for the most part in small communities, in small towns or
villages and what would now be regarded as small cities or indeed
have wandered with their flocks and herds. It is in this modern age
that we have been presented with a new situation, or at least with a
situation whi * ch is accelerating in difficulty and in opportunity, because
man has to a large extent now become a city dweller.
As public health measures have advanced and as
technological progress has been used, it has become possible to
manufacture more and more goods, world population has risen and
is rising it looks like doubling again within a single generation and
with this, the movement towards larger and larger communities will
continue. Thus I think all of us are faced with a problem of modern
times and modern society, and that is to make cities for men rather
than to fit men into inadequate cities. This is an enormous problem,
calling for very great resources and allied inextricably to your interests
of providing housing, if we are to get a proper end result.
Let us examine the problem. I am a country man myself
and I know the pleasure and the joys of open spaces. Somehow we have
to preserve these, and yet at the same time, plan for those who will
necessarily have to live in the more populous parts of the towns and cities.
You people who are building seeking to build the living
areas in these cities have a particular interest, I think, in seeing that
your efforts in housing are not nullified, that the people in your healthy
new houses are not choked by smog, that the people living in your houses
can move freely and quickly from place to place, that they are not deafened
nor have their nerves set on edge by a cacophony of noise. These are as
allied to your aims as are the provisions of houses or dwelling places of
any kind themselves. */ 2 
3-
You will need to help with the housing of the needy, as
well as considering the prosperous, and this may and probably will,
involve special partnerships with governments. And there is beyond
your immediate task of mobilising financial resources to permit
families to purchase the homes they would like, the need for the
planning and development of the new communities.
Here in Australia, Sir, the challenge of the future is
strong, strong indeed, because we have a population growing steadily
by natural increase and by continuing intake of migrants. We are
twelve million strong now and if all goes well, we will by the turn of
the century be twenty-eight million. The turn of the century is not
long in the life of a nation. It is but the blinking of an eye before we
will come to the turn of the century. Nor is it long for a planner to
be able to study, foresee and seek to overcome, or at least seek to
show how these problems can be overcome if the resources can be
acquired, nor is it long for the planner to have to do this.
This means that the demand for adequate housing will
be insistent, will continue to make calls on the resources of governments
and of private enterprise, particularly in the fields where the organisations
you represent are active, and particularly in the fields I have touched
on, of seeking to create a proper environment.
I am sure, Sir, you have been told and the conference
has been told that in Australia over seventy per cent of all householders
own their own homes or are paying them off. We, the Government,
encourage this, as you do. And it is also an encouragement, though
much more remains to be done in our country in this field, towards
slum reclamation in attempts to wipe out unhappy legacies of the past.
And it encourages flat construction to serve the preferences of those
who wish to live in that type of dwelling.
Here in Australia, by co-operation and State Governments,
with private enterprise in this field of housing, we try and we aspire to
house our people, to house them at reasonable costs in dwellings of their
own choice and in the locality where they want to live. That is something
of fundamental importance because the standard of a home environment
could well be a critical factor in one's standard of life, and by that I
don't mean that the best people live in the biggest houses. What I mean
is that the householder who likes what he lives in is likely to make the
best citizen, if he likes what he lives in and he likes what is around the
house in which he lives.
Today, forty per cent of we Australians are under
twenty-one, so in truth we are a young country, but we aim to be
mature and to be forward-looking in the way we try to house our people.
In this we regard it as important that old Australians and new Australians
have here the same opportunities to acquire homes of their own or to live
in other dwellings of their choice, and in this aim, Sir, your organisation
plays a helpful and significant part.
I think our record is a creditable one, but it is not a
record which means that by any means full solutions have been found.
It does mean that advances have been made towards these solutions.
*/ 4 
-4-
Now, Mr. Chairman and gentlemen, your presence
here today and the fact that you have honoured us by having your
Congress in Australia is most pleasing to all Australians and most
pleasing to myself as Prime Minister. I know the Australian delegates
have found much of value in this conference. The opportunity to talk
with their experienced colleagues from the older, industrialised
countries has been valuable to them, and I am sure Australia will
gain a lot as a result. I think, too, that the delegates from Asia, Africa and
South America have perhaps learnt much, have perhaps thought much
as to the application of means towards the ends we all seek, and in
particulartowards the fostering of savings and loan movements in their
own countries. You have covered a great deal of important ground in
your deliberations and in examining proposals for a world housing
bank, a world personnel bank, among many other things.
By such assemblies as these, you help to expose the
housing problems of a world society which is expanding rapidly under
enormous population pressures. And more than that, you are contributing
to the search for the solution to the problem of how man can happily,
healthily and with a sense of satisfaction live in the new vast communities
which must grow. You have had much success. I extend my congratulations
to you for what you have done, for what you aspire to do, and for the
spirit which lies behind all of your activities. 


68/ 164CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATIONUNVEILING OF FOUNDATION STONECANBERRA, A. C. T. 28 OCTOBER 1968Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonMr; Chairman, Mr. Minister,-Leader of the Opposition, DistinguishedGuests, Ladies and Gentlemen:I am delighted to be asked to unveil the plaque and I haveno doubt that in due time I'll be told precisely what string to pull in orderto do it. This is one of the most satisfying tasks that I couldimagine myself undertaking, because the unveiling of this plaque is anindication that we are really moving in building the first CanberraCollege of Advanced Education and that College represents a significantnew approach to tertiary education.If I may say so, the occasion is of special significance tome, and satisfaction to me, because I remember not so long ago carryingout a function which was called turning the first sod on the site. This:involved, not as you might imagine using a spade, but using some vastmechanical contraption which took a sod weighing some four cubic yar ds,if I remember rightly, and which at all times I felt was liable to getcompletely out of control. But I remember that well and if I may say so,Sir, the flies were just as bad on that occasion as they are today.I don't claim any proprietary rights in this college. Itfalls within the jurisdiction of my colleague the Minister for Educationand Science, and all the hard work and planning has been done by theInterim Council of the college under your leadership. But it is a symbol.It's the beginning of new things in the A. C. T. and the beginning of newthings throughout the whole of the nation.It is worth restating, I think, on this occasion what it isthat we are starting here. We're starting an institution, one of many,;which has flowed from the acceptance of those reports to which youreferred, Mr. Chairman. Those reports suggested that we shouldtailor our tertiary education system to meet the demands of an exciting,changing age and to meet the requirements of the tide of the future whichhas caught us up and which is going to require of us new schools and newapproaches to education. I think most of us here would be familiar with the reportsof the various committees the Mextin Committee, the Wark Committeeand the Burton Committee and we will know some of the special functionswhich these colleges have to carry out. But let us be fair about one thingright from the start, * and let us make it clear right from the start, to allthose interested in education throughout Australia. These colleges willnot be second level universities. / 2
-2Collectively they will provide an alternative system butnot an inferior system to university education. I will repeat that analternative system but not an inferior system to university education.Each college of the many that will grow or have grown throughout thenation will have its own standards, quality and its own levels of efficiency.Each will be a tertiary institution with a strong vocational bias, as yousaid, offering courses leading to professional excellence in selecteddisciplines. And the colleges will aim to provide scholarship, not onlyfor the sake of scholarship, which was the genesis of university education,but to meet specific needs of industry and of human endeavour in specificspecialised areas. This is where the college courses will differ from thecourses at our universities not all the courses of our universities butvery many of them. The first building here is, as you said, to be a multi-purposebuilding and if all goes well, the students will be here at the beginning of1970. 1 was glad, Sir, that you mentioned that the request of the InterimCouncil of the college that it be allowed to plan for the inclusion of teachereducation has been accepted, at least in principle. When firm proposals,which I think have not yet been made, are received, they will be studiedby us with great care and interest, and I hope and believe with the sameresults as have led to the plans for the college itself.At any rate, a school of teacher education within theCanberra College will add to the pool of trained teachers within Australia,for use within Australia or the Territories, and indeed provide teachersfor local schools. Liberal Studies is one of the first courses which thiscollege will offer. And I want to stress this, because a deliberateinfusion of the liberal arts into a system which is essentially vocationaland which many people seem to think will be extremely technical, is offirst importance. This infusion is designed to ensure that human values arenot lost in a world of machines or the classics abandoned for calculuSand computers. I don't see at all why humanists and technologists haveto be different people or take different approaches to the problems oftheir lives or of the nation. What we aim to produce here, of course,is a new " end product" a liberally-educated technologist, or, if I mayput it another way, without upsetting my distinguished colleague, atechnologically-educated liberal.I believe, Sir, we must develop these colleges in a waywhich will give us plenty of flexibility; adapt the system to the changesnow bearing down upon us changes in environment, in social attitudes,in the application of science and technology changes which have agreater intensity about them now than we have experienced at any pasttime in the history of this country.If we are to reach for the stars, then we must reach forthem with trained minds and skilled hands. / 3
3-One more thing, Sir, I would say. This college now isbeing built in open country, yet within measurable time, within a shorttime, there will be around it the new town of Belconnen. And I hope thatthis college will stand in that town as one example of an AustralianGovernment's active interest and continuing interest in education. Thiscollege is being built to meet a demand in the Capital Territory, butthat demand is reflected across the whole of this continent.No doubt, the college will develop its own tzaditions asthe years go by. You can't merely vest tradition in new things. Youcan't confer tradition like a diploma or a degree, or whatever it is youdecide to confer. You have to let it grow from the quality of its coursesand the capacity of its staff and students.But I am certain that if the beginnings of this college arebuilt upon in the future with the same devotion, with the same skill, ashas been used in the past, that the tradition this college will develop willbe second to none of any tertiary institution in Australia.Sir, here, and again in colleges like it throughout Australia,we are going to see people being educated not merely for the 20th but forthe 21st century, which we are rapidly approaching. And I believe thatwhat may happen in that 21st century will largely be shaped by the productsof these colleges, of universities acting jointly to provide that which thisnation needs a liberal education, scholarship for its own sake, a searchingmind, a capacity to understand new things, a capacity to apply technologyand an insistence that technology so applied be applied for the good of alland not for destructioh, So this is an important occasion; this is for ' me a satisfyingoccasion and for all those who have given their work and their minds andtheir time, I trust that it too is a highly satisfactory occasion.


53RD CONGRESS OF THE R. S. L.CANBERRA, A. C. T. 28 OCTOBER 1968Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonYour Excellency, Sir. Arthur Lee, Mr. Whitlam, Ministers, Members,Service Chiefs of Staff, and Ladies and Gentlemen:-My task is merely to say a few supporting words afterthe Governor-General has opened this Conference. And I will keepthem brief, as I know you would wish them to be kept brief.it is for me a great distinction to be able to stand todayand talk to the representatives of an organisation which has, since itwas formed, had three major objectives at least in my mind threemajor objectives. The first, to see that those who were maimed by war,and the dependents of thos e who were maimed or did not return at allfrom war, were looked after by the nation. The second, to try toensure that the defences of this country were, insofar as our resourcespermitted, kept at a level which would help us to retain what in the pastmembers of this organisation have so dearly fought to retain. And thethird, to see that that which was retained in two world ware is usedproperly in peace for the benefit of the nation.In neither of the great wars fought did we win anythingnew, nor did we seek to. What we did was to retain something old andsomething precious, the right to live in freedom and to develop ourselvesaccording to our people's will. We might not have retained that in myview we would not have retained that but for the sacrifices twice made.And it is therefore a most significant objective of this organisation tosee that the foundation upon which, and upon which alone a great nationcan be built, the foundation of freedom and participation in decisions....to see that that foundation is used to build an enduring structure. Theseare three great objectives.As to the first two, the Governor-General has alreadyindicated the difficulties of getting a quart out of a pint pot. But, I amsure, that insofar as this organisation is concerned, they will neverstop squeezing if I can change the metaphor and regard it as a tube oftoothpaste never cease squeezing the tube to endeavour to get from itthe utmost possible. One thing of which His Excellency spoke was the numberof items on your agenda. One of them will not need to take up much ofyour time the item concerned with the extension of tuberculosisbenefits to those who have fought in special areas or in Vietnam. Thelegislation was amended last week in order to extend these benefits tothese people. As to defence, I know that everyone present is concernedwith the changed situation which faces our nation as a result of the decisionof the British to withdraw from our near north. I know that everyone hererealises that meeting a changed situation and a new challenge requiresdecisions which cannot be lightly arrived at and ought not to be too quicklyrushed into. And that is all I propose to say on that matter. / 2
-2-But it may be appropriate, Sir, to conclude by announcinghere something which I believe has a significance for the organisationand for the nation itself. This November there is an anniversary, andthat is the anniversary of the ending of that great war fought some halfa century ago. We have been asked by the French Government tocontribute from Australia a contingent of troops who will representthis nation, together with a contingent from New Zealand. They willmarch through the streets of the city of Paris and give visible evidenceof the sacrifices made by this nation for a country 10, 000 miles away....but for a cause which is just as significant whether it is 10, 000 ormiles away. And so there will be on this 50th celebration representativesof the Australian Army and the New Zealand Army providing to thepeople of Europe an indication, a reminder of that continuing concernof this nation for the maintenance of freedom, which cost so dearly atthat time and which will be commemorated by this march. I hope thatour decision to send this contingent meets with the approval of thisgathering and indeed I am sure it does.BACKGROUND POINTS ON PARIS CONTINGENT:This will comprise about 150 men representing thethree services. A party of 84 soldiers and airmen will leave byair on 6 November. The Naval contingent of some 40 officers andmen will be made up of R. A. N. personnel serving in Britain.


PRESENTATION OF A GOLD COIN COMMEMORATING THE DEDICATION OF THE ANZAC MEMORIAL AND FOREST IN ISRAEL
MELBOURNE, VIC. 29 OCTOBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton.
Mr. President, Your Excellency:
I understand that at some later stage in these proceedings there will be a presentation of a memento, and I wish now to take this opportunity of saying how much I value the opportunity to appear before you and how honoured I am that the Government of Israel has made this occasion possible. I would like, Mr. ' President, through you,. and also Your S Excellency, through you, to express to the Government of Israel my own deep gtatitude and appreciation.
W The Anzac Memorial Forest must, in a sense, be unique.There it is, part of a programme of transforming unproductive land toproductive land, and yet at the same time a memorial to the 17, 000Australians who were in Palestine as it then was in the First WorldWar and to the 70, 000 who were there in the Second World War.Australians who on both occasions rode, if they were Light Horsemen,knee to knee with citizens of Australia of Jewish extraction and werehelped by those of Jewish extraction in that country a memorial toshared efforts, to shared dangers, to shared hardships so long ago.I have not seen this forest, but I can in my mind imagineit a vast stretch of eucalypts, bearing witness to those things whichwere together done, and reminding us of battles long ago. This mustserve to draw closer and closer the ties between our two countries whichare I think already as close as the ties between any two countries I know.There is in some ways a remarkable parallel between theState of Israel and the nation of Australia. Both have got to develop andhave developed in a harsh environment where nature is not kind, wherethere is no smiling way of developing, of growing, of building, but wherewhat has to be attained has to be attained only by great effort and bywresting from ; that harsh environment the requirements for growth.Both of us are, in the councils of the world, comparativelynew, comparatively small, and yet I think both of us are, by applyingscientific knowledge, by applying technology, showing what can be donein arid country, showing what can be done if effort is put in. And bothof us require, and Israel particularly has required over the years,assistance from outside in the form of capital to enable the building ofindustrial muscles, the provision of a better life for its citizens to go ahead.
-2ICertainly the area of your land is smaller than the areaof ours. Probably, I think, the amount of good land that we have isperhaps greater than the amount in Israel, but having said that, stillthere are these shared problems, still there are these requirementsfor overcoming them, and that is something else we have in common.That is not all. Though we in Australia and though youAustralians have not ever had to bear the direct impact of total itar ianfs m,yet those of your faith have seen what can happen when people are preparedto give away their freedom, when people are prepared to allow an allpowerfuldictator to decide their fates and their lives. You know it,perhaps at first hand, perhaps from stories from relatives, or friends,certainly you know it, and while we have not had to experience it, yetwe know it too. There is, I think, again a shared determination by theState of Israel and by the nation of Australia to see that there will neverdevelop in our countries that kind of totalitarianism, and to seek to do asmuch as within our compass lies to see that it does not develop any further,that it does not spread any further. We have seen what happens toindividuals when one accepts the doctrine which you and we do not acceptthat the citizen exists to serve the state and not the state to serve the0 citizen. We have seen what can happen when religious bigotry orpolitical bigotry, or racial bigotry is allowed to run riot, and that canonly run riot if totalitarianism is in existence. That again is somethingI believe we have in common.Of course you have difficulties in Israel, Sir, that we don'thave. We do not have to plough our land with a rifle within arm's reach,we do not have to go to bed at night and bar and lock the doors or be carefulthat the lights don't so shine that a sniper may take advantage of it. We canuse ploughshares alone. In Israel it must be ploughshares and arms. Butwe have as a nation, I believe, a feeling and a knowledge of what this mightbe like. We have an admiration for what has been achieved on thedevelopmental and the economic and the defensive front in Israel. Wehave this shared determination of which I have previcu sly spoken.Now, Sir, may I add this. I believe that we in Australiahave reason to be grateful to the Jewish community of Australians becausethey have helped in my view to foster the knowledge of Israel in Australiaand draw closer the bonds between Israel and Australia, leading to thatkind of genuinely friendly feeling which I believe exists between our twocountries. The rebirth of Israel after 2, 000 years though it was not-easyhas been, because of heffsofte Jesh _ 6mmrnity in this and othercountries, something in which we can take some joy as well as those ofJewfish extraction. so / 3
3-We look forward as a government and as a people to thetime when true peace will be restored in that area in which Israel lies.I haven't heard many people saying " Let us sit down and talk. Let ussit down and discuss" though I know, Sir, your own government wantsthis to happen. When it does and when the foundations of true peace arelaid and when no longer is there a need for a rifle or a grenade to bewithin the reach of somebody ploughing a field in Israel, then how muchbetter it will be for the human race as a whole, how much brighter andeasier the'future will be for a country like Israel so close in affinity, inits difficulties, in its desires, in its aims to Australia.For these reasons, Sir, for the admiration we have, forthe problems that we share in common, for the aspirations and idealswhich I think are the same between Australians and Israelis, I am doublyhonoured that today you have asked me to come here and talk to you. Toyou, Sir, the representative of the Government of Israel, and to all ofyou, who are not Israelis, but Australians of the Jewish faith, I thank youfor the opportunity and express my gratitude to you.7T



OPENING OF JOHN McEWEN HOUSE
CANBERRA, A. CT.
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton 4 NOVEMBER 1968
Mr Chairman, Mr Moss, John McEwen and Ladies and Gentlemen
present: My task this afternoon is, I am told, to open the building
officially, and I was told that I would be presented with a gold key
when I arrived so that I could do it, but Mr Moss being a rather
canny type of man, as I know from old, hasn't yet given it to me.
I am putting him on warning that I will need it I don't mean to
keep; I just mean to open the building.
It is a compliment to me to be asked on this occasion
to open this door, and it is a compliment for two reasons. Firstly,
because this building is named after a man who has given to the
national Parliament thirty-four years of service, a longer time than
any sitting member except one has spent in the Federal Parliament.
During that time, he has filled many important posts,
becoming Deputy Leader of the Country Party in, I think, 1943, and
Leadet in 1958, and who during the time he has filled those posts,
has become known, I believe to all Australians of whatever political
colour they may be, as one of the outstanding negotiators overseas
for Australian products and the sale of Australian products and the
arranging of agreements with other countries, all to the benefit
of the producers of Australia.
He has been Prime Minister. I think perhaps the only
significant post he hasn't filled is that of External Affairs, and I
am not at all sure that at some stage he might not have acted there.
( Mr McEwen " I was Minister") You were Minister. All, right
that's a full hand,
He also has, during that period of time, become known
to those of us closer to him not only as a highly successful farmer
and practical farmer, but as a first-class colleague and a man to be
trusted as a colleague, and as a great Australian.
And so this house is named after him and in his honour.
This is the first reason why I regard it as such a compliment to me
to open it today. But there are other reasons. For some eighteen years
now, the Liberal not Conservative but Liberal and Country Party
coalition has given to Australia, I believe, enlightened government
and government which has enabled progress, such as has not been
seen in this nation before, to take place, a government which has
taken account of the needs and aspirations of the individual citizens
who make up the country. 
-2
Now it is not to be-supposed that-in that-period of eighteen
years or in any other period of years there will not, from time to time,
arise problems on which, in a coalition government, part of the
government may have one view and part of the government may have
another. This may inevitably occur in coalition governments, but given
good will, given a discussion of these matters not on a caucus basis, but
on a basis of individuals sitting around a table and expressing their
judgmnents, th en these difficulties can be overcome.
This. is unusual, I think, and it is a tribute to John McEwen, to
the previous leaders of the Country Party, to the previous leaders of the
Liberal Party that this has operated in this way and that both leaders and
both parties have put what they believed to be the good of their country before
their immediate aims on such occasions as any disagreement might arise.
This is a way a joint government works, must wort-and will continue to
work, given such men as have led our party and as have led the Country
Party. After all, as I have just pointed out, there are a number of
matters we have got in common. Mr Anthony said how the Country Party
was dedicated to fighting for producers, not only producers of butter or
wool or wheat, but also producers of machinery or oil or things from
factories. Well that makes two parties dedicated to those ends, and with
both of us on their side, they ought to get along all right! We have got
that in common.* If the past is a prelude to the future, and I believe it is, then
as a Liberal Prime Minister, it is good for me, and pleasing to me, to
stand here to open this building, symbolising such a long and such a
successful and such a progressive partnership and indicating that for the
future what I believe will happen will happen . that that partnership
will go on in the same way to the benefit of this nation of Australia.
That does not mean that we both won't from time to time be contesting
various seats against each other, but at least we will be contesting them
with the same ultimate objective in mind and seeking to attain ultimately
the same goal. That is the cement that h~ as bound us together and will
continue to bind us together while we have such men as Sir Artrhur Fadden
or John McEwen or Sir Robert Menzies or Mr Holt leading the sections of
this coalition government which, starting as two sections, has become a
whole, and I believe a whole for the good of this nation. 



68/ 171
GREENSBOROUGH LIBERAL PARTY BRANCH LUNCHEON
BUNDOORA, Victoria NOVEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Chairman, Mr Jarman, newly-selected candidate for this electorate
and Ladies and Gentlemen: The real purpose of my coming here today was to have
an opportunity to meet as many of you individually as possible. It was not
to make a long and involved speech, particularly since most of you are
standing up, and long and involved speeches under those circumstances are
not always received with the greatest bonhomie.
But there are some things that I would like to say to
you sketchily as they must be said at this time and in these circumstancesjust
roughing out some of the beliefs I think you have " 4nd I know we have as
to how this country should be run and as to what is possJL.'.-1 for this country
to attain if it is properly run.
I want to take you back not all of you because we have
so many young Liberals here who at the time were not old enough to be
involved but those of you who remember, I want to take you back to the
time when this Liberal Party first became the Government of Australia
under Sir Robert Menzies. The nation for some time had been suffering controls
of various kinds which appeared to be imposed for no other reason than a
liking for having controls. The nation had been informed that if we attained
the stage where four or five per cent of unemployment was reached, then
that was the optimum that any nation could expect to have, and that was to
all intents and purposes full employment.
We had suffered under an approach which basically,
philosophically held the view that the individual really existed mainly for
the purpose of serving the state, rather than, as is the proper approach,
the state existed to serve the individual. We believe the state should gi e
the individual the greatest possible chance of developing his own personality,
of taking his own risks, of reaping the rewards if his judgment is sound, or
of accepting the consequences if his judgment is bad tc. d the risks turn out
to have been badly based. So we turned our backs on restrictive philosophies and
on the idea that controls were the answer and that such things as price
control, which in effect meant profit control, should be introduced. We had
seen and experienced that profit control meant that if somebody had some
new idea, some new approach and they produced something better than had
previously been produced at a cheaper price but at a greater profit, then a
control would be introduced to see that the benefit from that did not flow to
the man who had those ideas. This we felt and you felt stopped the growth
of a great nation. And so you got together. People came out and asked you
to get together. You got together here and throughout Australia, and you
changed that approach. You changed that type of government, and as a result
over the nearly two decades since then, the growth of this country has been
unparalleled and the opportunities for individuals in this country have never
been greater. / 2 
-2
That is the basis on which Sir Robert Menzies built, on
which Harold Holt built, and on which, given the opportunity, 1, and the team
behind me, will continue to build.
Today, perhaps, the tasks and the problems of applying
this kind of philosophy are different and more pressing than they have been
before in our history, for we live indeed in times of great and basic change.
Up until some very few years ago, we in Australia took little heed of what
was required for the defence of our own country. We lived under the
protection of Britain and the British Navy and then we lived under the added
protection of the United States alliance.
When wars broke out, as they did in 1914-18 or 1939 or
in Korea, we were not found wanting. We sent our contingents, we made our
sacrifices, but in the years between we did little and had no need to do much
in this field. That has changed, with the United Kingdom pulling back from
East of Suez, with no definition with any finite approach as to under what
circumstances and how they might return from West of Suez, with whatever
judgment and assessment one cares to make as to the particular involvement
the United States might have in the future in Asia.
With these things, we have entered a new period in
Australia's history, a time of change, a need to contribute constantly to
our own defence, more than I personally like to contribute because I have
always in my mind the knowledge of what could be done with what must be put
into this defence expenditure. But I have also in my mind, and your
Government and its supporters have in their mind that in this time of change
we must keep up the enormous expansion of resources for our own defence
as an insurance policy, and if we are with some measure of safety to own
what we have and progress in the way that is possible. I
There are great problems and difficulties here. It is
a time of change and that is the first great sign of it I would put before you.
But then we have a better and a happier one in a way,
a time of change in the developmental tempo of this country.
Up until about five or six years ago, development was
going on, yes. It was going on gradually, fairly quietly, and suddenly like
Spring, we busted out all over oil was found in Bass Strait, Hamersley
was developed, manganese was mined in the North, and new industries in
woodchips were developed, and hundreds of millions and thousands of
millions of capital for development was required. This has reached a rate
of growth, a geometrical progression, which again is a sign of a time of
change. It shows, should it be maintained, as I am sure it will be, tha;
we will, in thirty years and thirty years is not very long not be a nation
of twelve million, but be a nation of twenty-eight million. We will be a
nation with a greater industrial potential with the door to the future open
and the future to which that door is open being almost illimitable.
As we accept this time of change and as we take in all
the people we can and as we take in all the capital we need and we need
it we must take that in having regard to our own interests as well. We
must seek to see that in development there is some reservation to Australians
who are prepared to take the initial risk of equity capital in development,
seek to see that if capital is raised inside this country, as distinct from
being brought from outside, then those who contribute that capital in this
country in some way or another should get the benefit of that part of the
ownership to which their capital entitles them. d 
-3
This again is a new era of change, but a happy one, a
good one, one that we can look forward to with pride. It does, of course,
bring in its train problems, and you all know what the problems are becailse
what we need here and throughout Australia are more schools, more technical
schools, better roads, better communications you name it, we need it.
But these are problems of growth, these are problems arising from growth
and not from stagnation. This in itself, although at the moment it is difficult
because the manpower we have and the resources we have are fully committed,
at least it is a symptom of optimism, and the problems we must face are
problems raised through our burgeoning growth and not problems through
stagnation. You mentioned one other indication of change, I think,
Mr. Jarman. There is, I believe, growing up in this nation now, and there
will be fostered in this nation now a more conscious approach to seeking to
see that those who are sick, that those who are ill, that, those who are old,
that those who have had little chance to provide for themselves are given by
the community at least a minimum frugal standard of living when they suffer
from the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. And I believe it is desired
that this be done without a broad hand -out by the government from your pockets
to all concerned, but rather that it is steered to the akeas wlere the need is
greatest to provide the standard required. This is a sign of a change in
attitude. I won't go on. Those things mentioned are just some of
the new problems that we in this country, with your backing, have got to face
and have got to overcome. May I conclude by saying this that over and
above our pride in living in Greensborough, or our pride in living in Melbourne
or our pride in living in Victoria, the nation requires that aid of us feel a
pride in being Australians contributing to the development of a nation, no
matter in what part of the nation that development takes place. Because
wherever it takes place, all of us benefit, all of us grow, all of us can
feel we are giving something towards the future, something towards a better
country for our children, who, wherever they go in the world, will say with
pride and fire in their heart: " I am an Australian.
And if we do that, as I think we will, and at the same
time see to it that not only the material advancement I have spokeni of occurs,
not only that the development and defence needs are met, but also, over and
above everything that the individual in this nation is given the opportunity to
develop his own resources to the utmost, then we will have before us a
shining future. That is why I am so glad to meet today so many people who
will be contributing to it.
Thank you. 



OPENING OF THE MA[ T CONROY MEMORIAL POOL 68/ 172
AT MARYMEAD CHILDREN'S CENTlRE
NARRABUNDAH, A. C. T. 16 NOVEMBER 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mrs. Conroy, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
In a very few short moments, I will be opening and naming
this Matt Conroy Wading Pool. I am glad to have been asked to do it for two
reasons. One is a personal reason; and that is that Matt Conroy and his
family lived just across the street from us when we first came to live in
Canberra, and were the first neighbours that we ever got to know in Narrabundah.
During the years that we knew each other, I think the friendship
between our families and between Matt Conroy and myself grew constantly.
Certainly my admiration for him as a man grew constantly. He was all those
things which Mr. Graham has said he was.
He was in addition somebody who got happiness out of each day
of life and put effort into everything he did, whether it was his work as a
public servant, whether it was the time he spent in sporting activities.... I
think he finished up being a pretty good bowler, but he began as a very good
rugby player and as a very good cricketer and as a very good all round sport;
whether it was the time he put into those club activities, those sporting
activities, the endeavours to attain better academic qualifications in order
the better to be able to do his work in the public service, he gave unsparingly
and enjoyed each moment of his life. That is the personal reason why I am
glad to be here and why I am so glad to have this opportunity of saying something
at the opening of the pool dedicated to his memory.
Another reason, of course, and it is perhaps in a sense much
the same sort of reason, is that he was a member of the Lions Club which
constructed this pool, another indication of service to the community. He
belonged to it, I think, for at least four years, and at the time of his death
was Vice-President of it. He gave, as in other fields, during those four
years, unstinted effort in the civic activities of the Lions.
These are by no means negligible. I cannot, of course, call to
mind all the activities in which they engage. This is one example, this pool
from which the children who stay for a short or a long time at Marymead will
continue to get pleasure.
There is a great long list of other civic activities that the Lions
Club has engaged in the provision of equipment to the Red Cross for Meals on
Wheels, the raising of $ 55, 000 in the branch which first started here, quite
irrespective of the individual work which each member of the Lions Club has
put in, for the betterment of the community in which they live, for assistance
to those who needed assistance in that community, and always with a certain
emphasis towards trying to assist the children in the community.
So both because of my own feeling towards him and because of
the work he gave to the Club, which has built this pool and has named it after
him, I have.... I will not say pleasure.... I have satisfaction in being able to
perform this duty this afternoon and to pay this tribute.
I think there is very little more to say on an occasion such as this.
A man's works speak for him. The recognition of his comrades speaks for him.
And the pleasure that future generations will get from this and other activities
will continue to speak for him and his associates in the Lions Club. And so I
open this Pool and name it The Matt Conroy Wading Pool. 



ACCEPTANCE OF THE SIR HUBERT MURRAY PAPERS
BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON, ON
BEHALF OF THE INATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
Canberra, A. C. T._ 6 DECEMEF 1968
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Sir Grenfell, Mrs Pinney, Dr West and Members of the National Library
Council This seems to be fundamentally, at any rate ostensibly, a
strictly family occasion, as it were, and I feel very privileged indeed to be
able to share in it and to accept on behalf of the Council these historical
letters which you have so generously donated.
It is appropriate, I think, that on such a day you, Sir, as the
eminent biographer of Sir Hubert Murray should be with us, and perhaps
even more appropriate that you should be with us on this occasion in this
place as the son-in-law of Harold White who adds to the flavour of this
gathering. Mr Harold White's acquisitive instincts, of course, are quite
well known, as far as the Library is concerned, but I am not sure whether
in this case he was the chief hunter after the letters which are before us or
whether indeed they were freely offered, as I believe they were, by Mrs
Pinney and by Dr West.
Sir, you have described Sir Hubert Murray as a great pro-consul
as indeed he was a great colonialist, It is not a word which tends to be
in fashion nowadays, to be a colonialist, but I think that looking back on the
times of which we are speaking, it has to be accepted that the colonial rule
which Sir Hubert carried out was of immense benefit to Papua at that time
and that it would have been impossible for that country to have developed to
the state where colonialism is no longer acceptable had it not been for the
guidance of this man.
He was a man of many parts. We hear cif him first or I hear
of him first when he was at school, from which, if I am not inr"' rrectly
informed, he was ejected for taking a punch at one of his masters a thing
for which I envy him very much because it was something I always wanted to
do when I was at school. I can only think that the master concerned was a very
lucky man indeed that he was missed because I gather that Sir Hubert went on
to become a heavyweight champion and able to ta~ ke on any iiumber of masters
should he so have wished.
He had, of course, a very distinguished and interesting career
in the field during the Boer War, and you have indicated to me that there were
some most interesting letters here letters from the field written at that time.
Hie also took over the running of Papua, the bringing of Papua towards its full
stature at a time of enormous challenge. So he was a man who contribued
greatly to that country and we must hope and I believe by contributing to
that country gave the opportunity for those further contributions which will be
a contribution to Australia iin the years ahead and the relations between Australia
and Papua. 2 J 
-2-
You mentioned, Sir, a time when he died in Samarai and
when there was a mourning festival held, and I would like to quote in
part from what was said at that time. This is a quote of what was said
by a village councillor on this occa3ion
" But who is like him in Papua? There is none. There will
never be one like him. He came among us and saw our lives.
Sometimes when he was younger, he hunted and fished with us.
He knew us in all our ways. Sometimes when his work was done,
Ihe met us on the roads as we came home from our gardens and he
greeted us. Now we have lost him, for he is dead. We shall not
know his friendly ways He was the best of men; our
children and their children will talk of him. He promised us all
' I will not leave you. I will die in Papua' His words were the words
of a true man for his body lies in our ground.
Now the record of the work he did lies in the National
Library of Australia. With that history and with that feeling among the
people for what he did when he was alive, may I renew the protestations
of the gratitude we feel that these records of his work lie in the national
archives for all time.
Thank you, Mrs Pinney 



VISIT TO THE U. K. 1969
EXTRACTS FROM SPEECH MADE BY THE PRIME
MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON, TO THE
COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE
13 JANUARY 1969
Australia attaches great importance to the work of
UNCTAD and we think it is bringing about a greater awareness of the
problems of developing countries. Although there was, I know, a
widespread feeling of disappointment among the developing countries
that the concrete results from the second UNCTAD conference last year
were not greater, resolutions on tariff preferences, commodity problems,
increased aid and improved aid terms, all pointed in the right direction.
In 1966, Australia introduced a system of tariff preferences
for exports of developing countries, which we have since enlarged. We
believe that this system is the most effective way for us to help developing
countries increase their exports of manufactured and semi-manufactured
goods. Trade is, in the last analysis, more important than aid.
Whilst our hopes for really acceptable conditions of access to markets
for agricultural products in the major industrial countries were not
realised in the Kennedy Round, there were some credits, we now have a
new international grains arrangement and a new international sugar
agreement. Australia has always stressed the need for international
commodity agreements in certain products and the arrangements for
wheat and sugar, together with those that already exist for tin and coffee,
are signposts for the future and show that if producers and consumers
are both willing, we can get results.
We were greatly pleased at the inclusion in the sugar
agreement of the special provisions for developing countries the
" hardship fund" for sugar and the preferential allocation of short falls.
We also supported the Food Aid Convention for wheat. Let me emphasise
here we support in the strongest way the remarks of the distinguished
representative from Jamaica. We would urge those countries which have
not yet done so to take the necessary steps to accept the international
sugar agreement. On the broader front in the international monetary
field I believe we can expect further action to see how the system
might be improved and I hope that the International Monetary Fund
will play a central role in any review. There is, I believe, a continuing
need for a multi-lateral approach to international financial and economic
problems. In the past year or so we have had no less than three crises
in the international monetary field...., the sterling devaluation, the gold
/ 2 
crisis and the recent run out of French francs into deutschmarks. But
despite these crises some progress has been made by the two reserve
currency countries towards a balance of payments equilibrium, which,
if it is attained, must help all around this table.
We all know how severe were the measures imposed on
the British people in the last two years and I understand Britain now expects
to move faster towards first, a balance of payments equilibrium and
then, a surplus which is necessary to meet debt obligations. I am sure
we all wish our British colleagues every success in their efforts for they
are as important to Britain as they are important to all d us.
The new Special Drawing Rights scheme will support the
present structure of reserve assets. The scheme, as you know, is
non-discriminatory and open to all members of the fund. We, in
Australia, earnestly hope that other members of the Commonwealth who
have not already joined will do so soon.
I have previously stated that Australia which in one sense
is a developed country, and in another equally valid sense a developing
and underdeveloped country is playing a part in international aid which
is by no means inconsiderable. It will continue to play that part. We
cannot, however, agree to support the proposition to contribute to a
multi-lateral fund within the Commonwealth and under the control of the
Secretariat. We shall continue to provide our aid under existing multilateral
arrangements and bi-laterally for proposals discussed and agreed
between ourselves and the country concerned either within or without
the Commonwealth. 



I I VISIT TO THE U. K. 1969
AUSTRALIA CLUB ADDRESS
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN FUIN
AT THE DORCHESTER HOTEL, LONDON
17 JANUARY 1969
Your Royal Highness, the other Lords who were mentioned by the
Toastmaster, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
May I first express the great pleasure and the great lifting
in the heart I feel at being in this room with such a distinguished company,
who have come together, as I believe, to demonstrate affection and support
for the country which I lead.
It is indeed a demonstration to warm the heart of any
Australian. But though I come from half a world away, yet I do not stand
here completely as a stranger. As you, Mr. Minister, have said, some
formative years were spent in this country during the course of my edu~ cation
at a college called Brasenose which was then, not noted for learning in any
way at all. But nevertheless judging from the alumni if I may use a word
borrowed from my American wife it does seem to have thrown up a large
number of people leading in a large number of fields, in spite of the fact
that so much of their time was spent either rowing or playing hockey or
engaging in some other enjoyable and agreeable activity.
I was much struck, talking of this kind of agreeable activity,
by the typical British understatement you made, Mr. Minister, when you
said you had thought of Australians as people who just played cricket. I
seem to remember in the course of the years that they played it reasonably
well. Brasenose was not my only early life experience in the United Kingdom.
With a typical politician's desire to make the best of both worlds I engaged
in labouring activities. Indeed the present Lord Tweedsmuir and I shipped
as deckhands on a trawler out of hull and worked our way around the Farao
Islands and back, although at that stage, Sir, it was not absolutely essential
for us to have a union ticket. But we did learn much of this country in that
time, and indeed, to know more perhaps because of that study of history in
which I was engaged at this great university.
It became clear to me, as it must to anyone who studies
history, that it is the British people over the centuries who have internally
and externally engaged in struggle aimed always at seeking to destroy
arbitrary power wherever it may raise its head; who have sought to give
to the individuals who alone are the riches of any country the right fully
to participate in the decisions that their country makes. And from the time
of Cromwell or before, through the Napoleonic wars, through the wars when
at any time absolute and arbitrary power sought to conquer Europe ( which
then was the significant world) it was Britain who stood as the bulwark against
that idea, and this we cart never forget. Nor can we forget, as Australians,
that for nearly two hundred years, we lived in that faraway country completely
under the protection of the British Navy. We had no need to defend ourselves
/ 2 
except occasionally when we raised trained bands because it was thought
that Russia might invade us at the time of the Crimean War or something
of that kind history has a habit of repeating itself. And yet the trust,
the faith, the protection, was in the British people and the British Navy.
When the calls came in South Africa, or in the First World War or in the
Second, then naturally we repaid, or sought to repay, that which had been
so generously given to us. And on the whole, I think one can say the books
are reasonably fairly balanced.
We will, I think, as you suggested, Mr. Minister, take more
part in the region in which we live, provide more in the way of defence for
the stability of the regions in which we live. Indeed we have little choice,
but this is not unreasonable and this is not something at which 1, at any
rate, intend to cavill. For we do still revere and we do still uphold those
same institutions of parliamentary democracy, that same reverence for
the rule of law which this country has brought into the world, which you
helped us for so long to retain and which I know should they be threatened
in our own country from some source outside, we could look to you and the
British people to assist us to retain.
So you spoke of the development of Australia, of the
excitement of Australia, of the future of Australia. I would like for a little
while myself to say some words on what I see as a brash, a growing, an
exciting, and exhilarating country; perhaps one of the most exciting and
exhilarating countries in the world, just getting off the launching pad in a
way. Thirty years ago we had a population of 7 million: today we have a
population of 12 million in thirty years we will have a population of 28
million. And thirty years in the life of a nation is but the blinking of an
eyelid and then having attained the population we will go on as I believe to
60, 70 million and be a real power in the world. It will be a power I
hope that will always be exercised for good and always be exercised in
conjunction with the British Government of the United Kingdom itself.
There has been an " explosion" in Australia just recently
and I am going to weary you with some statistics to indicate the extent of
this " explosion". Not so many years ago we were thought to be poor in
natural resources and to be growers of wool, growers of cattle, growers
of cricketers, growers of people who sometimes unjustly criticise the
United Kingdom, but not richly endowed in those dry, arid, inland areas
which make up so much of our continent. Yet now our known oil fields will
be producing about 70 per cent of our own requirements for crude petroleum
by 1970 just two years on. Only a fraction of what is there to be discovered
is I am sure, as yet, discovered.
We have at the same time discovered supplies of natural gas
for industry in our great cities, and this will be available in those cities
Melbourne, Brisbane probably by the end of this year. Cur iron ore
mountains seem to be illimitable and made of a grade unmatched elsewhe-re.
By 1973 vwe will be exporting 35 million tons of iron ore every year and by
that stage or ' 71 or ' 72 these minerals, nickel as well, will be producing
one billion dollars a year of export income for our country. / 3 
3-
We have more than a third of the world's known deposits of
bauxite, to make alumina and aluminium and the output will rise from about
a million tons which is the present output to 10 million tons in 1972.
Production of coal for export will double. Nickel discoveries, in which I
think quite a number of people in the United Kingdom have done reasolpably
well, will add to this future which lies so close within our grasp. Phosphate,
copper, other minerals have been discovered and will follow.
This is no credit to us. I do not tell this to this distinguished
company in the suggestion that it is something that resounds to Australian
individual's own credit; I say it because I want to indicate that there is ill
my belief an illimitable future, that there will be a doubling in our economy
every thirteen years, and that those who are interested should get in on
the ground floor, as some already have, to take full advantage of the
opportunities which are there in such great abundance. Not opportunities
merely for Australia. Because if it is true that this economic development
is possible and I am sure it is and if it is true that this economic
development in its turn w~ ill enable the influx of population which we so
require and I'm sure that too is true then this vision of a nation in
twenty, thirty years will be of advantage not just to us, but to us and to
that England which will be tied to us forever in general approaches to the
world's require ments and the world's problems.
I did read in one of the distinguished papers of this country
this morning, a leading article suggesting that we regarded the United
Kingdom as a quarry for taking people and population. Well, I suppose
in a sense we do. But it will be to both of our advantages, and indeed it
will be different from what was originally said when the settlers first
came to Australia, because we will be able to say with full truth " True
patriots they, for be it understood, they left their country of our country's
good." But what we I must pause here all the things which I
have said will take place. The speed with which they take place will
naturally depend upon the amount of capital flowing in to enable such
development. And this is the more true because on current account, on
what we sell to other countries and what we buy f~ om other countries, we
don't do so well. The United States places difficulties in the way of us
selling meat and wool and other products, and there are murmurings of
some entry into some kind of association by Great Britain which might cut
down on the prospects of selling our own primary products. And so the
current account does need to be balanced by inflow of capital. Inflow of
capital, which will go to a country as stable as any country in the world,
and be able to be invested in enterprises which will return to those who so
invest an interest as great, I think, as they could receive anywhere.
We want this, and we want it urgently. But we want it, in some respects,
on our own terms. e. / 4 
-4-
Up until very recently it has seemed to me that the postpre
of Australia in seeking overseas capital has been the posture of a puppy
lying on its back with all legs in the air and its stomach exposed, and
saying, " Please, please, please, give us capital. Tickle my tummy on
any conditions", and this is being re-examined for those who seek and
wish to take the risks and the advantages that are offered, by bringing in
capital for new development, then we are delighted, and we are receptive
for that capital. But we do say and I go no further than to say that we do
say that we would be happy if in such cases when some new great
development were to take place, and capital from here were to come to
help it, and there was an opportunity I say only an opportunity offered
for some equity participation by Australians in that new development.
Should they care not to take it up, that is their business, that is their loss.
Should they wish to take it up at some later stage, after the risks have
been taken and have been successfully overcome, then they must expect
to take it up at a premium, because somebody else has taken the risks.
But initially, it would please us if in such cases an opportunity were given
to get in on the ground floor.
We do not look with complete and utter favour on overseas
corporations, having started development in our own country, having
brought capital from abroad to make that development possible, then seeking
to raise debenture capital inside our own country in order to keep the process
rolling. Well this is not overseas capital, this does not bring in with it a
capacity for us to bring in more migrants. This does not bring the machinery
or whatever it may be that true overseas capital provides. But being
reasonable people, we are amenable to any suggestions that, should such
a situation arise and should debenture capital be sought to be raised within
Australia for purposes of some overseas company, we would look at-. that
with sympathy, as long as it was coupled with the offer of equity to,.
Australian shareholders at the same time.
You may have heard perhaps I gather you have from reading
the newspapers some queries in some minds as to our attitude towardis
portfolio investment, as distinct from development investment. We are
delighted to have portfolio investment, particularly if Mr. Smith, or Mr.
Brown or Mr. Jones, wishing to take a flutter in Great Western, or in
B. H. P. or some other of our great companies, wishes to buy two hundred
shares, three hundred shares, five hundred shares this is marvellous.
We like it. Wie trust no impediment will ever be put in its way. And we
realise that in the case of companies already established, that there are
instances in which such Australian companies could with advantage to them
and to Australia, be taken over. If there are inefficient companies, companies
badly run, companies which need capital they cannot raise inside our country,
companies which need an infusion of technical management, then it could
well be of advantage to all that from abroad somebody who can provide the
required capital and management skill and technology should be enabled to
enter into and if necessary control and certainly have a very great influence
on such a company. But we do believe that there are other companies, well
run, well managed, sometimes under-valued on exchanges in relation to the
assets they have, who can be subject to market raids, to offers of first come, 
first served, to cert ' ain shareholders so that the whole company itself does
not have a chance, all the shareholders do not have a chance to examine
the offer that is made, and we do not have a chance to know who is buying
the company. There was a specific instance of that not so long ago and
we had to discover who was trying to buy one of our insurance companies,
who was buying it and whether we thought that such a company should in
such cases be taker. over.
These are under examination, these last two matters at the
moment. They will be worked out. But let there be no doubt in the minds
of anybody in this room, but that we need, wish, welcome, investment
capital, that there is stability of opportunity for those who have it to invest.
And speaking for myself, in spite of what I am told from some quarters,
I think that if we provide a stable government, and if we provide clear
evidence that there is going to be a darn good return on any capital that
is invested, then that capital is going to come to us and not be frightened
off because of the sort of things that I have just now been saying.
We do not want, in twenty or thirty years, to have Americans,
or French, or Swiss or British, owning the major companies in Australia,
for a variety of reasons I do not need now to go into. But I had promised
I would say sometling on this subject, tonight. I know it's dull. I know
it's dry. Now "' ye said it. But when all is said and done, Sir, to come
back to what you said at the beginning, all these things, really, are tools
with which to build the future. The tools with which to make one potentially
great nation realise that potential, so that it can in the future, in conjunction
with an already great nation, make a far greater contribution and effect
on the world, to the benefit of all of us.
And this is essential, I believe, if we are to keep in a world
swinging down the grooves of change, those things of which you spoke and
for which Britain stands. The avoidance of the knock on the door of the
secret police at midnight; the avoidance of the fear of one man to speak
his mind because he may be punished; the opportunity for a man to develop
his own capacity to the top of his bent. And it's a charge laid on all of us
to see that these things are kept. All of us English, Australians, New
Zealanders all those of common stock and of these beliefs. A charge
that was laid in 1939 and ' 45. And can I ask you, as you look at me, to try
not to see me, if I make this point, but instead to see behind me, regiment
on regiment of young men dead in ' 39 to ' 45, and try and hear them saying
burning in tanks and aeroplanes, drowning in submarines, shattered and
broken by high explosive shells we gave, for our full measure of devotion,
that these things of what you spoke, and of which I am speaking, might
continue. And they will continue the better while we stay together,
while we stay in conjunction, while we in Australia reach towards our destiny.
While we convert the vision splendid, of the sunlit plains extended, into a
reality which is now within our grasp. With our work, and your help, to
our common effort, and for the protection of those things, we both, as I am
sure, desire for our children.
Thank you. 



PARLIAMENTARY (/ 0P 4
LAUNCHING OF NEW FIVE-YEAR APPEAL
BY GEELONG GRAMMAR SCHOOL
GEELONG, VICTORIA 24 FEBRUARY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Carton
Mr. Southey, Mr. Headmaster, Ladies and Gentlemen:-
It is not a sacrifice, Sir, but a pleasure for my wife and
I to have been asked tonigTht to attend such a cheerful and, in a way, such
a nostalgic gathering. Indeed, it is' such a cheerful gathering that I am
touched with a little wand of doubt as to whether everybody here knows
precisely why it is they have been asked: But fortunately speaking of
course politically it is not for me to tell you, but for those who are to
speak later. I think the function that has been assigned to me, which I
notice has been said to be going to take twenty minutes, but which in fact
is going to take very much less, is to take your minds for a moment off
what those who follow me will say and to use an American football term
run interference. I said " a cheerful and a nostalgic gathering", and it is
nostalgic for me to stand here again in this vaulted hall which seems
to have changed very little, except for being elongated a little bit, since
the time when I sat here as a very small boy and was very lucky if I got
a slice of toast at breakfast as a mark of favour from one of those
handmaidens who used to wait upon us. If you got one, you knew you were
right, that she rather liked you that day. Otherwise you didn't get toast
at all. But not only does the nostalgia come from the hall itself or
from the portraits that one sees hanging opposite one here. I have seen
three headmasters of this school. Admittedly I had a brief acquaintance
with the first. But I remember him wiell, for it was he who did his best
to have me expelled at an early stage from this school. It was for what
I still believe was the relatively mild misdemeanour of having brought
down from my home a 25/ 50 Browning automatic with a full clip of
cartridges, which I was accustomed to use in the bucolic glades of Mystic
Park, and which I had no intention of using upon him or upon any master
or any boy: But it appeared to him, coming as he did from England, that
the discovery of such a lethal weapon in a locked cupboard to which,
incidentally, he should not have had a key was something which deserved
/ 2 
the gravest condemnation. However, he was argued out of his intentions
and subsequently left, with no bullet holes anywhere around him, and was
superseded by the headmaster whom I suppose most of us here know, Mr.
R. Darling. Trhat was the second headmaster that I knew. Mr. Garnett
, is the third. It is my hope, and my belief, that in the years which lie
ahead of this school there will be portrait after portrait around the walls
of this great hall. And perhaps in another hundred years there will be
an indication, through those portraits, of the progress which this school
has made, just as there is an indication for those who knew the school in
the time of Dr. Brown, in the time of Dr. Darling, and now in the time of
Dr. Garnett, of the progress which has been made in the last twenty-five
or thirty years. I believe it is essential that such progress should be made
by independent schools in Australia. There are three main reasons why
I say this. We have always, I think, believed that there was a democratic
right for parents, if they were prepared to make some sacrifice themselves,
to choose the type of school to which they would send their children. They
should not be denied by any act or any law or any economic action of those
in power the opportunity always provided they would help to pay for it
themselves to choose that form of education for their children which
they believed would suit their children best.
This exercise of a democratic right is so wound up with
oreducational system and should continue to be so wound up with it
tat I myself regard it as one of the most important facets of education
W in this nation of Australia.
Secondly, Sir, there is an educational advantage in this.
By that I do not mean that this or any other school of this type is at any
9 tshpee csitfaicte . t imIe d ob entotet rm feitatend t htoat eadtu aclalt. e tIht em yaoyu nbge thaint misa ya sncoht oboel. ruInt dbeyp endsi
on the headmaster. It depends on the staff. It depends, in the case of a I
state school,* equally on the headmaster and the staff.
Nor do I mean that all new educational advances come from
schools such as this, because they don't. But. what I do mean is that when
there are two educational systems side by side, when there are schools tLtt
are run by the state and when there are schools that are run as this school'
is run, then there is more room for experiments in educational attitudes,
in educational methods, and there is less likelihood of bureaucratic control
of all curricula and education. Indeed it is this competition, if that is the
word, and I think perhaps it is, not in the sense of competition in the markel
place, but in the sense of competition for excellence which spurs both thel
state and the private school to the benefit of both. I: / 3 
Were there but one system of education, were we to have
a system such as I am told exists in France where a Minister for Education
can, at a given moment, say, ttffi every school in France at this hour of
eleven o'clock in the morning, the third form is being read to from page
649 of the second volume of Proust" then we would indeed be in danger
of having a monolithic system. A monolithic system can be moribund.
One in competition cannot. And these are the educational advantages that
schools such as this bring to the community.
Thirdly, of course, though having been a parent I know it
is difficult for parents to understand, there is an economic advantage
not of course to those who have children going through the school at a
particular time, but to the community at large. Because if all those -who
attend this and other schools such as this throughout Australia were
tomorrow to have the doors shut to them, and be required to go to state
schools, then this would be impossible. The bill to be paid would be so
great that school fees would seem as nothing in comparison to the taxes
which would be placed upon you. Thirdly, therefore, there is this economic
advantage. Sir, this school is one with a long and distinguished record.
It has been a beneficiary in certain ways from Commonwealth Government
schemes and State Government schemes, but what it has also done is
something which the Chairman mentioned. It has sent out from its portals
graduates, not only to one state of this country but to Queensland, Western
Australia, Tasmania, South Australia to the whole of the nation of
Australia and they have come back here tonight from all corners of the
land to the one part of the nation which gave them education.
Perhaps this happens in other schools too. I believe it does.
I believe it will happen more and more, but it is another great advantage.
I believe that, through this medium, there should be a national outlook able
the more easily to be disseminated than would be the case perhaps in some
other schools. Now, it is not for me to talk any longer. It is for those who
are to follow me now to speak to you, but I do conclude by saying this.
Those of you who know the young of today, the young at any school, the
young perhaps at this school and those of you who know them well would
probably not, most of you, describe them by the word " meek". Certainly,
the ones I have run across could not be so described. But, Sir, meek or
not, they will inherit Australia, and they will do the better for this nation, 1K
and for the children they will bear tQ you as grandchildren, if they are
given every possible facility for education which this nation or this school
or you yourselves can provide.
It is as true today as it was true when Disraeli said in the
19th century of England that " upon the education of this country the fate of
this country depends", and it is upon the contributions that schools such as
this make to education, that the education of this country depends. That is
why tonight, with some nostalgia and great affection, I am so honoured to
have been asked to speak to you for a short time. I thank you. 



MOORABBIN LIBERAL PARTY BRANCH DINNER
TOWN HALL, MOORABBIN, VIC. V 28 ' FEBRUARY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Chairman, Mr Mayor, Mr Chipp, Distinguished Parliamentary
Colleagues, both Federal and State, and Ladies and Gentlemen
That is rather a hard introduction for me to live up to,
though at the beginning of this speech I would like to say that as long as
I am entrusted with the Prime Ministership of this country, I shall try to
live up to it, and I know I will be supported in that by such Members of
the Federal Parliament as your Member from Higinbotham in the past and
from Hotham in the future Don Chipp.
I came along tonight to have the opportunity to meet you.
I came along to have the opportunity to talk to you, most of you being
Liberals; the rest of you, undoubtedly, when you put your minds to it,
are going to become Liberals:'
I am touched and I think my wife is touched that so many
of you have come along tonight to see us, to hear us and to meet us.
Perhaps I should try to put before you some ideas of my own as to what
government is all about.
Every three years, one goes to the polls. Every three years
the television stations have proponents for this side or for that, and the
newspapers have people writing articles for this side or for that. The
public meetings to which nobody goes have people standing on platforms,
speaking for this side or for that, and occasionally when they do go to a
public meeting which is usually when a Prime Minister is there people
are trying to hit him on the head with a banner or to stop somebody hitting
him on the head with a banner.
This is just the outwa-rd show of what it is all about. What
really are the basic reasons for government? What do you really want to
get from the governments that you elect? What kind of advances do you
expect? What kind of Australia do you have in your minds not only for
yourselves, not mainly for yourselves, but for the children you have, and
in some cases, odd as it may seem because everybody here looks so young
the grandchildren you may have'?
I suppose and I do not put these in any order of priority but
just as they come to my mind that you would want to have in the nation of
Australia, a government which would try to see that every employable
person in Australia was employed, that there was no waste manpower,
that there was no person with skills and integrity and capacity who had to
sit at home and who was utnable to support his fa-mily because the economy
could not offer him work to do to further the country in which he li ved. 
-2
I say this-with some feeling because I do remember when
I was young-there was a time when there were many many people in
Australia who were willing to work hard, who had the skills to contribute
to the building of a nation, who had to sit at home because it was said
" There is no chance to employ you because we haven't got enough money
to do it. I think one of the basic things a nation wants is to ensure that
every man who can contribute to the advance of that nation is given the
opportunity to contribute to it, and is paid according to his merits,
according to his capacity and according to his contribution.
I believe you would want to see more than that, more than
the mere chance of employment being offered. I believe that you would
want to see and if you wouldn't, you ought to want to see that not
merely employment but the opportunity for advancement according to
the talents of an individual is provided in a nation such as this. And
I do suggest that this has been done.
I do suggest that in the period of time during which the
Liberal Party has been in office and during which great leaders of the
Liberal Party have led this country, leaders in whose steps I follow but
whose stature I do not yet pretend to attain to during that period of
time, people who are willing to work have had employment opportunities
never offered before. They have had the opportunity to develop their
talents and to move upwards in a way this nation had never offered
previously. And this is one of the things that government is all about.
But there are other new problems crowding in upon us,
because we are in a way an adolescent nation. We are half-way between
the nation that we were in 1939, a junior nation and certainly between
1900 and 1939 a junior nation, a child, as it were, of the Mother
Country and half-way between that and the mighty nation which we
may be, if we properly judge, in fifty or one hundred years' time. In
that sense we are, I say, adolescent between the child stage and
between the world leader stage.
One of the things that is going to decide how in 50,
100 years' tine this turns out, is what we do now concerning the
investment and the ownership and the control of the industries of
Australia and the development of Australia.
It is true that no developing nation such as ours can
possibly attain, in the time in which it ought to attain, greatness unless
there is from outside great capital investment. I look backc to the United
States of America, which grew as quickly as it did only because of a
great flow of investment from outside. I wonder what the situation of
the United States of America would be now if those investments, which
developed so greatly, had not had to be sold off by Great Britain in the
First World War, and in the Second World War, in order to enable her
to play a leading part in protecting the freedom of the world, If this
had not happened, the investments that were made in that country in
the 1880' s and the 1890' s and the 1900' s would have grown to what
proportion now? How much of the proceeds of those investment, if
they had not had to be sold off, would now be flowing to Great Britain? 
3-
I do not want to see indeed I will not see I do not want
to think of seeing in 50 or 60 or 100 years' time too much of the
proceeds of Australian raw materials, of Australian capacity, of
Australian initiative, flowing out of this country instead of remaining
in it. And yet, feeling that as deeply as I do, and kcnowing its
importance as I do, I also know that if we are to grow as quickly as
the world situation may require, if we are to bring into this country
the flow of migrants, the record flow of migrants this year, in order to
build our population as quickly as our future safety may require, then we
must have from overseas this capital investment.
So there is a balance, a steering of a course between
Scylla and Charybdis on one side, an absolute necessity, if we are to
grow as we must, for overseas capital investment on the other Bide
a requirement to see to the utmost of our capacity that such overseas
investment is married to an opportunity for Australian equity so that
our children shall participate in the growth that overseas investment
brings. This is another thing that government is all about. This is
another thing that people like Don Chipp and myself and the others that
you have elected are working at,. And before long, perhaps six weeks,
perhaps eight weeks, perhaps ten weeks, but before long, I believe that
we will have the chance to put before you a programme, a proposition
which will steer this course between these two in a sense, opposed,
desires. This is of the utmost importance for the future of this nation.
What else is government about? Well one thing, of course,
and this is, I think, the keystone and always has been of the Liberal
Party, is that we should seek to see that those who are old or ill or
aged or in some other way disadvantaged, or the victims of the slings
and arrows of outrageous fortune, should be helped by those who are
more affluent. I do not mean that those who are not prepared to work
should be supported by those who are. I do not mean that there should
not be a requirement for people to make effort in order to get some
achievement or in order to be able to live and support their families.
But I do mean that when there is some great misfortune that falls upon
the people in our community, then the rest of the community should
see that that misfortune is overcome, and that that man on whom
misfortune falls, and his family, should be succoured by the rest of
the community. I think that during the period we have been in government
during the last twelve or fourteen months some considerable steps
have been taken in this direction. And I am certain that in the months
to come before the endi of the year, even greater steps will be made in
this direction. I believe that in a year we will be able to make the steps
./ 4 
-4
which will show that-Poverty-which-is not poverty because of the fault of
an individual, will be-able to be banished from our midst. Also that
the fear of long illness, which-has already been removed by what we
have done and therefore is no longer a significant. subject, but that the
fear of the difficulty of family illness will be able to be removed from the
Consciousness of Australians.
These, with many other matters of this kind which I can't
go into but education is one are what government is all about. But,
basically, if these things are to develop in a nation, there is one other
item which ought not to be a transcendant matter but which, in a way,
I think is, to which government must direct its attention. That is
defending the capacity to do those things of which I have in shorthand
been speaking to you. Because it is of little use to have a policy on
investment, and it is of little use to have a policy on trying to overcome
illness and poverty, and it is of little use to have a policy to advance
education or to make better roads unless one can be sure that in the
years ahead the people of Australia will themselves be able to develop
that policy freely and without some invading power telling them how to do
it. And so, although it should not be significant, and so
although it takes so much of ow production, yet if we are to be able,
as independent people, to decide what we want to do in these other
matters, then the capacity to defend our right to be able to do it without
coercion is perhaps transcendant.
He re we are a little isolated, because here, as I said the
other night in the House, an era has ended. Great Britain has gone from
our part of the world. The United States may not and I say no more
than may not be as interested as she was. So we, and the closest
countries to us in the region of Asia in which we live, must co-operate
and we, as the greatest technological power in the region, as the most
advanced industrial power in the region, must try to help the region
economically. We must try to help it in the way of trade, and must be
prepared to put into defence hardware, and into the manpower for
defence services, more than any of us would want to put, were it not
that we have to do it in order to retain the right of free choice as to
how we are to run our country.
Well, we in the Government have indicated how we pr~ opose
to do this. We have indicated the means of co-operation with our
neighbours. We have indicated that Australians, should there be
difficulty in the regions to our North, should there be an incursion of
communism there which may eventually threaten us, we have indicated
that in that case Australians will be there. This is one of the things
that government is all about.
I grew up in a time, you know, when Hitler was rising to
power in Europe, and in a time when there were many voices raised
saying " Do not oppose this man. His ideas may be wrong. His racial
desire to exterminate all Jews may be wrong. He may say he is going to 
5
conquer other countries, but that is just rodomontade for internal
consumpt:. n. Do not let us worry about this. And so country after
country fell under the control of a ruthless and authoritative power.
This made, perhaps, some impression on me. Not the imminent, but
the possible future threat, is in our part of the world. And as long as
we are in government, we are going to do our best to see that this threat
wil~ l be able to be resisted by Australians should it become imminent.
These are some of the matters with which you are concerned
and with which I am concerned. Others are to ensure that there is a
chance for personal choice, that there is no direction as to what a man
should or should not do or where he should or should not work or where
he should or should not invest his savings.
Last week: in the Parliament, quite clearly, there came out
some basic significant difference between the Government, which I lead,
and the Opposition which seeks to become the Government. Because
there is black and white was spelt out what in 1949 so many of us came in
to fight against. There it was stated by the Opposition should we
become a government, we will tell insurance companies, which are the
depositaries of the savings of the people; we will tell banks which are
the depositaries of the savings of the people, where they must and where
they must not invest those savings. And if they wish to invest them
in some development which will bring them in 6 per cent, and we, a
Labor Government, think they should invest them in somL-thing else which
will bring them in 2 per cent, then we will make them invest where
we want them to invest.
We do not say that. We say there must be a personal
choice by a man as to the job he will take, and a personal choice by the
man as to the investments he will make, and a personal choice by
companies as to where they will invest for the benefit of the shareholders
in those companies. This perhaps has more significance for the
development of a country than may at first appear.
I suppose in a way it is unusual it must be unusual that
one party which has been in government in this country for the last
twenty years, which is about a third of the time that Australia has been
a nation. It started in 1901. It is now 1969 all right 70 years. For
the last 20 years out of 70, one government has been running this
country. I doubt if this could be matched in any other country in the
world. One would have thought that in this period of time, tiredness
would have crept in, that there would have been a clinging to shibboleths
of the past, that something new would not have been developed by a
party which had been so long in power. This isn't so.
We are looking now to examine and we have been
publicly examining the sacred cows which since 1901 have for so
long been unquestioned. Dare I mention things like Commonwealth/ 6 
6-
State relations, for-example,-and a number of other less controversial
subject$, all of which need to be looked at, and about none of which I
propose to enter into controversial discussion tonight.
This is not an indication of decadence; surely this is an
indication of a new approach. And may I suggest to you that it being
true that for 20 out of 70 years there has been this kind of government
in Australia, that the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Look at
what has happened in those 20 years. Look at the development that has
taken place. Look at the increase in population that has taken place.
Look at the increase in employment that has taken place. Look at the
future that has opened up for this nation in that period of time, If the
proof of the pudding is in the eating, then the pudding that has been baked
in the last 20 years is good for the nation, and if it is good for this nation,
it is good for the world.
Sir, I have only one other thing to say, because I have been
speaking to a great degree, of the past. We really haven't started yet.
We are 12 million people now. We will be 28 million people by the turn
of the century, some 31 years, and that in the life of a nation is just the
blinki~ ng of an eye. ( Tape changeover brief section missing)
These are the goals which are attainable before us. On
the progress which has been made towards them, on your judgment of
the progress which has been made, I believe that the philosophy which
has made possible that progress is the philosophy which will make possible
the attainment of those goals. That will be done, but it will only be done
if the people of Australia, of whom you are a cross section, agree with
us that the ways in which we seek to attain these goals are the right ways,
and believe that we are genuine in seeking to attain them. If you did not
believe both these things, I do not think that you would be here tonight.
The fact that you are here tonight is of immense encouragement to me,
to Don Chipp and to those who stand with me.
I thank you for coming. We draw encouragement from your
coming, and I believe that the work which so many of you do will be to
the great benefit of this rising nation of the world. 



STATEMENT ON
COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS
ARRANGEMENTS 1969-70 TO 1973-74
The present Commonwealth Aid Roads legislation will
expire on 30 June. Before the end of the current session of the
Commonwealth Parliament we therefore propose to seek legislative
authority for new arrangements to operate for the next five years.
Thxe isingarrangements provided for Commonwealth
Aid Road grants of $ 750 million for the five year period 1964-69.
This was $ 250 million, of 50 per cent, more than was provided for
the five year period before that. In addition, other Commonwealth
financial assistance to the States for roads purposes, such as the
" beef roads" schemes, amounted to $ 36 million during the five
years. The Commonwealth has long acknowledged a financial
obligation to contribute to the development of the Australian
roads system and is nowadays financing more than one-third of the
total amount spent annually on roads throughout Australia.
At the operational level, responsibility for the detailed
planning and carrying out of road works in the States has rested with
the States. Naturally we have become increasingly concerned with
the problem of achieving the best allocation of national resources.
between the building and upkeep of roads and other pressing demands
for developmental works. We want to ensure that the resources
made available for roads are applied in ways which will best serve
the nation's evolving road requirements.
Following the 1964 review of the Commonwealth Aid
Roads arrangements, we set up the Commonwealth Bureau of Roads
to undertake a thorough survey and appraisal of the existing roads
system and of foreseeable roads requirements.
Whilst considering what new arrangements we should
propose for financial assistance to the States for roads during the
next quinquennium we have been greatly assisted by the
information and advice the Bureau has furnished to us. The
Premier' s have already received copies of the Bureau's report. 
I feel sure that they too would have found it enlightening and
helpful. It would have been impossible for the Bureau to prepare
such a report without the extensive assistance it received from the
State authorities concerned with roads matters. We appreciate
their contribution and the way they have co-operated with the
Bureau. The Commonwealth Government ac. epts the Bureau's
assessment that, provided it is applied economically, expenditure on
roads at a rate considerably higher than at present could and should
be undertaken during the next five years. 4e recognise the high
returns, in terms of increased productivity and reduced
transportation costs, that can flow from well-directed investment
in this field. WVe are, therefore, prepared to increase very
considerably, under a new set of arrangements, the amount of
Commonwealth financial assistance to the States for roads purposes.
The new arrangements we have in mind aim to bring the distribution
of Commonwealth assistance as between the States more closely
into accord with relative needs for road expenditures, and to direct
this assistance more specifically than in the past to the development
of particular classes of roads that seem to us to have high
importance from a national standpoint. 
3.
We propose that Commonwealth assistance should be
provided specifically for
construction and reconstruction of arterial and sub-arterial
roads in urban areas;
construction and reconstruction of non-urban arterial
roads; construction, reconstruction and maintenance oi other
rural roads;
planning and research.
Under the existing arrangements the Commonwealth has
imposed a speciiic requirement that at least 10O% oi* the total Commonwealth
Aid Roads grant be spent on construction and maintenance oñ roads in rural
areas, other than highways, trunk roads and main roads.
Under the arrangements proposed the allocation of money
lor such roads will be the same amount of money as was received in 1968/ 69
plus an escalation of 5T% each year waich will be compounded.
Ta-us although the old formula oi 403% of the total grant
available has been abandoned the actual amounts available for alich roads
will increase in eaca year of the L'ive year period, and such roads will
rceceive an amount of $ P394. 55 million an increase of 9i 65 million on
the amount required to be spent on this class of road during the last
quinquennium. The proposed specific allocations for arterial and
sub-arterial roads in urban areas and for non-urban arterial roads will
be innovations. We consider that a big increase in construction and
reconstruction of arterial and sub-arterial roads in urban areas is needed
to help overcome the acute traf-iic problems of the larger cities. The
central place the non-urban arterial roads must have in the progressive
development of a more efficient highway system spanning the nation fully
warrants the provision of specific assistance for their development. The
allocatici fcr both these classes of arterial roads would, we propose, be
for construction and reconstruction only. 
The proposed all ocation for planning and research
reflects our view that considerably more resources should be directed
to these activities and tnat planning and researcn will pay handsome dividends
and permit us to plan and build more efficiently in the future.
We are therefore prepared to make the States a
" 1principal" Commonwealth grant for these purposes of 200 million
during the next five years.
Tiie method of dividing the total sum available between
the States has been adopted in order to approac more closely a pattern
of distribution in accord with relative needs for road expenditure.
We have felt unable to move abruptly from the formula
o. L-distribution which has been in use for the last five years to one
entirely in accord with economically evaluated needs as portrayed by
the Bureau of Roads because doing so would not pay sufficient regard
to the disruption of the existing pattern oi roads expenditure and the
operational and other problems that drastic, rapid, changes could
create f1or various States.
We iiave thereiore decided miat, for the next five years
and as a transitional arrangement, the distribution between tne 3States
should be primarily on the basis oi. giving equal weight to the distribution
under the existing legislation and the distribution indicated by the Bureau's
" scheduling programme". The " scheduling programme" is based upon an
estimate by the Bureau of Roads, made after consultation with the State road
authorities, of tae amount of road work capable oi yielding high economic
returns wiiich can be carried out during the next five years with the
resources likely to be available in that period.
We therefore propose that the sum of 40, 20J million
be distributed between the States on the basis recommended in the
minority report oi the Bureau. 
This distribution will produce the following results:
million
New South Wale 3.4
Victoria .2 54. 4
Queensland 2% 31. 6
South Australia 12
Western Australia
Tasmania 54.3D
Totaljj
E~ ven thouL; h this partly reflects the existing distribution we
recognise that it could create difficulties for some States. Because of this
the Commonwealth is prepared to provide special supplements to ensure that
no State receives over the next five years less than 52 per cent more than in
the present quinquennium. These supplements will be " phased out" t by the
end of the period. These special supplementary grants, which would be available
for expenditure on construction and maintenance of any type of road, would
total million and would be distributed in this way: million
South Australia J
Western Australia 42-. 8
Tasmania 2.25.
TogTether the principal and the supplementary grants would
amount to 252, 935 million: an increase of $ 5.32. million, or 67 per cent, 
on the grants for the present quinquennium. I will circulate a table showing
the distribution between States for each year of the next quinquennium.
Let me explain in greater detail our proposals for specific
allocations, within the sum of 203 million I mentioned, for urban and nonurban
arterial roads, other rural roads and planniny and research.
Urban arterial and sub-arterial roads are those falling within
Classes 6 and 7 defined by the Bureau of Roads in Appendix V to its report.
Non-urban arterial roads are those in Classes 1 and 2 and other rural roads
those in Classes 3, 4 and 5. These classes of roads are described in a
statement I will circulate.
Wie also propose that 1. 5 per cent of each State's share of the
203 million be specifically allocated for expenditure on planning and
research approved by the Commonwealth.
The differences be tween the total of each State's share of the
2) 3 million and the sum of the allocations for expenditure in that State on
" other rural roads" and planninx and rescarch comprise the specific allocations
for urban and non-urban arterial roads. The relative sizes of these
allocations in each State corresponds with the proportionate relationships
between them in the Bureau's " Scheduliny Programme".
Combining-the fig--ures for all States, the total allocations would
be as follows:-million
Construction, reconstruction
and maintenance of " other
rural" roads 39.. 55
Construction and reconstruction
of non-urban arterial roads 186.76 
7.
Construction and reconstruction
of urban arterial and subarterial
roads 69
Planning, and Research 18. 3
Total Principal Grant 1, 230. X).
As I mentioned earlier, urban arterial and sub-arterial roads
would be those falling within Classes 6 and 7 as defined by the Bureau; nonurban
arterial would be those within Classes 1 and 2; and other rural roads
those within Classes 3, 4 and 5. 1 add that, for this purpose, the
delineation between urban and non-urban areas will be mapde by defining as
urban areas those areas of capital cities designated by the Statistician as
Capital City Statistical Divisions and the urban areas of major provincial
cities having populations greater than 403, 03-0 at the last Census. The
Commonwealth will consult with the States re--arding the particular roads
that will be included in each of the main classes. 
8.
ych.-tbe. separate and specific allocations or
funds for the three-broad classifications are to be used for the class of
roads specified. The amounts to be provided are very large and we
recognise that, in exceptional circumstances, especially in the case of
construction of urban arterial and sub-arterial roads, a State might
encounter difficulty in using all of its annual allocation because of planning
or other delays. Provio ion will accordingly be made in the new
legislation to meet such problems, if they arise. Under the present
legislation, amounts of Commonwealth funds set aside by the States
during 4 year for expenditure on roads, have to be spent within six months
after the end of that year. We do not intend to insist on this in future,
and propose that on request by the States, the States may accumulate
funds within each class during the term of the new Commonwealth Aid
Roads Act, subject to the Commonwealth being satisfied that evely
effort had been made to spend the money available within six months
of the end of the year for which it was available The funds would
be held in respect of that class by the Commonwealth until required for
expenditure by the State. We are also prepared, in exceptional circumstances,
to allow limited transfers between the funds. In both cases it would
rest with the State concerned to seek the variation.
This brings me to the matching arrangements. Under
the existing legislation, each State has been required, if it was to qualify
for a specified part of the total grant, to spend an equivalent amount
from its own resources in excess of a base figure. For the next five
years, we propose that each State should increase its expenditure on
roads from its own resources at the same rate as the number of motor
vehicles on register in the State. The broad objective would be to ensure
that the State Governments' allocations for roads expenditure from their
own resources increased progressively. The proposed requirement
would not be an unduly onerous one certainly not in relation to the
proposed increase of 67 per cent in the Commonwealth's contribution. 
SThe arrangements I have outlined will, we believe,
enable roads development and maintenance to match the increase in
demand for roads and also achieve a significant reduction in backlog of
road works. It is obvious that there will be a significant and nationwide
improvement in standards. They are also designed to ensure the progressive
development of a national roads system along lines best designed to
serve our evolving road needs,
We face a huge and complex task and one that calls
for the closest co-operation between all the road authorities, both
Commonwealth and State. Through co-operation much can be done to
meet the problems in this field an6 develop an efficient roads system of
which all of us, as Australians, can be proud.
We also want to improve co-operation with the States
over the wider field of transportation generally. For this reason we
propose that studies be made in depth on a co-operative basis of all
aspects of transportation problems in Australia.
Let me crystallise the proposals in this way. The
arrangements we are proposing for the next quinquennium are likely
to ensure that the Commonwealth will be providing a substantially
increased share of the finance for expenditure on roads.
The proposed increase in our grants* will be
$ 502.05 million or 67 per cent. An increase of over half a billion
dollars is, we think, a very generous one and one that must considerably
improve the standard of roads in this country during the next five
years. 



OPENING OF NEW LIBERAL PARTY HEADQUARTE 9 N
Brisbane, Q'd. 3 MARCH 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chalk, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and
Gentlemen: This is, of course, not by any means the first visit I
have made to Queensland as Prime Minister. Indeed, I am not quite
sure, but I think it might be the fourth or fifth or something of that
kind. It is a very happy occasion for a visit, to be able to open this
building, although I understand it has been in use for a month.
Nevertheless, the mere fact that it is being officially opened now
does not render null and void anything that has been done during the
month that it wasn't officially open.
I find it pleasant to be here for two reasons one
because,: as I know you will all agree, this is an extremely attractive
and efficient building in which to do the work of a political party. The
other reason is that I believe it is, in a way, symbolic symbolic of
a political party which makes advances, which progresses, which
moves in this case from premises which are not sufficient to premises
which are sufficient. This is an indication, I believe, of that
progressiveness in the Queensland Division of the Liberal Party, a
progressiveness which I believe extends throughout the whole of
Australia as far as the Liberal Party is concerned.
We have, as you said, Sir, been in existence some
twenty-five years or so and in government for twenty. I think this is
a record which all those who have supported the Liberal Party, or
now support it, can look back on with pride and with a belief that the
work that they have done in the branches and in the electorates has
been reflected in great good and great progress accruing to the nation
of Australia. If you look back to the time when this party came in to
office, I think it is not unfair to say that at that time Australia was
relatively stagnant and the policies of the Government then looking
after Australia were relatively sterile. There were problems then
which called urgently to be overcome. And in the period since this
Government achieved office, I think they have been overcome.
At that stage one of the problems was how to provide
for full employment for all those willing and able to work in Australia,
and at that stage, those who were then the Government, and now seek
hopelessly to be the Government again, were saying that five per cent
of unemployment was a reasonable sort of level for a country to reach;
e. / 2 
-2
you couldn't expect it to go much lower. Yet we know that we hay e
gone much lower and that in Australia today there is no fear of
unemployment for any man able and willing and with skills to contribute.
There was little growth in Australia at that time, yet
since then the growth in this country, as your Chairman has said,
compares with the growth of any country in the world and exceeds the
growth of at least ninety-eight per cent of the countries of the world.
Now this doesn't mean there aren't still problems to be
overcome. Of course there are. Problems will always be with us.
But it does mean that the problems are new in kind because they are
problems stemming from the great growth that Australia has made,
from the great increases in its population, from the accretion in size
of its cities, from the calls from all quarters for capital for still
further development and for manpower to service that capital in still
further development. But at least these problems stemming from
growth, problems which I believe we are overcoming though in the
history of any nation there will always be problems are better than
the problems which stemmed from the sterility and stagnation of the
past. Here in this State is, I think, a magnificent e xample
of the growth of which I have been talking. A good deal of it is due
to the creation of a climate by the Liberal-Country Party Government,
the creation of a climate which encourages an individual, which
rewards an individual for the work and contribution he makes to the
nation in which he lives. Some of it is due to deliberate decisions on
the part of our Government; such decisions as, for example, to take
action to see that a city such as Townsville was given the potential for
growth. That city is now in a position where it is among the fastest
growing cities in Australia. Why? Because of deliberate decisions to
place there a university college ( soon to be a university if not one
already); a teachers' college; and, a large Army establishment. With
this comes all those who flow in to service the people in such
establishments, because another decision by the Government was the
establishment throughout the North of a network of roads, opening up
the country as it has not been opened up before and enabling the delivery
of cattle from the interior in a condition which previously was impossible.
And if you look through this great segment of Australia
now and bear in mind what is happening in Townsville, what is happening
in Weipa, what is happening in Gladstone, the growth of Mt. Isa, the
construction of the Fairbairn Dam and many other such developments,
you will see what is being contributed in this State to this State, but
more importantly than that, what is being contributed by this State to
the nation of Australia. You spoke, Sir, of nationalism, and I will never cease to
speak of it. This is an example of the kind of nationalism that I mean,
that these great developments in this part of Australia should be
recognised throughout the whole nation as contributions not to a pa rt
/ 3 
3-
of Australia but to the whole. The contributions made in Western
Australia by Mt. Tom Price and the other great developments must
be recognised as contributing not just to Western Australia but to the
nation as a whole, including Queensland, just as the oil strikes in Bass
Strait must so be considered by all parts of this nation. Because if
we are to attain the destiny that lies before us, which is within our
grasp, then we must, of course, give loyalty to the towns in which we
live, to the cities in which we live, to the areas of Australia in which
we live, but we must recognise that above and beyond and overriding
all that is a loyalty, a pride and a sense of achievement in whatever
good happens in any part of this great nation of ours.
This is not to be translated as chauvinism because it
isn't. But it is to be regarded as an opportunity given by Providence
to a new nation, to take a hard land, to wring from it a standard of
living better than that any other land has known, and to contribute to
the region in which we live unstinted assistance of all kinds so that
we from our national development assist our neighbours and thereby
assist ourselves. As a result, our children and grandchildren may
in time, as I believe they will, be able to say: " This new nation is
now significant in terms of numbers, in terms of industrial muscles,
in the councils of the world. This new nation has taken initiatives
to help its ill and aged and poor in a better and more effective way
than has been taken anywhere else in the world. This new nation has
not withdrawn inside itself but has been willing to share what has been
given to it by nature and what it has torn from nature by muscles and
by thought, to share that with its neighbours".
If this is so, then when that time comes there will be
no Australian who cannot in the world hold his head high and feel pride
in his heart. If that time comes, as I am sure it will, then the
Liberal Party and those of you who have worked for it so hard will
get a better reward than any other I can think of.
Sir, there is another great development project proposed
in Queensland now a suggestion that a gigantic power-house may be
built on the central Queensland coalfields, calling for some $ 200 million
in loan funds. This is an exciting suggestion. I can say no more about
it than that it was put up by Mr. Chalk and the Queensland Government
to us and that it requires close examination in order to determine the
extent of the coal deposits, the exact price at which electricity from
those deposits can be sold, the willingness of overseas firms to use
that power in order to develop the areas around that particular powerhouse,
and indeed a number of other feasibility studies. These are
the first steps. I have written to the Queensland Government and said
that we recommend and suggest that there should be a meeting of
officials from the Commonwealth and from Queensland so that these
matters may, as a first step, be thoroughly investigated. I can go
no further than that at this stage, and this meeting is entirely without
commitment. But should the scheme turn out to be -feasible, should it 
4
turn out to be what its proponents believe it might turn out to be, should
it do that, and should the resources be able to be found and made available,
then that will be one more great forward step I won't say for Queensland,
I'll say for Australia. I think, Sir, that is all I have to say. Indeed, I have
spoken longer than I was told to. So I will just conclude by thanking
you all for what you have done and for what I know you will do to keep
this nation moving, as it has been moving, only moving even faster in
the future. 



" AUSTRALIA 19
AUSTRALIAN FINANCE CONFERENCE SEMINAR
Wentworth Hotel, Sydney, N. S. W. MARCH 1969
k-J i APR 1969
SPEECH BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, MR JOHN GORTON
Mr Chairman and Gentlemen:
I have really come here tonight because I believe that
the objectives of this Seminar and the calibre of the people who are
attending it are in both cases so great they should be recognised on a
national basis. There are a number of things which I think should be
said even though they may be already in your minds, and probably they
are or you would not have come together to discuss what our nation will
be like in 1980. This morning the Treasurer spoke to you of the progress
we have made over the last decade. Now let us think of the progress
possible for us between now and 1980. What sort of a nation could we
then be? What sort of a place in the world would we then fill? What
sort of a potential still remaining before us could we have achieved in
the decade from now onwards?
These are most significant questions, and ones to which
you, academics, public servants, businessmen and ordinary Australians
in every walk of life must direct their minds. This is a duty because..
how long ago 25 years or more ago great numbers of Australians and
men from Britain and the United States gave up their lives in order to
ensure that we and other nations who are like-minded would have a
foundation on which to build the fut ure, the foundation being the interplay
of freedom in a community and the use of freedom in a community.
And they secured that foundat ion, but a foundation is not a building.
Without a sure foundation, you cannot have an enduring
structure. But the foundation having been achieved, it is now necessary
and essential that the enduring structure should be built on it, for those
who gained the foundation and for those who will come after us. This,
I think, is the problem to which you are directing your minds. You cannot,
of course, provide a building without great effort and thought and
planning. And I presume that the effort and the thought and the planning,
and the directions they should take, are what were in your minds when
you decided you would have this seminar.
Well, what could Australia be like in 1980? Let us
look at the material possibilities. There has been, in the years just
recently past, an explosion in Australia. We have an opportunity which,
0 a 0. 0. 2 
-2
I think, no other nation in the world has within its grasp.
Not so many years ago we were thought to be poor in
natural resources, to be growers of wool, or growers of cattle or producers
of cricketers or tennis players, and not a nation with the immense
potential as such countries as the United States. Yet, in those few vealrs
we have and let me here quote what may be wearisome but nevcrtbele~ s
true s tatistics we have discovered oil fields which, by 1980 and before,
will be producing some two-thirds of the oil requirements of this nationl.
Yet we must discover more because will not be able indefinitely, from
the oil fields so far discovered, to produce all the requirements we need
in the future. Indeed, perhaps 11, 12 or 14 years will see the present
discoveries needing to be augmented.
We have discovered natural gas in almost unlimited
quantities, which will be fed in not onl y to the domestic hearths of this
country but into the industrial complexes, to provide a cheap and reliable
source of industrial energy. We have discovered iron ore in mountains,
and the amount of iron ore in them seems to be illimitable while the
quality appears to be unmatched from any other iron ore sources in the
world. And from these mineral sources alone, long before the period
to which you are looking, something like one billion dollars a year of
export income will be coming into this nation.
We have more than one-third of the world's kcnown
deposits of bauxite to make alumina and aluminium and I mean to make
alumina and eventually aluminium. Our bauxite output will rise from
about one million tons, which is our present output, to ten million tons
in 1972. Production of coal for export will double. Nickel discoveries
will add to the future that lies so close within our grasp, and we are
likely to be one of the great exporters of nickel in the world. And
phosphate, copper and other minerals which have been discovered will
follow. This is no credit to us. These things were there.
But they have been discovered adI vhb* Is been daae to expl oit their discovery
has been of some credit to us, th~ ough you, better than anyone else, will
know how much more can be done to make it of yet more credit and of
yet more benefit to the nation in which we live.
In addition to these natural resources, primary products
have added to our glimpses of thc future, so too has our industrial
secondary development. But therc. is very much more to be done.
What in 1980 will our numbers be? They will be
million, a 25 per cent increase on the numbers now living in Australia.
And what will an increase of 25 per cent in our population enable
Australia in 1980 to do?
It is up to you, and to us all, to see that the best possible
uses of these material opportunities are made. And then what would we
want our nation to do? 
-3
Well, I believe that you would want, and the Australians
of 1980 would want, to see that we took our place in the region in which
we live as the technological leader of that region, as the manufacturing
leader of that region. We would want to be a nation which provided
to the greatest extent possible commensurate with our own requirements,
technological assistance, aid of all kinds to the economies of the cou ntries
in our region and, if necessary, military assistance, to provide that
security without which economic progress is probably impossible. That
is why we have as one decision we have had to make indicated that
we were in and of the region in which we live, economically, politically
and militarily, and have provided an earnest and a visible instance that
Australia is there and is going to be there to the utmost of its capacity
now, and I believe in 1980, if we are wanted.
Further, we would want to see that such material
progress as comes to us from the great opportunities that are within our
grasp are spread more evenly amongst our population. I don't mean by
that, any more than the Treasurer meant this morning, that those who
contribute most because of their brain power or organising power or
luck or whatever it may be, should not be rewarded most. But I do say
that if there is great material prosperity to come to us, as I believe
there is, then it is wrong, it is unsupportable that there should be people
who are bankrupted by illress or who are unable in their old age, having
borne the heat and burden of the day, not to have a comfort able life, and
a life without worrying whether there is enough money to buy enough to
eat. This is one of the things that I believe we must be working for in
1980, indeed before that if possible.
But if this nation is to be what you men of vision, and
Australians of vision want it to be and believe they can make it, then
material prosperity is there, and the spreading of that material prosperity
is possible and the taking of our place in the world is possible. All these
things depend on the thought and the effort and the devotion and the
leadership of all of us in this room and of Australians outside who, as
I believe, have themselves perhaps an unformulated but certainly a
sincere vision of what they want the future of their country to be.
What is going to happen though if we do develop as
quickdy as we can, what is going to happen about the ownership of
Australia in 1980, and of the various enterprises in Australia in 1980?
There are two things which are in a sense conflicting,
which we must have in our minds when we think of this problem.
Firstly, it is utterly impossible for us as a nation to develop as quickly
as we must, to bring in as many immigrants as we must, to provide
the industrial muscles we must, unless there is a strong inflow of
overseas capital. From our own resources we cannot generate enough
to do all that we need to do in the time available.
And yet, that having been said, and that being
essential, it is also necessary to seek to see that by 1980, the inflow
of this capital which I reiterate still must come has not come in 4 
-4
such a way that there has not been an opportunity for Australians fully to
participate in the growth which this capital makes possible. There are
a number of facets of this problem, of this difficulty of steering between
Scylla and Charybdis. One of them, of course, concerns the question of
takeovers by overseas companies of Australian companies. As far as I
am concerned, if there is an inefficient Australian company which would
benefit from an infusion of capital, from an infusion of technological
know-how, from an infusion of management, then the provision of
per cent, or even 60 per cent of overseas capital to see that that
company became efficient would not in any be repugnant to me. But if
there were an efficient Australian company, if there were a company
which was operating with good management, good technological application,
and there sought to be a raid on that company by people with a long spoon
who could afford to buy it out at high prices and wait for growth to repay
in five, ten or twelve years' time without dividends in the meantime, then
I would not think it was in Australia's interests that, in such cases, that
should happen. There are questions of development capital required
which are quite different from what I have been speaking about so far.
We have made it clear, as a government, that we would like to see, that
we wish to see, that when development capital comes to Australia to
exploit some hitherto unused resource, to open up some area of the country,
that it would provide an opportunity for some Australian participation
on the ground floor. This is not a matter for legislation. This is not a
matter for something rigidly written in a bill. These are ad hoc decisions
in almost every case. But I think that if a government makes it clear that
it would like this to hap pen, then this does have an effect on responsible
overseas companies who are thinking about coming to this nation and
developing some area of it.
It does have and has had an effect on really responsible
overseas comp~ anies in their decisions as to the amount of equity they
would be prepared to offer and I use the word " offer" and I will later
say why I use the word " offer to Australians, I have no doubt that this
is already happening. Then there is the question of an overseas company which
having, to our benefit and don't let us ever forget this to our benefit
as well as to their own, having carried on some development which needs to
employ new funds for further development, and which seeks to raise a
proportion of those new funds inside this country ( and funds raised inside
this country are not overseas capital and I am speaking of funds raised on
fixed interest) Surely, again without legislation to bring down rigid rules
for this, surely it is not unreasonable to suggest that if such a company
wishes to raise fixed interest money inside Australia, whatever proportion
it may be of the total new funds proposed to be used, that the attitude of a
government towards an approach to raise such fixed interest capital
inside Australia 
would be influenced by the amount of equity such a company was prepared
to offer to Australian shareholders. This indeed is what we have been
saying. It may well be and I would not deny it that so much
capital is requized for the development of Australia and for new funds to
continue the development of Australia that the money markets of Australia
and the savings of Australians could not meet the requirements of x per
cent of equity. I think it likely that they could not. That is why I use
the word " Ioffer", because what is important to me is that in such cases
people are prepared to allow Australians to enter with equity such
companies if Australians are prepared to take up the offer. But if they
are not prepared to take it up, as for good reason they were not
prepared to take it up in Gove, or if because of existing economic
circumstances in any particular year it is thought that a float could not
be filled if it were offered, then at least the offer has been made.
If Australians cannot accept it, then that is no reason why the development
should not go on. But if we are thinking of Australia in 1980, it is as
well to have in mind not the legislative compulsions which people talk
about because there are so many different circumstances in any
particular application. But it is as well, I think, for those who come
to us from overseas to know that they won't be disadvantaged, but to
know what it is that Australians would like them to do and, one hopes, to
be prepared to enter into some kind of partnership with Australian s so
that ly 1980, we will be able to be in greater or lesser degree partners,
and not merely the subject of investment.
Of course we are partners in some degree already as
all of you will know, because we get 45 per cent of any profits that any
overseas company makes:' But nevertheless, that having been said, it
is still not unpleas ant to think that there would be a partnership, there
would be an opportunity for Australian participation, depending on the
circumstances and the amount and the economic climate at any particular
time. Well, we'll see by 1980 how it has worked out.
Then we want, I think, in the nation that we all
envisage, more than just these-material advantages. There must be
some conception of the philosophy that the nation wants to live by. I
would hope that by 1980 we would have been able to develop a system of
education which would provide us with the scientific graduates and the
technological people from the Colleges of Advanced Education and from
the universities who will be able to give industry what it wants. They
would be people who would be able, as technologists, to adi ance the
boundaries of knowledge in technology in industry, and be able as
technicians to understand those advances and to service the requirements
of the latest machines and techniques. / 6 
-6-
We would want to see that each individual in this
nation would have an opportunity to choose the type of work which fulfils
him, whatever it may be, whether it is producing television shows or
whether it is out on the new frontiers driving bulldozers. Whatever it
may be, in whatever field whether it is as a teacher, actor, politician
or businessman people should be able to choose the type of occupat ion
which will give them some belief that what they are doing is not only
being done for themselves but is also contributing to the nation of which
they are a part. To give this opportunity is part of what I mean by the
philosophy a nation lives by. And I would hope by then, and I believe by
then, there would be no individual in Australia whose first loyalty, whose
first thoughts, whose first devotion was not to the nation in which he lives,
rather than to the part of the nation in which he lives.
But much sooner than that, we will have what we have
only had before perhaps in wartime, and that is a sense of unity of purpose,
a sense of delight in victory, whether that victory occurs in the West or
in Bass Strait or at Weipa or in Gladstone or in Groote Eylandt. Each
individual will have a feeling of satisfaction at the efforts he or she is
contributing to the growth of a great nation. This is the nation of which
you have a vision, and which, God willing, could by 1980 be an example
to the rest of the nations of the world and which, after 1980, will continue
to unfold the story of Australia Unlimited. 



PA~ L11~ ME O9F F) C 9op 7
RESTR ICTED
OPENING OF THE HAROLD HOLT MEMORIAL
SWIMMING POOL
MALVERN, VIC. 16 MARCH 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Mayor, Sir Robert Menzies and Ladies and Gentlemen:
May I start by saying how glad I am to have the
opportunity to be here today in my own electorate in which I am
able to appear in all too infrequently, for reasons which I hope you
will understand and forgive.
Now this piece of paper in my hand was a speech
which was written to give to you, but it appears to be not much use
to me now because the Mayor has said practically everything that
was written in it except for that bit about bikinis: Consequently,
it has been necessary for me to make a few rough notes while
listening to the Mayor. So what I have to say to you will not be as
polished as it otherwise might be, but nevertheless it will be
sincerely meant and felt.
I should tell you, however, that very frequently on
0 these occasions I am so happy to reach the end of a speech perhaps
not as happy as those who listen to it: that I sometimes forget
whatever it is that I am supposed to be opening. I hope that won't
0 happen on this occasion, but if it should the thing is open nevertheless.
I am told when this happens, a gun is going to go off immediately
and people are going to dive off the towers but I am assured there
will be blank shells in the gun.
Now, Sir, we have here a fine example of local
government action. You mentioned, Sir, and brought back to my
mind, that too many people thought of local government as being
merely occupied with building roads or collecting rubbish, and it
did remind me of a true story.
Many years ago, the little daughter of some friends
of mine came back from a walk and said: " Yesterday when we
passed the corner there was a dead dog on it, but today when we
passed it had gone because Pranci Proconsul had taken it away.
Now, the child's parents were a little bemused at this because the
introduction of this matter with rather obscure religious overtones
was not at once clear to them. But it became clear the next day when
a little more investigation disclosed that Pranci Proconsul was in
fact the Prahran City Council. But we know, Sir, that they do far
more than that and this is visual evidence of it, because there is
history repeating itself. / 2 
-2
I was surprised at the number of hands that went up
for people who had been here when the first opening took place, an
opening of a pool which was then a trendsetter 42 years ago and which
is now being followed by a complex of pools which I am told are the
finest in the Southern Hemisphere and if anybody wants to deny that
I am quite prepared to have an argument about it. They really are
a magnificent complex and they retain the trees and general park-like
approach, which is so necessary for functions of this kind.
How proud the late Prime Minister, who represented
the city of Malvern in the electorate of Higgins in the Federal
Parliament with such distinction for so long, how proud he would be
to have his name associated with this facility provided for the people
of Malvern and how he would hope, as I hope, that whereas 42 years
ago there were few, comparatively few, who could swim, today there
is a generation, more and more of whom are able to swim. Partly,
I think in this instance, this has been due to the work of the lifesaving
association formed here and in other centres throughout Australia.
The nation should take this business of swimming very
seriously. We are blessed in every State with some of the best ocean
beaches in the world, and we have such swimming facilities as these
at rivers and lakes throughout our country. Yet far too often there are
reports of boating accidents in which somebody has been drowned
because they could not swim. This should not happen in a country
like Australia. Sir, I think in providing facilities such as this and
by the work citizens are putting into teaching children to swim in
facilities such as this, we are on the way to seeing that all can swim.
Harold Holt, that fine swimmer himself, a man who
kept fit and encouraged others to keep fit would be pleased to have
not only his name associated with this complex, but be delighted at
the possibilities which this complex opens up for fitness and for
teaching children to swim.
Sir, I think I have said all I would wish to say. I now
declare this swimming complex to be open. 



VISIT TO THE U. S. AND
CANADA 1969 718
CANADA
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, ~ I
MR. JOHN GORTON, ON ARRIVAL IN OTTAWA
2 APRIL 1969
My wife and I are delighted to be in Canada. I much
appreciate this opportunity again to meet your Prime Minister, Mr.
Trudeau, so soon after our talks in London.
I look forward to our discussions here in Ottawa, and
I am sure they will be of benefit to both our countries. I shall not,
in a statement on arrival and before I have talked with Mr. Trudeau,
presume to detail what we are likely to discuss.
But some of the subjects of common concern are obvious.
Canada and Australia have an interest in world peace and security so
that all nations, no matter how small, can be free and live without
fear. As Pacific nations, we are both concerned to see
stability and progress in Asia, with genuinely independent, economically
developing, self-reliant states, and we in Australia have played and
will play an active role in regional co-operation.
Another field for discussion could be the development
of further contacts between Canada and Australia. The more we visit
one another the better. I am very happy to accept Mr. Trudeau's
invitation to visit Canada, and he and other Canadian Ministers will
always be welcome in Australia. In fact, we are looking forward to a
visit very soon from the Canadian Minister of Trade and Commerce,
Mr. Pepin. Our two countries need to keep in touch and work together
whenever we can. Although many miles separate Canada and Australia, we
both have much in common. We both have a Pacific coastline and are
both developing an industrialised society in a harsh environment. We
both depend heavily on primary products to earn foreign exchange and
are therefore greatly interested in freedom of access to markets for
primary products and in realising payable prices for such products.
And we both have large scale immigration programmes. / 2 
-2-
Our friendship is of long-standing and we share a common
purpose in many international activities. We have been comrades-inarms
in two world wars, in the fighting in Korea, and we have taken
part together in U. N. peace-keeping operations.
We were proud to take part in your centennial
celebrations at Expo ' 67 in Montreal and we acknowledge the imagination
and vision that made it such a success.
As Pacific and Commonwealth partners, we should build
an even closer relationship in the future. I am sure we will. 



PRESENTATION TO H. M. A. S. HOBART OF U. S.
NAVY UNIT COMMENDATION 14HAY 1969
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 21 APRIL 1969
Speech by the _ Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Admiral Baumberger, Admiral Grabbe, Parliamentary Colleagues
and Distinguished Guests and Officers and Men of the Royal
Australian Navy:-This is a proud day for the Royal Australian Navy
and for the officers and men of HMAS Hobart in particular, all of
those who have served in her in the past or who are now serving in
her. To you, Admiral Baumberger, I say thank you for all
you have said, thank you for the honour you do the Australian Navy,
and, through it, the Australian people, by the presentation of this
Unit Commendation from the United States Navy.
I take this opportunity of personally congratulating
Commodore Griffiths and those who served with him when this
Commendation was won. The job they did was in the best and finest
traditions of the Australian Navy.
This, too, I think, is a day we will all remember as
one more demonstration of the friendship between the Australian
and the American people, a day when our comradeship in arms with
the United States receives special recognition. I say with great
conviction that our two countries are not " fair-weather friends"
We have stayed together, we stay together and we stick together
whether the going is rough or smooth.
Hobart's service with the Seventh Fleet as " an eager,
aggressive and dauntless member" ( to quote from the Commendation)
is an example of that spirit. It's been like that for a long time now,
and that's how I believe it will continue.
This is the first Unit Commendation from the United
States Navy to be awarded to a ship of the Australian Fleet and it will
have a special place in the battle honours of our Navy. For myself,
I feel particularly gratified because I like to feel, in a way, that
Hobart was one of my ships. She was the second of the three guided
missile destroyers ordered from the United States during my time
as Minister for the Navy and she was the first Australian warship to
serve in Vietnam. / 2 
-2
I say to you all officers and men of the Navy here
today that though the conflict in Vietnam is long, and though our
naval ships are engaged on faraway seas, the Australian public and
Government do not forget you.
They admire and respect you for the way you are
doing your job. They are grateful to you for what you are contributing.
They support you. And zhese, of course, are sentiments that apply.
to all our servicemen who are performing with such distinction. IndIeed,
it was less than a year ago in Washington that I had the privilege of
accepting a Presidential citation on behalf of the Sixth Battalion Royal
Australian Regiment. Hobart has done two tours of duty with the Seventh Fleet
off Vietnam and, as you know, is just across the way at Garden Island
refitting. She is being given even sharper teeth by the fitting of an
Australian-made, Australian-designed anti-submarine missile system,
[ kara, and I have no doubt that she will continue to give a good account
of herself, wherever she is engaged.
Today there is change all round and the Australian Navy,
along with our other Armed Forces, will have continuing commitments
in Pacific and Asian waters even when the conflict in Vietnam is over.
It must be the best-equipped and the strongest Navy our resources can
allow, and that's the responsibility of the Government and its advisers.
But it must also be the best-led and the best-manned fleet. And that is
up to the officers and men who man it, and if they continue to man it in
they way in which they have, then there is no doubt it will be the
best -officered and best -led fleet.
I thank you, Sir, for being here today. thank the United
States Navy for Hobart's commendation and all that it means to us, to
the officers and men who have served or are serving in Hobart and to
the Australian people from which they come. 



ANNIVERSARY OF INDEPENDENCE OF ISRAEL
Festival Hall, Melbourne 22 APRIL 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Ambassador and Fellow Australians of Jewish
Faith or Jewish Descent:-
We stand here to give greetings to you all on a stage
from which those bright banners have just been carried banners
which symbolically bore the stars of the Southern Cross and the Star
of David. And how proper that is, for this association is not a recent
one. Back in the 1914-18 War, Australian soldiers, many of
Jewish descent, rode and fought with Jews in Israel. In the last Great
World War, two of the best-known Jewish soldiers today served with
Australians in the Syrian campaign. I am told, and I believe it is true,
that General Moshe Dayan lost his eye while with an Australian patrol
in the Syrian campaign. He was using a pair of binoculars to help
his-Australian comrades, and was hit by an enemy bullet.
And I know that Brigadier General Allon served in a
little-known but gallant action where he guided and led an Australian
patrol behind the enemy lines to hold and seize a bridge and prevent
its destruction so that Australian and other troops coming along from
behind could cross that bridge. They were to hold it for eighteen
hours. They held it for four days.
This is the sort of association in fighting, in war, that
has gone on between Australians and Jews in Israel, so how right it
was that today the flags should bear the stars of both our nations.
And what a special cheer there was, of course, for the
reference to the Six-Day War, a war which, I suspect, must have
benefited the Israeli Treasury immensely because I know that a third
of the budget of Israel is spent on defence but I imagine that at least
another third of its defence material has been made available from
other sources: But that was some years ago, and while it did what wars
can do, and that is settle immediate problems and fighting and wars
can do that, no matter what anyone may say it has not settled the
continuing problem. And since that time I think there have been
one-quarter as many casualties as occurred in that Six-Day War,
many of them children blown to pieces or maimed by button mines,
/ 2 
2-
many of them peasants working in their fields suddenly the target of
mortar or machine gun attack, for Israel is still a beleaguered nation.
That nation still must work, wherever it may be working, with the
tool of its trade in one hand and the sword and the rifle within grasp
for the other. It still must seek to hear all the time above the noises
of the market place the possible call of the tocsin to defend what has
been won, because that must be defended.
War is horrible. Fighting is horrible. But they are
not the worst things that can happen, and who could possibly know this
better than the people now in Israel, with the thousands of years of
persecution in all the lands in which they sought to make their home,
having been driven out from their own. With all those years of
persecution culminating in Nazi aggression who could know it better?
And who could know better that if the choice eventually
has to be made between a battlefield and a Belsen, then free men and
women must choose a battlefield every time.
What we all want is for it to be recognised throughout
the world that Israel is there to stay, and that Israel is a free and
sovereign and independent nation as of right. And we want Israel to
be allowed to divert that money that now must be put into defence to
be used for the further increase of the miracles it has wrought in the
arid land to which it has gone.
Sometimes, it almost makes one despair when one thinks
of what has been wrung from the desert, when one thinks of the forests
which have grown and are growing, where previously erosion held sway,
where one sees the factories and industries springing up where
previously was nothing but nomadic wandering, where one sees not two
but ten blades of grass where only one grew before. It almost makes
one despair to think that that example can be the subject of such threat
and such attacks rather than be followed for the benefit of all those
who live in that region of the Middle East.
What all Australians want, I believe, is that it should
be possible for an enduring peace to be made; that the Arab nations
should sit down and talk and discuss and reach agreement. What that
decision or result will be, I do not know or seek here to indicate, as
long as it brings to all those people living there the chance to progress,
the chance to live in peace, the chance to take care of refugees, the
chance to give human beings in that part of the world happiness,
confidence in the future and a knowledge which you have and which I
have which is quite ineradicable. That is that though the State of
Israel may be 21 today and has attained its majority, it will go on
forever. / 3
11 6 
-3'
What I have outlined could be achieved if the two great
powers not four great powers but two great powers in the world
the United States of America and the U. S. S. were to say, " Enough
of this. Turn your swords into ploughshares. We are strong enough
to see that one will not be attacked by the other and we in concert will
help to hold the peace." This could be done.
For ourselves for myself, for my Government, for
Australians, we are small and therefore perhaps sympathetic
particularly to Israel which also is small. But that which we can do
we will do to support it. That which we can say we will say. That
influence we can bring to bear, such as it is, will be brought to bear
for this end. And I cannot better express that approach than by
reading to you part of a message sent by us to the Executive Council
of Australian Jewry in the Sydney Town Hall some time ago. And this
is our belief as a Government and my belief as a Prime Minister:-
" We believe that all parties to the dispute should
without delay sit down around the conference table
and begin discussions aimed at restoring peace and
stability to the Middle East. Any such settlement
must be formally based on the acceptance of Israel
as a sovereign nation, existing as of right, entitled
to live and develop in security, free of constant
threat, posing no threat to its neighbouring countries
and using for the good of all, rights and opportunities
so dearly bought."
I thank you. 


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
JOHN 0. GORTON, MP, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
23 APRIL 1969
DEFENCE SPACE COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
I have to inform the House that the Government has
accepted proposals which were made by the United States Government
for the establishment in Australia of a joint United States / Australian
defence space communications facility.
The facility will be located at Woomera. A site survey
party from the United States is expected to visit Woomera soon.
Construction should commence in September or October
and the installation should be ready to operate by late 1970. The
joint staff of Australian and U. S. personnel required to operate the
station will be between 250 and 300.
The construction of the station will be an important
contribution to the defence of all free nations. It is a further and most
important tangible expression of that close co-operation between the
United States and Australia in defence matters which is embodied in
the ANZUS Treaty. 



SECOND TRIP TO THE U. S. 1969
WASHILNGTON
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
AT THE WHITE HOUSE IDINNER 6 MAY 1969
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is a speech, Sir, to which it is very difficult
to reply. I think it is true that there is, between the people of the United
States and the people of my own country, some particular bonds which
are not of recent, birth, but which have matured over the years.
True it is, that in our own country we reached self
government by means of evolution and you by revolution. But nevertheless,
in some degree we think of you as being responsible for us. I know a
lot of other countries do that, too. Because it was only after the
Declaration of Independence and a certain amount of unpleasantness
which culminated at Yorktown following that, that Great Britain looked
to another outlet, if I may put it that way. Put it gave us the first impetus
to the growth of Australia and so perhaps in that indirect way, Sir, you
have helped us in our youth. I
But that was just at the beginning. Since then we have stood
together in many struggles--the First World War, fought far and away
from our shores and yours, but fought for the same reasons, our soldiers
and yours--the Second World War, the Korean War where Australians
were within the first week in action with the United States forces and the
first country so to be in action. And now, the Vietnam War.
I don't know why it is--or perhaps I do--but I am not sure
why it is that when countries talk, as you and I are talking, of the bonds
which unite and have united them, so often one turns to wars and to
struggles in which one has been together. Because, after all, a
successful war does not gain anything new. What it does do, if it is
successful, is prevent the imposition of something bad and obtain an
opportunity for new building upon a proper basis and a proper foundation
of freedom and participation.
Perhaps it is because men have for so long had to struggle,
and probably always will have to struggle, against the idea of absolute
and arbitrary power; against the idea of the secret police and the
hangman; against the philosophy that in order to be free and live in peace
one must subject one's self to the rule--without law--of dictatorship.
Perhaps it is because the fainthearted all through the years have been
/ 2 
prepared to say, " if you wish to eat you must sell your immortal soul. If
you wish peace you must submit to dictation. perhaps it is because there
is in the human spirit a refusal to accept this that one talks of nations
standing together in war, not because it is in war, but because of the
objectives sought by such struggles.
You, Sir, are bearing today a burden, greater, I think,
than that borne by any other man in the world I know. And in a way, here,
history is repeating itself because as I look up there and see a former
Republican-I hope no Democrats will be upset-I see a former Republican
looking down upon us, my mind goes back to those times and that burden
and the turmoil in this country in that period.
Too often do we now look back at Lincoln and tend to think
the speeches he made were well received and tend to think the ideals
he professed were accepted by all the people of the United States. But
not enough do we look back and think of the burden for five long years he
bore during a period when the United States lost more dead than it has
in the many wars since. And hie bore this.
During a period when Copperheads were inciting riots in
order to bring peace and not allow the war to continue; during the period
when the Horace Greeleys and others of the press were attacking not only
his ideas, but him personally; during the period when regiments from
the army of the Potomac had to be brought back to quell draft riots in New
York--that was a burden. But if it had not been carried by the man there
would be no United States today. There would have been, at any rate, a
slave autocracy of the South and what that, in junction with South America,
could then have lead to in the world no-one can tell. But there would have
been no United States.
And so the bearing of these burdens and the successful
consummation of these struggles is something which is not for that time
alone or for this time alone, but which, having been successful in that
time, led to the United States being able to be what it is today, and which,
if it is successful in this time, will lead to there being able to be
throughout the world an opportunity for us, when we next speak, when
we next meet, or at least communicate or whatever it may be, to talk not
of war but of the other progress which is the other part of which you spoke,
Sir, of which the United States and ourselves, you helping us economically,
building us, helping us to build ourselves, the other part may be the real
outcome of successful resistance to aggression. I think it will be.
I think that we will stand together in the future as we have
in the past, the great, the small, the comparatively small, but fired by
the same motives, inspired by the same ideas, resolute in the same way.
/ 3 
-3-
I hope that this will be true. It has been true and I believe
it will be true. And for our part, speaking for Australians, wherever the
United States is resisting aggre-sinn, wherever the United States or the
United Kingdom or any other country is seeking to ensure that there will
be a chance for the free expression of the spirit of man from himself and
not from dictatorship; wherever there is a joint attempt to improve not
only the material but the spiritual standards of life of the peoples of the
world, then, Sir, we will go Waltzing Matilda with you. 



BENDIGO BY-ELECTION
TV Message from the Prime Minister
( Recorded 23 May_ 1969)
On June the 7th you will elect a representative for
Bendigo to the Federal Parliament. I ask you to elect Warren
Cambridge, the Liberal Party candidate, to help me and my
Government. He's Bendigo born and bred, active in community
service and, of course, was Mayor of Bendigo last year. He knows
Bendigo's special problems and can raise those problems where it
counts as a member of the Government ' s team. But he also has a
vision of Australia's future as we do a developing land, a growing
land, a land where the ill and aged are cared for, a land which
helps its neighbours and which builds its defences. For effective
local representation and for the good of Australia's future bring
Bendigo into the Government and send us Councillor Cambridge on
June the 7th.
Note: This message will be broadcast 12 times by BCV-8
during the campaign. It will be used for the first
time at 8. 15 p. m. on Monday, 26 May. 



LIBERAL__ PARTY RALLY Y
KING'SSCHOOL, PARRAMATTA, N. S. W. 24 MAY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Bowen, Parliamentary Colleagues, Your Grace the
Archbishop, and Distinguished Guests:-
The main object which I have in mind today is to have the
opportunity later for my wife and I to meet as many of you as it is possible
for us to do. But before we can arrive at what I hope will be the mrost
enjoyable part of the afternoon, and what I know will be for us the most
enjoyable part of the afternoon, I should take some time, I think, to
discuss with you my beliefs as to what politics is all about. Because
after all, you are all here as members and supporters of the Liberal
Party, and as members and supporters of one of our best members of
the Liberal Party in Nigel Bowen.
But why is it that you are prepared, as I know so many of
you are, to go out at election times and to man polling booths when it is
120 degrees in the shade or raining cats and dogs and on every election
I can remember it has either been one or the other. Why is it that you
are prepared to do that, to give of your time and of your effort to address
envelopes, to attend branch meetings, to go out from your own fireside
and divorce yourselves from your own desires to play golf or to do
whatever it is that is of greatest interest to you? What is the motivation
behind it? It is not, I am sure, just to get Mr. Smith or Mr. Brown
or Mr. Jones in some particular position. It must be more than that and
I know it is more than that.
It is, I think, because you have a vision of what this country
can do under proper leadership, of what this country can become for
yourselves and for your children if the proper measures are taken. And
because you have this vision, I believe that what it is that motivates you
is the desire to participate in achieving the end that your vision says is
possible of achievement. And that is what politics, basically, is all about.
I suppose that the most important thing in politics, though
it is not a pressing burden on us now, but still the most important thing,
is to see that within a country there is retained that freedom of expression,
that capacity to express dissent, provided it is not expressed by violence;
that ability to disagree with governments without fear of retaliation; / 2 
-2
that chance to cast a secret ballot, knowing it will be secret and that no
retaliation can result from it; that ability to choose and change
governments, that freedom and democracy which we take for granted
but which is, when we look at the world, the prerogative of only a small
part of it. And basically that is the first requirement to be kept.
I am bound to say that I think that the side of politics which
you support is more likely to retain those basic freedoms than are any
other kinds of politics in this country. For after all, it is not the Liberals,
if they disagree with something, who seek to resort to violence because
they cannot win majority opinion. It is not the Liberals who attack
physically those who disagree with them. It is not the Liberals who pelt
missiles at distinguished citizens of Australia because they don't like
what those distinguished citizens are doing. It is rather people supporting
the other side. But after that, what is politics about? I think it is to keep
the security of this country against attack from abroad so that these basic
freedoms can be retained, not only within against attack but against
attack from without. And I believe that that side of politics which you
support is more concerned in times of peace with preparing against attack
from without, with preparing for the security of this country, than is the
other side of politics. We have, as you know, and not without some agony of spirit
and some time spent examining all the possibilities, decided to accept the
challenge to our north posed by the withdrawal of British forces. We have
decided to involve ourselves in the region to which we are contiguous and
to help it economically, to help it financially, to help it technically and
to provide a visible token of our willingness to assist it to defend itself.
And this in a new era was a great and momentous decision.
We did not adopt that course proposed by our opponents of
sending some Australian forces in and out in a kind of a jack-in-the-box
approach of " Now you see them now you don't", which is as psychologically
inept as it is logically and logistically absurd. Rather we have decided
that our security is helped by helping the security of the nations to our
north, have adopted that principle and I believe in that way have greatly
helped our future security and that is another and most important thing
that politics is all about.
just as it is of the utmost importance for us, a small
country in a dangerous world, to be sure as sure as one can be in the
world that in times of stress and danger should they come, we will be
able to call upon the assistance of a great power, knowing that we deserve
it because we will know that we have lived up to the spirit of the treaty
we formed with it, and are not seeking only to take but are willing to take
and to give for our own security and, as I believe, that of the free world
generally. / 3 
3-
Having achieved the proper processes of democracy inside
a country and guarded them, having guarded the country itself these,
important as they are, are only the foundation for what we do with what
we have gained by those measures. It is essential that we should provide
for the people of this country an opportunity for work if they are prepared
to work and this has been and will be done; that we should bring into
this country new manpower without which the development of this country
would languish; that we should marshal for the development and growth
materially of this country capital resources and technological know-how,
not only from within ourselves but from abroad. Because if there was
ever a country that needed quickly to grow materially, that needed quickly
to grow in manpower, then that country is Australia at this moment in the
world's history. And these are things, I believe, that we can do with our
team better than any of our opponents can do. And you must believe that
too and that must be another reason why you are prepared to give of your
time and effort and thought to help us continue a path, and continue an
upward path which for the last two decades has been unparalleled in
Australia's past history.
Now these are material things of which I spoke, but you
must wish too, I am sure, that in a country defended, insofar as its
strength will enable it to be defended, growing insofar as its resources
will al'low it to grow, there should also be more than a mere material
approach. You must, and I know you do, want to see that within such a
community there is a real attempt, a real effort made to look after the
ill, the unfortunate, the aged and the handicapped amongst us. And you
must and I am sure you do want to see provided for the people and the
young people of Australia not merely an opportunity for a job, not merely
an opportunity for material advancement, but an opportunity to choose the
kind of job, the kind of work which an individual feels he is most fitted to
perform, to try and train an individual, whether they wish to be an artist
or an artisan, a captain of industry or a captain in the merchant navy,
whatever field of endeavour an individual feels he should be drawn towards.
A country which is great will help such an individual to develop in the way
in which his own internal urges seek to make him develop, and in that way,
as I believe, will give him a feeling of participation, a feeling of wishing
to give rather than demanding to be given to. Because no great country
can continue to be great if the citizens who make it up clamour only to be
given to and do not have a wish, an urge and an opportunity to give in
return. And this, though perhaps it is one of the hardest tasks, is still
a matter of what politics is all about.
So I believe at this juncture in our history is the fostering
of a spirit of pride in being Australian, a fostering of an Australian
nationalism, no matter whether one lives in New South Wales, Victoria,
Parramatta, Malvern or wherever it may be; an elation at some advance
in this nation of ours, whether that advance be Cove, Bass Strait, Sydney,
Mt. Newman, wherever. A feeling that this, wherever it is situated, is
something which helps our nation as a whole, and that should attract our
first and greatest loyalty. / 4 
-4-
I do not mean that we should foster or seek to foster a
feeling of chauvinistic pride. I feel that we should seek to foster a feeling
of pride, an acknowledgment of the great challenges that face us and a
willingness to overcome them, and should join with that a feeling of
humility at the tasks in front of us, at the luck this country has had and
has exploited, at the requirement to help our neighbours because of the
luck which we have had and which, with hard work, we have exploited.
These approaches to the life of a nation are the very basic
fabric of which politics is made. If it were just a matter of who is in and
who is out, if it were not a matter bound up with philosophies, if it were
not a matter bound up with approaches, if it were not a matter which over
the centuries has led communities to, in many cases, physical fighting,
then it would not matter much. But in fact if what I have said is true
and I believe it is then it matters greatly, and so it matters greatly,
I believe, that you are prepared to work as you are, that you are prepared
to come here today as you have, because in so doing you are contributing
greatly to the achievement of that vision, to the advancement of that nation
to which you belong, and I belong, and which I think can only I will not
say " only" and which I think can best be advanced by the application of
the beliefs which you and we have in common. 



66
VICTORIAN JEWISH BOARD OF DEPUTIES DINNER
MELBOURNE, VIC. 26 MAY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Ashkanasy and all those here assembled:
You do my wife and I a very great honour tonight and we
are touched by what has been said and by the welcome you have given
us. We find it quite heartwarming and we thank you for it.
You, Sir, mentioned the espousal or somebody
mentioned the espousal of Jewish causes. I do not think that what
motivates me or what motivates most Australians is a desire to espouse
Jewish causes as such. I think that it is a belief that at this present
time in history Jewish causes and the causes of Israel are right causes
and are just causes and are honest causes, and are espoused by us for
that reason rather than that they are the causes of some particular
group. And you, Mr. Ashkanasy mentioned what are almost
' half-forgotten things and battles long ago' the years of 1937, 1938 and
1939 when, to our great advantage, we opened the gates of this country
to those who were threatened in Europe. Sir, I can only assure you of
this: that there are countries today who oppress citizens of the Jewish
race living within them. There are countries today which conduct public
executions, and we have taken such measures as we can to ensure that
if those countries will open their gates to allow those who wish to
emigrate from them, then we will again open our own gates to allow
those immigrants to come in. And to this end we have already appointed
Immigration Officers. We have already called upon Great Britain to
act for us so that should these gates be opened for egress then we will
be able quickly to make provision for ingress to ourselves to our
great ultimate advantage, as I think has been demonstrated since 1938
by those who came from abroad to be Australians and have so contributed
to the Australian culture and the Australian way of life.
I am privileged to be with you here tonight and the guest
of such a representative body as the Victorian Jewish Board of Deputies,
and particularly perhaps privileged because all of us here in this room
have a special interest in two very vigorous, very sovereign, very
independent countries Israel and Australia. There is a bond between
us which does stretch back over the decades, which does stretch back
to battles shared. But It has been strengthened, I think, by increasingly
close relationship in recent days. / 2
0 
-2
It is my hope tonight that this year Israel's 21st
Ianniversary as a nation may, God willing, see a permanent settlement,
a real peace in the Middle East and in the Holy Land. It is magnificent
to win a Six-Day War, but it is not the solution to the problems which
face Israel, because that Six-Day War was won and yet those problems
still press in upon her borders.
What surely must be required, what surely must be
sought by the great powers of the world is that Israel and the other
countries of the Middle East should sit down together, should discuss
how they can live together, should and I think in the words of your
own President draw lines on a map so that the Arabs say " This is the
border" and the Israelis say " This is the border", and then there is an
argument and a discussion about it. As long as it can finally lead to an
0 agreed border and to a real enduring peace so that the people of Israel
do not have continually to live with a plough in one hand and a rifle within
their grasp, so that the country of Israel can contribute the savings it
W can make to the development of the desert and to the increasing of its
industrial capacity instead of having to divert so much to the very very
necessary present requirements of armaments and defence.
It is almost beyond my understanding that in a region where
so much can be contributed by the example of Israel and the technology
of Israel and the development of the desert which Israel has shown is
possible that this should not be availed of by its neighbours; and where
its neighbours equally with Israel contribute so much of their effort to
tanks and guns and aeroplanes and shells instead of to education and
advancement of their own people.
I can only express the deepest hope that for the benefit
of all those in the Middle East, there will be this year or soon an end
to this strife, a beginning of a living in brotherhood, a beginning of a
joint attempt to develop that area for the good of all. And this must
come about by peace talks, by peace conferences, and small though we
are in the councils of the world, our voice will always be raised to seek
that end. I speak to you tonight, too, as fellow Australians because
I believe that all those here in this room are concerned in this country
with providing a better life for those who are born here and for those
who, for one reason or another, have come here or may in the future
come. In our beginnings, our pioneers had to tame a harsh country, a
dry country, an unfriendly country. And is it not true that this has been
and is still true of Israel that the desert had to be watered, that the new
towns and cities and kibbutzes had to be built where previously there
was nothing but desolation? We can claim, I think, as Australians, some
success in battling with a harsh environment. So, too, can Israel, and
here again is a bond between our countries. o / 3 
3-
But there are differences. Here we sleep easily at night,
as you, Sir, have said, and here we go about our work without threat,
without danger, without the risk of grenades being thrown into our
market-places, without the chances of buses carrying schoolchildren
being blown up by landmines, without the possibility of plastic
explosives being placed where. they will damage innocent civilians. In
Israel that is not the case. And all along the frontiers, until that peace
of which I have spoken and for which I will work and for which we must
all hope will come, that will be the great division between Australia
and Israel that here there is an opportunity to live without fear while
in Israel there Is not.
I hope that we can help to abolish this fear. Insofar as
we can, we will. But in the meantime we can, and I believe we sho4ld,
express our admiration and respect for the fortitude that the people of
Israel are showing at the moment.
I like the symbols of the friendships between our countries.
We both, as I have said before, have stars on our flags. We both have
some affinity towards the eucalypt and the gum trees. I have some
affinity for it because you gave me a grove, although I am not quite
sure that it really belongs to me, but nevertheless you gave it to me.
Somebody I think my wife told me that you are now exporting back
to Australia gum tree seed, which I think is going just a little too far:
And you have there, in Israel, these finite examples of the ties between
us in Nachiat Victoria which has been established in the desert with
funds subscribed no doubt by many in this room and by many whom
you represent outside this room. All these things remind us of the links
we have with Israel. You, Sir, in your opening remarks, were kind enough
to say something about what my Government is trying to do. What we
are trying to do here can come under three broad heads. We are trying
to ensure our security against attack from abroad in the future, and who
could understand that better than people close to Israel. We are trying
to push forward our development and strength, and who would know about
that better than the people of Israel. And we are trying to see that with
the material advancement this will bring, we also have the spiritual
belief in a requirement for the welfare of the ill, the unfortunate, the
maimed, the handicapped amongst us. And isn't it true that Israel
opened her borders to all, however unfortunate, from whatever part of
the world they came, in order to provide what is the ultimate objective
of welfare, a better life and a happier life.
These three things again are things which motivate this
country and Israel, and these three things are of the essence of safety
and of progress. / 4 
-4
I would like to take this chance to acknowledge what the
community of the Jewish race and the Jewish faith have done in Australia
over the years. It is, of course, to the lasting credit of the Jewish'
people that they have maintained their spiritual values, that they have
maintained their religion, that they have maintained their standards of
conduct against the world ever since they were by the Romans thrown
out of what was the first State of Israel. This has been true no matter
where they have been born or no matter where they have lived. And
they have done this in Australia too, although most were born here and
although their integration into the Australian community has been, as
I believe, total. What have they given us? They have given us great riches,
I think, as have other races who have come here. They have given us
great advantages in developing our own culture and in bringing in and
infusing and diffusing amongst us their rich culture which many Australians
now think is their own and which in fact has become their own. I know,
Sir, that this will go on.
You have all won an honoured and respected place in
Australian life, and I am proud that even though sometimes it gets a
little lonely, I am Prime Minister of a country where bigotry is at a
discount, and where Australians accept each other for what they are.
And I believe that you will all agree with me that we in this room as
Australians are not troubled by what each man's faith might be or what
form the worship of his God might take. We are interested only in
" Is this man a good man or a bad man? Does he contribute to the
community? Or does he uot?" This is the way it should be. This is the
way it is and this, please God, will be the way it always will be in
Australia in the future.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and all those in this room
for the evening that you have tendered to my wife and 1. It is a night
that we will always remember, and the things of which we speak and
the things for which we stand are eternal things and they will overcome. 



OPENING OF CASEY WING AT ROYAL MEL-BOURNE
INSTITUTE OF ' TECHNOLOGY, MELBOURNE 2 JUNE 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:
You were kind enough, Mr. ' Chairman, to mention an early
association of mine with this concept of Colleges of Advanced Education.
And indeed it was, I think, a bold and new experiment to start such colleges
and to make them not competitive with universities, not on a collision
course with universities but turning out people with the same graduate
W standards as the university could turn out, and with a slightly different
motivation in their education. So many of them, unfortunately, ( because
I heard what some had said in the back previously) destined, I am afraid,
to become bourgeousie. And, indeed, Mr. President, the time had come in Australia
when this new experiment should be begun. We are going to have, between
11967 and 1972, 50 per cent more students staying in matriculation forms
at secondary schools and then coming on to tertiary education. And what
we see here in this building is not only the beginning of a ten-year plan of
great significance for this RMIT College of Advanced Education, but is an
example of what is happening through the length and breadth of Australia
in these kinds of institutions. So that in Ballarat, in the Gordon Institute
of Technology, in Bendigo, in every capital city from Rockhampton to
Kalgoorlie, these buildings are going up to serve the requirements of
students who want practical education as well as liberal education and to
serve the requirements of this nation now and in the future.
Mr. Chairman, I think that in the last four or five years or
so, there has been a great advance in the provision for education in Australia.
We have, for example, taking the Commonwealth Government alone, reached
~ astage where we are providing $ 17 a head of population for education,
whereas some years ago it was
The capital requirements alone for buildings such as this,
for universities, for science laboratories in schools, for libraries in schools
totalled some $ 248 M. and adding in all the scholarships that have beer,
brought newly in or expanded, the Australian Government, without
mentioning State Governments, is spending some $ 210 M. a year on
education. Indeed, Mr. President, I can say with some pride to quote
a phrase I seem to have read some time ago that the Australian
Government is " poking its bib into education" in quite a significant way
and to the good of the nation as a whole. / 2 
-2
Mr, President, it was some eighty years ago, I believe, that
~"~; Francis Ormond started this College and set the ball rolling, and at that
tietrade unionists subscribed half a crown a head to the capital required
to begin what has now grown and is now growing into a magriificant institution.
And half a crown a head i those days for a trade unionist was no small
Isum of money. It must be as much satisfaction to you, Sir, as it is to me
to see that on the Representative Council of this College the Trades Union
Council is still represented, and may it continue to be so represented.
We will not really know in Australia what the end results
of this will be for some few years. We must wait to see what the reports
are, coming back from industry in Australia. But that there is a requirement
for this kind of education cannot be argued against. Let's take 6ne example
only. The Mining Industry Council just recently pointed out that there would
be a need for twice as many engineers in 1972 in Australia as there is today,
and these, these practical engineers must come from colleges such as this.
iThat is but one example of the requirements of technical education which
V must be allied with a liberal education at the same time.
Sir, you are not, as I said before, embarked on a competitive
or a collision course with universities. Rather you are developing an
alternative system, and I believe it is up to everybody sitting here today,
and indeed everybody standing here today, particularly if they come from
this college and not from outside, to endeavour to sell as hard as is possible
the great requirement for graduates from this kind of college and the great
contribution they can make to our national life.
But it does not, it must not mean that the education here
provided is narrower than the education provided in established universities.
All it means, and what it must mean is that the twig, as it were, is being
bent so that it grows into a great strong tree of as great significance and
able to contribute as much as can any tree grown on any established
university campus. This is something new and an example of progress
that is happening. But it is only a beginning. It is, of course, only a
beginning in the active development of educational systems in Australia
Igenerally. We are here, I think, breaking out with this concept from
the conventions of the past, from the conventions applying to education in
the past, good though they were, strong though they must continue to be.
* Nevertheless, new times demand new thinking and new ways, and from
these colleges new thinking and new ways will, I believe, come. This we
are trying to provide but its success will depend on those going through
the colleges and what they get out of them and what they will contribute to
the nation after they have finished. / 3 
-3-
Mr. President, I believe that this college can do a great deal
to see that the concept is successful. And I am delighted to see that your
Department Advisory Committee includes representatives of all branches
of industry, because this will help to spread throughout Victoria what the
Victorian Government, our own Government and you are trying to do.
Sir, I believe this that from this new concept will come
students with the skills we require, the more highly developed skills we
require and the cultivated minds that individuals require so that they will
be able to go out into the nation and work in a field they wish to work in,
in which they can develop their own personality, in which they can contribute
to their own satisfaction and to the growth of this country to which they
belong.
b I now declare this building the Casey Building open. 



FIVE POWER CONFERENGJ! ." C
Parliament House, Canberra. K
19 june, 1969
OPENI: NG ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MiNISTER-, MIR jOIN GORTON
Gentlemen: What am doing now is outside the Conference proper but
it is something which gives me great satisfaction to do. That is, in the
first place, to have the opportunity to welcome here in Canberra, the
capital of Australia, distinguished Prime Ministers, Foreign Ministers
and Defence Ministers and those who have come with them, and to say
that we are fully conscious of the honour which is done us by your travelling
to confer in our country.
1 think we have come together because we have a common
interest a common interest in the economic progress of the region
in which we live and in which we ha-ve been, and I trust will continue to be,
interested. I believe we all think the economic progress of this region
must be reflected not only in bank statistics or statistics as to the
holding of foreign exchange or matters of that kind, but must be reflected
in an improved standard of living of the individual citizens who make up
the countries of the region.
And 1 believe that all of us think and I certainly think that
this kind of progress can best occur ( now that the situation is completely
changed from what it was previously because of the British decision to
withdraw), that this progress can best occur as a result of continuing
stability within the region, and as a result of all countries present,
including Britain, contributing to military forces which can help to defend
the region against external attack.
Stability within the region, that sine qua non, that requirement
for the proper progress of the region, will depend on the absence of
attacks or threatened attacks by any nation within or close to the region
against any other nation within or close to the region. It will depecnd on
the dim-inution and ultimate elimination of racial tensions in nations
within the region. It will depend on the creation of communities in each nation
in which all citizens have, and are seen to have, the same opportunities
for advancement in any chosen field of endeavour which the individual
may wish to enter. And it will depend on growing and more widelyshared
prosperity. 2 
-2
The defence of the region against outside attack external
attack will depend, I think, on the full acceptance of the fact that the
defence of Malaya and Singapore is indivisible, and on the acceptance of
the requirements the general planning, the provision of assistance, and
the acceptance of the req uirements which flow from the acceptance of
that basic fact. Our own approach, our Australian approach is, I hope and
believe, well known. We wish to co-operate with countries in our region
and to help when we can in all the ways in which we can*. I believe that
in fact we are doing so, though there is always room for argument as to
whether we are doing so to the extent which others might wish. Still, . we
are doing so, and for the reasons I have given.
One of the ways in which we decided to do so is by the ret ention
of some Australian forces in the area, a visible presence, a continuing
visible presence, a presence which has been described not by me but
I see the validity of the description as something which may appear to
others -at any rate to be the tip of the iceberg. We are retaining ground
forces which will, for the best military, logistic and financial reasons
and for great reasons of commonsense, be based in Singapore, provided
Singapore wishes them to remain in the area; forces which will not,
however, be confined to operations or exercises in Singapore, forces
which are there under the concept that defence against external attack
is, as far as Singapore and Malaya are concerned, in our view indivisible.
And we are retaining, as you know, air forces which will be
based in Malaya, provided the Malaysian Government wishes us to
remain in Malaysia, and provided, in the case of our ground forces tha
the Government of Singapore wishes us to remain ! u the best place to
base our troops, namely, Singapore.
These forces have the objective of assisting and I emphasise
the word assisting in defence against external aggression or subversion
which can be clearly seen to stem from -without the region and can be
clearly seen to be supported by external regimes. And our forces are
there for no other purpose. The maintenance of i ' nternal order in any
country or the involvement in internal quarrels in any country are not,
and will not be, our business.
I don't envisage that this meeting will arrive at the acceptance
of firm m-ilitary plans for operations or that it will attempt to lay down
firm conditions, and spelt-out circumstances under which the various / 3 
-3
forces which are available to assist against external aggression will
be used, Indeed, I think it will be better for this not to be done and
not to be attempted to be done,' but rather that general understandings
will be reached and actual decisions on the use of forces left to be made
on each country's judgment of circumstances as they may . arise in the
future. But I do believe and hope that this meeting will advance
further the general concept of Five Powers being interested in providing
assistance for a most significant region against attacks which may
develop against that region from outside. I hope this meeting will
advance planning on such things as radar control of aircraft; advance
planning on such things as the joint exercises which may, and I sincerely
hope will, continue to take place after the end of 1971.
1 also hope this meeting will advance still further the idea
that not from Australia, New Zealand or Great Britain alone, but that
from Singapore and from Malaysia as well, there will be a capacity
for joint opposition to any external threat which may arise and a full
acceptance of the fact that the countries in the region I include
ourselves and New Zealand in my mind will jointly exercise; will
jointly be prepared to resist ( again in each case subject to the judgments
of each individual around this table or rather of each government
represented by the individuals around this table) any external threat
which may arise. I do not think that I should, in making brief opening comments
at this meeting, make any long speech. But given conditions of
brotherhood inside the countries of the region, given conditions of
progress because of stability inside the countries of this region, then
we, all of us, have a duty to try to see to the best of the ability of
each of us, that this progress and this stability is not endangered from
w itho~ ut. If the task, as is possible who can tell what the future
holds if the task, as is possible, might at some future time become
great, greater than the resources all of us are able to put together to
counter, then we would hope and expect that there would be others that
would come to our assistance. But whether that be so or whether it be
not, if this conference does advance further concrete practical plans for
how to operate, how to command, how to control joint forces, then I
think it will have made a step forward. Not the only step because the
protection of existing regimes or the protection of governments of individual
countries, including mine, is not dependent in the last resource on 4 
-4-
force but rather on the judgment of all the individuals that make up
those countries that they are well off comparatively and are therefore
prepared to fight to retain that comparative position if it is threatened
but one significant step.
This, I think, is what this meeting is about, and I wish it
God-speed in its deliberations. I believe that because of the calibre
of those sitting around this table, either leading the countries which
they represent or playing the most significant part in the defence
plans of the countries which they represent, that there is every hope
that this conference will achieve what it sets out to achieve That in
great degree is up to you.
And the measure of the success which you achieve in the next
two days will be shown by events which occur in the next ten or fifteen
years in the countries to our North and be shown by the effect on the
world because there will be a significant effect on the world, including
Europe of what happens in the next ten or fifteen years in this region.
I wish you gentlemen the best of luck and I believe that not
only my own prayers and the prayers of Australians, but that indeed the
prayers of all whether they be Moslems, whether they be Buddhists,
whether they be Christians, whatever they be, are with you in your
deliberations, and I trust will sustain you ii them. 



0 JUL W9
GREAT SYNAGOGUE LUNCHEON
SYDNEY, N. S. W. JUNE 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
It is pleasant to be here and to talk to you at this luncheon;
to talk to you as Australians of the Jewish faith. I have long believed
your actions in the past and the present show that your community is not
an alien community any more than those who attend St. Andrew's Day
Dinners, or those perhaps more closely akin to my own forbears on one
side who wear green on St. Patrick Day. Mind you, I'm Church of
England I just want to make that clear:
But rather are we Australians a people who have, over the
years, come together from all corners of the world with differing religions,
with differing cultures, with differing customs, with different histories to
which we can look back but which should not condition all our thinking.
For while history is what is past, in one sense, it also beckons to us to
make it in the future in another sense. And a nation made of those who
come from so many different areas, from those who come with so many
different cultures, from those who have so many different things to
contribute, must be richer, must be more able to bend the course of
future history to its requirements, not as fragmented peoples, but as a
nation and a people embracing all. And because I believe this is your
belief and because I think in this approach lies true greatness for Australia
in the future, this is why I said it was such pleasure for me to talk to you
today. I have been called a nationalist, sometimes by my opponents
who tend to twist this in a way I think it should not be twisted, but I am
proud to admit to being a nationalist. I think that the future of this country
requires we should all have a national identity, national goals, national
aims and national pride. This should not be something shutting out the
rest of the world because of our nationalism, for that would be to wrap
ourselves up in a small parcel indeed and wrap out all the rest of the world.
But rather it should be something creating as a nation, having a national
pride, having something we can contribute to the general community of
nations in our own right and of our own identity for the good of all, much
as those members of a family, each with different capacities, each with
difference approaches, each with different personalities, can contribute
from themselves to the general family, as we can contribute to the family
of the world. / 2 
-2
But to do that there is a need to meet requirements inside
this country competing requirements, all of which cannot be met, or at
least all of which cannot be met at once. It is easy enough seeing the needs
that lie before us in all the various fields, it is easy enough to promise
that they will all be done and they will all be done at once, but it is impossible
to deliver on that promise and all men of sense known that this must be
true. Let me sketch out for you some of the problems lying before
us, calling for manpower, calling for capital, calling for technological
expertise and you will see what I mean by competing claims.
First, I suppose because this is the rock on which
development and indeed existence must evemrally depend first is the
requirement for our own national security and our own national defence
against possible attack. History shows that no matter what a period may
indicate to people, those who neglect security, those who neglect defence,
do so ultimately at their own peril. And so we must devote a proportion
of our manpower, a proportion of our resources, a proportion of our
thought to building up defence forces ( insofar as a nation of twelve million
can), and to forming alliances with greater countries who, seeing that we
are prepared to help ourselves, will be prepared to come and help us in
time of need. And we must, I believe, become involved in the region in
which we live so that to the north of us, countries will see that we care
about them, that we will help them not only economically, n~ ot only with
aid, not only with training, but also that we are prepared to help them
should they be attacked themselves.
But here I want to make some qualifications. Up until now,
we have been in a situation where we contributed because the defence of
these regions to our north was the responsibility of Britain as, at the
moment and for some short time ahead, it still will be. The responsibility
for the defence was Britain's. She accepted that responsibility and sought
assistance from the local populations. We cannot do that. We cannot take
over responsibility for the defence of these areas and look for assistance
from the local population. Rather is it our task to expect the local
populations to assist themselves and to be ready to contribute to that
joint defence, and this is the great difference between what was and what
will be. In doing that and we have decided to do that we are, I think,
acting in Australia's interests.
But we are not giving blank cheques for the use of Australian
youth by others. Our forces must be under our control. We are not giving
a blank cheque for the use of Australian youth and the killing of Australian
youth unless we are sure that this is done to prevent aggression, to prevent
attack, and not done merely as an involvement in racial conflicts in a
particular area. And it is well, and necessary, that everybody should
understand this, because then there can be no danger in the future of any
breach of faith. This has been made clear. This is one call upon our
resources. 
3-
We have another in a sense a corollary with the first; the
need to develop. We need to see that our mines come into production, that
our factories are stocked with the latest machinery with the latest
technological expertise, and with the latest scientific approach. We need
to see that our factories extend and that we become a nation of industrial
muscle, of strength within ourselves. This cannot be done quickly unless
we attract from abroad large sums of capital and large numbers of people
so that the requirements that I have spelt out can be met. This is being
done, it must continue, it must be another call or, our Government resources
because these things require that governments should put in roads, should
put in power plants, should put in water supplies, should put in the ancillary
requirements for such development should even, sometimes, please God,
put in sewerage: But here, too, it is necessary ( having said this and believing
it completely) to seek to ensure that these new developments will in their
beginning be required to offer to the Australian people some chance of
participation, This offer of some ownership by Australians should be made
at the start, so that as these enterprises grow, as Australia grows, then
the value of that initial participation will remain with Australians unless
they choose themselves to sell it to somebody else.
I used the word " offer". We are not going to be able in
Australia to provide from our own resources all the capital that is
required for all the development we need. I doubt if we are going to be able
to provide from within Australia all the capital that is required for half of
the development we need in the space of time in which we need it. But we
can supply varying proportions to varying industries and we wish, and have
let it be known that we expect that offers will be made for Australian equity
participation in new developments, or in expanded development, and if those
offers are not taken up, then that is Australia's fault and must not be allowed
to inhibit progress. This is another great call on our manpower and on our
resources and on our capital.
I haven't yet touched on many other areas because I do
believe, and you will know that I have said this, that it is necessary for a
great country not only to have industrial muscles, not only to be materially
great but to take care of those within it. In particular, I am speaking of
those who, their own race having been run, having reached a certain age,
ought to be able to live with some peace and some human dignity at the
hands of their fellow Australians. There ought to be provision so that if
some woman loses her husband and has a young family to bring up, that
family has the same chances of education, of clothing, and of food, as they
would have had had that woman's husband not died. / 4 
-4
And there is too an increasingly evident requirement that
if citizens contribute during their working life to their own security, their
own living after they retire, then they should not find themselves in a
situation where they may be no. better off, and possibly even worse off
than citizens existing solely on a pension paid by the State. This, I hasten
to say, is not to be assumed to be any suggestion of abolishing the means
test, because it isn't. It is merely a suggestion that there is an area of
unfairness, an area of injustice, and that area of unfairness and injustice
is one to which we must direct our minds. But this, too, calls for a great
deal of our resources, a great deal of the taxes which you pay.
And so, too, do demands for better education which we all
want at least so do the calls for more money for education, which is not
necessarily the same thing. But more money for education and a
requirement that is directed towards better education call upon our resources,
as do calls for better hospital services, better roads, and for many things
which you appreciate and with which I will not weary you by enumerating.
Another factor is the calls, the heartfelt calls for no higher taxation to
meet all these requirements indeed for lower taxes if it is at all possible.
And there is some justice well not justice, I'm not going
to u--e that word but there is some sense in this because taxes must not
get to a stage where they inhibit initiative, where they prevent the rewards
for extra effort; because in this case we could not meet the other
requirements which I have already mentioned. Wellt these are all calls.
And there is the requirement to see that inflation is not allowed, because
if it is, then we are merely kidding ourselves that we are advancing without
in fact advancing at all. In a nation where less than one per cent is
unemployed, in a nation where our resources and goods are used to their
fullest as they are now, Lhe answer is not just issuing more money but
rather more capital, more people and more effort from all sections of this
community. Well, there will be arguments as to the priorities amongst
the things I have mentioned and the many others you can add. They are
right and proper arguments, but there can be no argument as to what I
said initially that should anybody promise all these things all at once
he will not be able to deliver on that promise. And as it is necessary that
there should be these arguments as to priorities, then clearly they should
be stated and judged by the people of Australia. And this is the course
which we will follow and which, indeed, we have endeavoured to follow.
It may take time it will take time to attain the goals of
full social justice, to attain the goals of proper educational facilities, of
roads which suit everybody, of hospitals which can care properly and
cheaply for all the population, and for all the other things I have mentioned.
But surely the proper course for a nation to follow and this is the one
that we will try to follow is to set the goals, advance towards each one 
and of necessity, realising the constrictions I have spoken of, advance
over a period of time towards each one. This is inevitable, but with the
nation knowing what the ultimate goals are and the steps that are hoped to
be taken to reach them. This is what I regard as a prudent and proper
and honest approach to the Australian people and this is the one we have
been following and will follow. And this is the one, I think, most men of
good sense and judgment will accept as the proper course for an Australian
Government. Indeed, to finish, Sir, where I began, and to add one other
reason for my pleasure in speaking to you this afternoon, it is because I
think there would be within this hall such men of good judgment, of good
sense, of proper approach as would agree with and would support what we
have done and what we propose to do. Sir, we will make mistakes in the
years as we approach these problems. That is inevitable, for no man, no
woman, no government is perfect. But should such mistakes be made, they
will be honest mistakes. They will be admitted. They will be rectified.
And that, I think, is what the nation of Australia wants. At any rate, I
hope so, and I thank you for the chance of speaking to you. 



69/ 102
YOUNG LIBERAL RALLY
Caulfield Town Hall, Caulfield, Victoria 4 JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
It is a great pleasure to be introduced by a President who
is obviously a scholar and a gentleman, and who has very great insight
into my own mind sufficient to enable him to write what I actually fee!
about the activities of the Young Liberals.
And it is nice to be here at a period which was described
by your President as a period of change. Because, you know, " the times
they are a-changing", and how they change is going to be, I suppose in the
first place, up to those of us who are now in the Federal Parliament or in
the State Parliaments. But that is going to be influenced by what you think,
not much influenced by what the Young Labor Movement thinks or the
other people, but by what you think. And the directions that the changes
may take are going to be of enormous importance to you as you get older
and to the children that you want to grow up in a great Australia.
I don't think that I have known a time when change is more
in the air, both in our external policies and in our internal reappraisals
of things which have for so long been taken for granted. It is a time when
statements never previously questioned are increasingly subject to
analysis and criticism. And, if I may say so, this is one of the healthiest
things that can happen in a democracy.
Let's look at some of the ways in which the times are
changing. Let's first take the changes in our relations with the external
world and peoples and countries outside of our own. We all grew up I
grew up and all of my generation grew up and, indeed, our sons grew up
in a world in which we in Australia were protected by Great Britain. We
grew up in a world where countries to our near North which are now
household words, Malaysia which includes a peninsula called Malaya!
and Singapore were ruled by Great Britain. Indonesia was a colony of the
Dutch. French Indo-China embraced Laos, Cambodia, North Vietnam and
South Vietnam. There were no new countries in that region no selfgoverning
countries in that region. Indeed, India itself was governed from
Great Britain, and the protection and the peace of all that area of the world
rested on the might of the British Navy and on that great major power which
Britain used to be. / 2
ILI, 
-2 / 3
We, ourselves, had no need to worry about our own security
because it was guaranteed. We had no need to worry about our relationships
with newly-independent nations because there weren't any. We had no need
to be concerned with the region in which we lived because the region was a
variety of colonial states. And so in those for us fairly easy days, we didn't
have to look to our own security. In between wars, we didn't bother to keep
anything but the sketchiest of a standing army or navy or air force. When
the calls came, when our protector, Great Britain, was embroiled in some
struggle in the world, then we responded responded in the Boer War, in
the First World War and in the Second World War. But in between times,
we didn't bother. We didn't need to. We didn't have to.
And although since the end of the Second World War now
what is it, 24 years away there have been these enormous changes to
our north, it is only recently that the changes have really been brought
home. This is because that power to which we previously looked for the
protection of which I have spoken has said it is going from this area, and
we must look, therefore, more than ever before, to ourselves and not to
assistance from Great Britain. So we look for new allies, we look to build
up our own defences and, above all, we look to participate with the other
new peoples around us with the peoples of Indonesia, of Malaysia, of
Singapore, of the Philippines to try in a co-operative way to improve the
economic growth of these countries. Our aim must be to improve the
income per head of these countries, to see that the improvements which
flow from new technical advances, from new scientific approaches and
from better business management are passed down the line, from the
generals and the colonels and the majors and the captains, so that, if
may so phrase it, the privates, the ordinary people in these countries,
will see each year that there is a little more cloth for their families, a
little more food a window into the future offering hope. This is something
we have never had to do before until the times changed, but something which
is a great challenge and a great inspiration to us, I believe. If we can do
this, then we will not only be helping them but helping ourselves and
helping our region by seeing that there is a stable, progressive, happy
community built up in this part of the world.
And the times are also changing in other ways. In the early
days of Australia's history, it was Britain who sent the migrants to Australia,
sometimes unwillingly in the early stages of our history, but who sent them
to Australia. And it was British business houses that provided the capital
for Australian industry, British business houses which bought the great
cattle stations and which bought the land and which helped to develop our
country almost exclusively. But now we are taking, to our immense
benefit, and have been taking for some considerable time, people from
many countries in the world from Hungary, from Poland, from Greece, 
3-
There is another field, and although you are a long way
from requiring any assistance of the kind of which I am talking, I believe
you are interested in it. There is another field in which the times are
changing. There was a time when, without question, it was felt that
somebody whose race of life was run and who had reached an age of
retirement should be given some assistance from the State. But the
approach was that this assistance should be merely some supplement
to what the family could do for an aged person, or some supplement to
the savings an aged person had been able to make. And this attitude
persisted not only for aged people but for widows or for those who were
*/ 4
JA' fom Italy, from Turkey, from England, from the United States. From
Iaolv er the world new citizens have been coming to us with their different
cultures, with their different histories, with their different aspirations,
with their new ways of cooking food we have gone from the days of steak
and eggs! with their appreciation of a glass of wine with a meal, with
their appreciation of different music, all adding a richness to the texture
of our national life which, twenty years ago, we scarcely knew. And this
is, I think, an essential for the building of any great nation -that there
should be such an amalgam, that there should be so many different strands
in this single strong rope of national existence.
But one of the other changes which is co-existent with this
is that we have begun to feel I think we have all begun to feel that while
we still wish and must have this capital that Britain used to send us from
abroad, we have reached a stage where we want, as a nation, as individuals,
to have a chance to participate in the new developments taking place in
Australia. I don't want to see young Liberals, when they reach the age of
forty, or the sons and daughters of young Liberals, living in a country
where all the major developments are owned by overseas interests, where
the growth that those developments will experience, because of the growth
of Australia, is not shared with Australians. And I think it has become
well known now to those who have the capital and who are prepared to
provide it, that they have a stable place in which to invest, but that we
would like them to offer a chance to Australians to participate at the
beginning of any great new development. And if such people wish to borrow
money here to increase the development in which they are engqzged, then I
think that the opportunity for such fixed interest borrowing should be in
some way related to the opportunity they have given for equity participation
by Australians. That's all. If an opportunity is given for participation
I and is not accepted by Australians, then that's too bad. Let the development
go ahead in any case, but let the opportunity be offered to us. And I am
glad to say that more and more that opportunity is being provided by those
from abroad who can give us the financial sinews from which we can develop
our industrial muscles. But in a sense, this is an indication of change for
this approach, I think, has not been so often enunciated before as it is now. 
yelc -4
in some other way handicapped. I think there is a different approach in
fif Australia now. If there isn't, there ought to be and there will be. The
approach should be rather, not this is just a supplement to what a family
can do, but that there is a requirement in a civ ilised nation and a great
nation to provide adequately for those who have been unable to provide for
themselves so that they can live with a modicum of decency and without
the fear of hunger and cold. This is a change that must be persevered with.
How else are the times changing? Of course they are changing
in the sense that there has never been as great a number of people employed
so little unemployment in Australia as there is today. There has never
been as great a spate of development as there is in Australia today of
course tnat s true. Flow else are they chanig~
One of the interesting facets of change is this question of
0* dissent of which I think, Sir, you spoke. This is quite a fascinating subject
~. J~ And one which must engage our minds. If anybody were to say to me " Are
you in favour of dissent", the first answer I would have to give is, " How
do I know until I know what you are dissenting against?". I might be in
favour of something and therefore I wouldn't want myself to go out and
dissent against it. But if anybody were to say to me, " Are you in favour
of people being able to express dissent?", then there can only be one answer.
That is, " Yes, one must defend the right of people to express dissent".
As Voltaire said, " I disagree with what you say, but I will defend to the
death your right to say it". So one must agree with the right of people to
express dissent. But then if one goes further and says, " Do you agree
that the right to express dissent carries with it the right to violence,
carries with it the right to destruction", then there can only be one answer
and that is, If people come along to a political meeting of any kind
and seek to drown out the speaker and seek to prevent him putting his Views
before the community, then they are not expressing dissent. They are
expressing a fascist approach and they are denying the right of free speech.
And if people congregate together with banners, they may, if they are
peacefully exhibiting those banners, be properly expressing dissent; but
if they congregate together and seek to attack a particular building or a
particular person or to block the right of ordinary citizens to use a road,
then again they are not expressing dissent. They are denying liberty to
their fellow citizens. And this perhaps will be a question which will need
closely to be examined by the community.
We have seen some examples of this kind of violence of
which I have spoken. It can only have two outcomes. Either it leads to
counter-violence, as we saw in Germany, when one group who were
dedicated to preventing their opponents expressing an opinion clashed
violently with those who thought they had that right, and there were armed
clashes in the street something we cannot tolerate. Or alternatively,
4SAr4_ 41-1 
it can lead to the imposition of some kind of fascist, communist or
authoritarian regime. And it is necessary that all our people should clearly
know and clearly believe that dissent does not and cannot be allowed to
extend to the use of violence, or to the denial of freedom of expression.
We have never had this kind of problem in Australia before but that it is
with us now I think there are few of you would deny.
Let's look at another area of change. I spoke a little while
ago of the great development now taking place in this land of ours. I don't
know how many of you in this hall have been to Western Australia, have
seen Port Hedland, Mt. Newman, Mt. Tom Price, have seen the place
where Australians are laying each day a record length of railway line.
Or how many of you have seen or felt the excitement in the air of the new
frontiers, or how many have been to Cove, or how many have been to
Weipa or Groote Eylandt or all the areas in Australia where great new
advances are being made. But I do urge all of you who have the opportunity,
who may have the opportunity in the future, to go to these places, to seize
that opportunity with both hands. You will find it rewarding financially,
because the wages paid there are very great. You won't find it uncomfortable
as frontiers used to be, because now people live in air-conditioned houses
and have supermarkets and swimming pools and they can be quite delightful
places to live. But you will find that they have an air of growth, an
excitement of growth, a general feeling which draws out from the individual,
I believe, this response: " Here is a place where I can contribute. Here
is a place where if I do something it will benefit not only me but the country
in which I live and the other citizens of the country in which I live".
And this brings me to the last subject I wish briefly to
discuss under this title: " The Times They are A-Changing". There was
a time when those who were born in Caulfield tended to grow up in Caulfield
and retire in Caulfield. Those born in Malvern did the same. There was
little travel in this nation of ours. There was little knowledge of the other
parts of this nation. There was some interstate rivalry, some interstate
jealousy but little feeling of national identity, except in time of war. And
how that has changed, with the movement from State to State of those
working for big companies, of those working in the public service, of those
serving in the armed forces, of those who merely want a change. There
has now grown up in Australia a population which spends some time in
Melbourne, some in Sydney, some in Brisbane and some in the country, and
sees the nation as a whole. This change, I think, has brought about a climate
where we are all feeling much more than we have ever felt before, not
that we live just for a municipality or for a city or for a state, but for a
country, a nation which is already incipiently great and which is without
doubt going to be a really great nation. / 6 
6-
And there is a feeling, I think, of pleasure and pride in
Victoria at the great iron ore developments in Western Australia or the
bauxite development in Queensland or the new developments in Mt. isa.
And there is a feeling of pleasure and pride in Western Australia at the
Bass Strait oil and gas discoveries because there is a feeling this benefits
all of us from wherever it may come, from wherever it is found it is in
our country that it is found. It benefits all of us, it gives us all a chance
to be richer as a nation. This is new, compared with twenty years; this
is to be encouraged and I hope will be developed with your help.
We will be a great industrial nation without doubt. We will,
given proper compassion for those who are ill and sick, given proper
opportunities to help others, be not only great materially but greater
spiritually than we have been before. On the way we will need to work.
On the way we will need to put in great effort. On the way, I hope we will
keep a sense of humour and keep a knowledge that while effort is required,
that while national unity is required, while hard work is required, yet
there mumt be tirfie for laughter. and for gaiety and for song. And there
must be a goal of giving an opportunity to each individual among us to
develop his own capacities for his own purposes, to use the gifts he may
have, whether they are as a great musician, a great actor, a great business
tycoon, a great scientist, a great teacher. In whatever direction, to use
those gifts to the top of his bent for his benefit as a human being and for
the benefit of a nation.
You will help us in this. You are helping us in this. The
future is in your hands. This is why, Sir, you were so right when you
said how pleased I was to come and talk to the Young Liberals and what
an appreciation I had of the contribution they have to make and have made
to this nation of ours. 



69/ 1f03
ANNUAL LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
WA. DIVISION
PERTH, WA. 7 JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr President, Parliamentary Colleagues and Delegates:
It is an honour for me to technically open this Conference
of West Australian Liberals.
As you say, Sir, I have been here, I think on five I am
told on five I think on six occasions since becoming Prime Minister.
I will certainly be back before the elections and while the elections are
on and, given your assistance, I would expect to be back as Prime
Minister after the elections are over.
After all, this is a really exciting part of a really exciting
nation. Here, Sir, I think you are taking something like ttrnce the
national average of migrants and the population here is growing at
something like twice the national average. Here we have a part of
Australia which is already contributing enormously to our total
mineral exports and which nothing can stop contributing in even
greater measure in the years to come.
You must feel it yourself, the excitement in the air in
Perth; though that is nothing compared with the excitement in the air
in Port Hedland, in Mt Tom Price, and in the other new frontiers of
this developing State. There is an enormous future which has just
begun for Western Australia, and that is not to be regarded as merely
a future for Western Australia but for Australia as a whole.
I wonder what it; is that brings you, as Liberal delegates,
to a meeting of this kind. What is it that you want to see happen in
this country? What is it that you want to see the Members you support
and the Government you put in office do? There will, of course, be
on matters of detail different answers from different individuals, but
there must be some basic overriding consensus of what you wish to
happen in Australia, of what you wish a Government to do for
Australia. Because you don't go out, I am sure, merely to elect a 2/ o 
Mr Smith or Mr Jones or Mr Robinson to some particular seat. You
must, and have, a reason for seeking a particular representative of
a particular philosophy. And I want to talk a little tonight of what I
think motivates you people to see that the sort of Government you want
is in office in Australia.
I suppose first of all you want to see a continuation of a
climate which a Government can create a climate which enables Individuals
in Australia to take their risks in a developing coun~ try, to use their
initiati-t~ s, to, take their losses if thuy fail, and star-t again, and to take their
gains if they succeed without being envied by others. Because this is
the sort of climate which permits to individuals the greatest possible
area of freedom to experiment, to build new businesses, to try new
developments. In that climate, and in that climate alone, can a
country quickly and properly and to the benefit of its citizens grow
rich and prosperous and give to its citizens the chance of self
fulfilment. So it is, I think, that climate, as opposed to the idea the
socialist idea that the individual exists to serve the state that you
want to see in the Government you elect in Australia. But you want
to see other things too. You want to see other things done as a result
of that climate being created and these are the ones that I see as
important. And these are the ones I believe you see as important.
Firstly, you must wish to look to the defence and security
of Australia. We are not under any imminent threat of invasion or
attack, nor can I envisage myself in the decade ahead that we would
be under such imminent threat. But history shows that a nation which
does not look to its own defences and its own security even in times of
peace fails to do so at its peril. And the pages of history, and receltt
history, show hations which thought they were safe, and because they
didn't contribute to that safety, found out too late they we:--e noDt cafe at
all. So you would wish us, I think, to regard this as the rock on which
all other development, and indeed our existence, mustC~ pend.
To do this, we must look to our own defences, though the
defences which can be called in to being by a nation of 12 million are
not great. Yet we must look to our own defences and be able to be
seen in the world to be taking a serious and a real approach to our own
security. And we must also look beyond ourselves. We must, as you
know we have done, become involved in the region to our North. This
is the region in which we live, the region in which in the future we must
0 
continue to live; and we must help that region technically, economically,
by opening the avenues of trade and by doing all we can to increase the
standards of living of the peoples in that region. For in that way lies
ukimately the greatest defence. But we must also show our readiness
to participate in the defence of that region against external attack. And
this we have done, and this I believe you would wish us to do.
When I say " participate in the defence of that regioii', I mean,
precisely, participate in it. Up until the present and for a little while to
come, Britain has taken full responsibility for the defence of the region
to our North. She has accepted that responsibility as a major power.
She has looked for assistance to the people in the region themselves, to
those in Malaysia and in Singapore; and she has looked to us and she
has looked to New Zealand, and she has not looked in vain. But we
cannot take over that overriding responsibility and that must be clear to
all.
0 We can join in, and will join in concerted efforts against
external attack, but we cannot take over the full responsibility that
Britain had. And that is the difference between what was, and for a
little while is, but what in the future will not be. I believe you would
wish us to do this. I believe you would see it as sensible. I believe
you would see the stationing of our air force on the peninsula of
M~ alaya and the stationing of our troops in Singapore as visible evidence
of this interest, of this willingness to participate, and as tt. e only real
way in which such visible interest can be shown.
This is one great difference between ourselves and our
opponents, for they would reject what I have just put to you. They
would say we should not do this. Rather would they adopt a jack-inthe-
box policy of shooting some troops up and then bringing them back
.9 and then shooting them up and briaging them back on the premise of
now-you-see-' em-now-you-dork; a proposition which is as psychologically
inept as it is logistically absurd, and which in fact would mean no real
readiness to partic ipate in the defence of the region at all. This is one
great difference and this is one clear-cuLc difference.
But also in this area of defence, we must look to alliances
with major powers. Britain will come to our assistance, I am sure, but
the major assistance I think we must look for now is from the United
States. We have an understanding and an undertaking that that
assistance will come under the ANZUS Pact, but we would not wish as
a Government, and you would not wish, I believe, as an Australian
people that we should expect to get that assistance in time of peril,
without ourselves contributing to Zue. alliance which promises us that
o 4/. 
assistance. There is another major difference between ourselves
and our opponents. We are prepared to contribute to a joint defence.
We are prepared to participate in such installations as North-West
Cape, Pine Gap or Woomera because'they are for our joint protection.
But our opponents would not be prepared to do that. They would seek
only to take and not to contribute because there might be perhaps some
small danger in contributing. I do not believe that any alliance which
seeks only to take and not to give will be a lasting alliance or a lasting
security for this country. And in this field, which I have rated so
important, these are the great differences between what I believe and
hope you wish, and what I know our opponents would destroy.
Then, what next? What more? What other things are
uppermost in your mind. I venture to say that development of this
nation, continued and accelerated development, is one of the major
W things you wish to seethappen. Yet because at the moment there is
virtually no unemployment at all in Australia, which means that all
the labour available is e mployed in one field or another, in private
enterprise development or government development but employed
there is no unused labour on which to call for accelerated development.
So there must be a continued effort to bring in more migrants to this
country and to beat the record number of migrants which this year wil 1
see coming to these shores. This is one of the essentials of continued
and accelerated development.
The other, of course, is the provision of capital to enable
labour and capital to work together. Her-w e cannot possibly hope to
generate from within our own savings and within our own community
sufficient capital to develop this country as quickly as it must be
developed. I believe we could not possibly hope to generate from
within our own savings even half as much capital as is required for
our future development. So we : must continue, as we have done, to
look to overseas capital to flow here to enable the strength of this
country to grow and to enable the industrial and material capacity of
this nation to increase.
Yet, at the same time, we would wish as a government,
and I believe that you would wish, that the maximum opportunityfor
Australian participation in this growth and development should be
offered to the Australian people, preferably at the beginning of a
development, but certainly as that development progresses. It is
impossible, of course, and it would be ridiculous to try to say that
there must be a specific proportion of Australian ownership or some
0
goe' 
I think that it is cynical in the extreme,
extreme, to talk about abolishing the means test.
$ 150 million more for social services, and that is improper in the
For if there is to
what ultimately the
o. 6/.
4
.4 development can't go ahead. But if it is known abroad that an Australian
Government wishes and expects that an opportunity for Australian
participation will be offered to the Australi; n people then I believe that,
knowing what a government wants and tenZ i-es--onsible, those grvat
companies will do what they are already daiiw and that is offer more
and more~ opportunit5es for iequity pz-rt!, ipation in dc2velop--m-nt. And
this we will seek to bring about.
This is not putting curbs on the flow of capital into Australia.
This, I believe, will not frighten off any capital from Australia. For
given a politically stable country such as we are, and given the opportunity
of full profits from an investment of capital, then I believe that capital
will come here and will not be deterred by the request that an offer should
be made of some participation in that development. And it is important
that this should happen because in fifty years, developments which now
begin will, as this country grows, grow with it, and the assets and the
value and the worth of these developments will, in fifty years' time, be
immensely greater than they are now. And there should be a chance for
Australians to own and participate in some of that growth in their own
country. So I believe that you would wish to see, and we will do our best
to see this happens an increasing flow of labour, an increasing flow of
capital, an increasing chance of Australian participation in that material
development of which I have spoken to you.
What else should a community require? What else do Liberal
supporters seek from their Government? To my mind, having spoken of
material things, one of the requirements you wouid wish a requiremnnnt
essential if a nation is to be truly great is proper care of the aged, the
widowed, the children of widows, the ill and the handicapped amongst us.
That will require, an d has indeed called forth, careful analysis of our
social services system as it at present exists, in an endeavour to
isolate the areas of greatest need and give more assistance to those areas,
And, at the same time we must deal with a problem which is wih us now
and which in the future will grow, and that is the problem posed by those
who during their lives have themselves saved in one way or another, such
as contributing to superannuation, or in some other way. Some of these
people now find themselves little better off, possibly even, when one takes
into consideration their ineligibility for pensioners' fringe benefits,
possibly even worse off than those who have not contributed during their
lifetime.
WI-6 
0z the abolition of the means test would cost $ 150 million more a year
then that amount would go into this one proposition without one single
cent flowing to ameliorate the lot of those who are really in need. But
having said that, it still remains true that if saving is not to be
discouraged, and it must not be, then we must see that those who do
save andhave saved get some advantage from that saving and do not find
themselves in a disadvantageous position as against those who have not.
This kind of compassion, this kind of thought-out approach as opposed
to the past practices of merely raising pensions all across the board
is something that I think you would wish to see happen in this country
and something we are determined to see happen.
On the other fronts, on th e other problems which face us,
there are many difficult choices of priority. Of course, throughout
this nation we want better hospitals, more hospitals, cheaper hospitals
and a health scheme which works better than the existing one. Not that
that scheme is as bad as is sometimes painted, for 77 per cent of
the Australian people are covered by health insurance, another 12 per
cent are covered by repatriation or old-age benefits or in similar ways,
but not enough citizens are covered sufficiently to meet the calls of
illness, particularly prolonged illness.
Then there is the need for more technical schools, since if
the nation we have in our mind is to grow as we hope it will, then it
will only grow by the proper application of modern technology. This
can only be done by properly trained technicians and technologists, the
demand for which is immense and will grow in geometric proportions
in the years ahead.
There is a demand for more education. I speak not now of
technical education but of general education. A requirement for better
communications, a call for more to be spent on roads, a multitude of
requirements and nobody can meet them all, quickly. Should anybody
come before you, as I suspect somebody night, and say " I will overcome
the problems of health; I will overcome the problems of education; I
will build a new naval base in Western Australia; I will build new
railways everywhere; I will provide powerhouses there; I will provide
you name it and I will promise it", then he would not be able to deliver
on that promise, and all men of sense must know this. We would not
adopt that attitude. We would select what we would consider the highest
priorities for the national good, provide finance sufficient to see that
all our manpower and all our materials and all our resources were put
to use, and would necessarily if we are to avoid inflation and the
raising of taxes have to do this over a period of time. But we would
wish to put before you our goals and the steps by which we hope to approach
and hope to solve them. And perhaps when you think of it, that is another 
difference between ourselves and our opponents. For I think that
is a more honest approach, I think it is a genuine approach, whereas
I think those who promise all things to all men at once, must be seen
to be lacking in credibility.
Sir, in endeavouring to do what the people in this room
would want us to do, I am sure that from time to time we will make
some mistakes, forno man and no woman and no government can avoid
mistakes. If we do, they will be mistakes which have been made
honestly after examination of all the facts, and when they are realised,
they will be admitted and the course of action changed. I do not think
there will be many such mistakes. I think that I can only make this
one promise that the team we have in Canberra, strengthened as it
is by the members who come to us from West Australia, will dotheir
utmost to carry out what I feel you have in your own minds as objectives
for the future of this, our nation. And we will try to do two things which
are not finite. We will try to encourage and increase a feeling of pride
in being Australians, even if that overrides pride in being Victorians
or West Australians. So that wherever in this nation a man may live
Queensland, New South Wales or Victoria he will be proud and
pleased and happy at the development going on in other parts of the
country. And we will try to do something else if we canA. We will try
to foster amongst the Australian people a flietnf of unity of purpose.
I don't mean the acceptance of uniform ideas but I do mean the acceptance
of the concept which I am sure is true, that there is no longer room in
our nation for the idea, for example, that employees are automatically
opposed to employers and that their interests are different. Rather,
looked at properly, must they be the same for a manufacturer must
wish to see as much purchasing power as possible among the people,
most of whom are employees, and an employee must wish to see as
much efficiency as possible, because in that way the goods he and his
friends buy are cheaper. So there is no longer room for a concept of
employees on one si de and -mployers on the other, no longer room for
a concept of owners of industrial factories having interests diametrically
opposed to those who are or, the land. Rather there needs to be a feeling
that what happens, happens for all Australians, for the good of all
Australians and there is no divisive requirement because a man is an
employee or employer or works in the city or works in the country.
This is another thing, I believe, that is required of a great nation.
Given the continuation of the climate I have spoken of, given
an attempt to approach these non-definable things I have spoken of,
given the approach to defence and social services and the other calls
8/. 
8.*
upon us which I have mentioned, then I think we have, through you, a
better chance of turning this country into the one I think we all imagine
in our hearts it can be, a better chance than any other group or any other
organisations existing in Australia today, or likely to exist in Australia
in the future. We will, given your continued support, make our efforts join
with yours to realise the promise of this sunburnt country and pass this
promise on to our children and our children's children. This, I think,
is why you leave your homes to hand out" how to vote" cards, why you
work, what you want to see happen, and if it is, then we will try our
utmost to be worthy of your confidence. 



LIBERAL WOMEN'S RALLY
BRISBANE, Qld. JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I never have looked up the number of women on the rolls
throughout the Commonwealth of Australia In the way your President has,
but I did just happen to discover that on the Queensland rolls, as distinct
from the Commonwealth rolls, there are 15, 000 more women than men.
So our minds must have been working in the same direction, Madam
President. We were both looking to the strength. And indeed we were
looking to the strength, at least as far as a political organisation is
concerned. It is the strength that comes from the behind-the-scenes
work of the Women's Section, from the running of the branches, from the
posting out of literature, the contribution of ideas and from all the tasks
that have to be done in a party or . n a campaign.
Now, it will not be long some months, not long before
we all find ou. rselves in an electoral campaign to discover whether the
people of Australia wish us to continue to give the kind of government that
has tran~ sformed Australia over the last two decades. And it has
transformed Australia. It is a different nation from that of twenty years
ago. You will remember sometimes we tend to forget but you will
remem-ber all the people from so many races in the world who have come
to Australia in that time, been assimilated and brought to us their own
cultures, their own ways of thinking, and infused into the bloodstream of
Australia, giving us a new vigour and a new interest. They have certainly
improved the variety of what we eat and drink twenty years ago steak
and eggs was about the culinary end as far as Australians were concerned:
The population has been built up, the development of the
country has grown in a way it has never done before and, at the same
time, there has been removed from the minds of people generally that
fear of unemployment which was always present two decades, or three
decades ago. They find themselves living now in a country which has, I
think, the lowest rate of unemployment of any nation in the world
though from time to time particular parts may be stricken by particular
pr&amp; blems. And even in the last year or eighteen months, I think we
have given an indication to Australia that we are not merely going to go
ahead without seeking changes and new pastures. While providing that
background of progress, we will seek out new areas to help, new avenues
along which we can advance to the future. / 2 
-2
And begause these things tend sometimes to be overlooked
in the rush of events, let me remind you of some of those new approaches
which in the last year or eighteen months have taken place.
We have, for example, in the field of education, taken
steps to see that every school in Australia is provided through
Commonwealth Government funds without matching requirements from
the States with libraries. So those secondary schools of which I speak
may have not only science teaching facilities but facilities for teaching
the humanities which alone can develop minds able to use science to the
proper ends. We have developed an entirely new approach to the problem
of communications through roads in Australia. And for the first time,
by cost-benefit analysis of various proposals, and by the abandonment of
the requirement that a particular amount of a given sum should be spent
in some particular area by abandoning that, by taking cost-plus
processes, by adding a half billion dollars to the sums of money for the
next five-year period, by setting aside specific amounts of that to try
and overcome the congestion which the urbanisation of Australia is
imposing on its city dwellers, by setting sums aside for new freeways,
for new communications in the city, we have, I think, taken a giant step
in that particular field, and a new step.
We have entered the area of overseas shipping so that
Australia will have a ship operating between Australia and Japan, between
Australia and the United Kingdom and between Australia and the United
States. This is not only to save the invisible costs which the operation of
foreign ships imposes on us, but so that we can have proof that the products
af the land for they are what will mostly fiW the ships are carried at
costs which we know to be fair costs and that our producers are not mulcted.
And this again, I believe, is something a nation, an island nation like
Australia should have done, something which I believe will grow,
something which within this short space of time has been a new initiative.
We have taken decisions which were not easy in the
international climate to our north, where the situation has changed so
significantly. We have taken the decision that we will not be the sheriff
in that region to which we belong, as England was the sheriff or was
claimed to be the sheriff. We cannot fill the role of sheriff nor do we
want to, but we are prepared to play our part in the defence of the region
in which we stand as members of the sheriff's posse and as fairly strong,
relatively strong members of the sheriff's po~ sse. We have decided that
we will have Australian troops visible in the area to our north as evidence
of this approach. These were not easy decisions to take in the light of the
enormously changed circumstances through Brti's withdrawal from our
north, but we have taken them. 
-3.
These are some indications of new approaches over the
last eighteen months. And yet now we stand on the threshold of opportunities
such as Australia has not known before and which will give us chances to
take more and more new initiatives. We are on the threshold of the exciting
seventies, those years when the overseas earnings of Australia will grow
and grow as our farm produce grows, as our minerals finally come into
their own and are exported and as I hope, will be fabricated and exported;
on the threshold of years when, if things are properly run, there will be
modernisation of the equipment in our manufacturing industries and more
automation. One man will be able to do the work done now by two, yet
there will be so much work to do, there will not be unemployment, but
rahter a chance of the greater production which is possible if one man does
the work of two and of the greater reward which is possible for each such
man; These are the opportunities that lie before us.
You would expect us, I believe, in these circumstances, to
go in to these exciting seventies with the twin beliefs that we have work to
do at home, development to do at home and we have also a part to play in
the defence of the region in which we live; and that we must do both, or
else there is a possibility we might fail to achieve either. And so you
would, I think, expect us to devote to the development of our own capacity
for defence not a greater percentage of gross national product but certainly
greater rums of money as our gross national product grows. You would
expect us, I think, to look to our alliances, and in particular our alliance
with the United States for defensive purposes. And looking to those
alliances, you would expect us to be prepared to contribute towards a joint
defence and not merely to seek to take and give nothing back.
And you would expect us to see that we kept the rate of
employment as high as it is, that we continued to bring in the record number
of migrants which we are now attracting and that we developed all parts of
this nation as quickly as the manpower resources and the capital resources
would permit. I say " would permit" for there are many things throughout
Australia which today can be pointed to and people can say " This should
be done. It should be done now. It will be economical. It will return
money for the investment that is put into it. It will add to growth". All
these things are true of all t tese projects. And yet with the work force
fully employed, a great accretion of new projects is not immediately
possible. Yet you would expect us to see these things happen, subject to
the limitations of an expanding work force and expanding capital.
I think, and I have been criticised for thinking this, but I
still think it and still propose to express it, that we will need for the
development of this country and the speed at which it should be developed,
great amounts of overseas capital. We cannot generate from within our
own savings enough to do all that lies before us. Yet I also believe that
we can and should require an offer of participation to Australians in these
/ 4 
-4
new developments at the beginning and the key word is " offer"'. There
should be a chance to participate. There should be a chance for Australians
to see their investments grow as their country grows, to be part owners.
This we will make clear I think we have made it clear to the world,
and to those who have money to invest. And I do not believe for one
moment that it will prevent the flow of that overseas capital which we must
have. For Australian participation is not a condition, but the offer to
Australians to participate is a goal which I think we will attain.
I am sure, too, that you would wish us to use some of the
material benefits which will flow from the economic circumstances I see
before us, to ensure that in a way that has not happened before, those
who are at the end of life's race, those who are widowed or ill or handicapped'
in some other way, are helped by the community. And you would want us,
I think, to see that those who help themselves during their life are not
thereby entirely c~ ut off from any additional assistance from the State.
I hope nobody will imagine when I say that that I am talking
about the possibility of abolishing the means test. I am not and it should
not be abolished. There is no reason in the world as far as I see it
why $ 450 million should eventually be spent to provide a pension, for
example, to my wife who will have one anyway, or to other wealthy citizens
of Australia. That money can far better be used in relieving real need.
But there is a need to see that those who have in some way or other given
some provision to themselves are not entirely cut out at the lower levels
from some assistance from the State as well.
These are the things, I think, you would want a government
to do. I would add one other thing. There is a need, I think, to improve
not only the material circumstances of life so that one has two cars, bigger
houses, more refrigerators or better machinery or whatever it might be.
There is also a need to improve the quality of life, a need that will grow
as the leisure time for the population of Australia grows, an opportunity
to do a number of things. An opportunity first to choose the course in life
which most appeals to an individual; to choose and be properly trained,
and to be excited by the chance of being properly trained; to be whatever
an actor, a film producer, a television producer, a plumber, a carpenter,
a scientist, a technologist. And what I would say improved the quality of life would be
if people, young and not so young, were given the opportunity to advance
their minds and exercise their minds. There must be many of you here
today who found, as my own wife found, that you had been married, there
had been a family, the family had grown up and got married, and all those
years that you had put in to raising that family had gone and the family
had gone. And if the quality of life is to be improved, there should be
opportunities for courses of various kinds for those who wish to take them
so that that great reservoir of intelligence, ability and capacity which I 
believe lies in the female population should be given a chance for Australia's
sake to be used,_ sbld.' jegven &amp;-chance for the individual's sake to be
used. I could go on for some time but there is not time speaking
of the improvements in the quality of life that are possible and will be
increasingly possible as the material benefits of our work and development
continue to flow in to us. I hope and I believe that as we step across the
threshold of tLese exciting seventies, the people of Australia will say they
would like to see a continuation of the kind of government that has transformed
Australia. For it is not old, it is not tired; it is young and vital and
seeking new approaches and, in the next twenty years, it will seize
opportunities to make that transformation greater still.
I think and believe that this will happen. If it does, then
on behalf of the team I lead in Canberra, I can pledge to you that we will
seek to our utmost to do that which I have tried to outline to you this
afternoon, and we will go into the fight to do it, fortified by two things
fortified by the knowledge that in all things that matter, we are a united
team and a united party. There are no ideological cleavages anywhere,
though there are and there should be discussions and arguments as to how
a particular goal should be achieved. And that is different from the
bitterly divided Opposition. We stand for achievement whereas people
riven with ideological factions, riven with hatreds, cannot achieve its
pledges. The second thing fortifying us is gatherings such as this which
I have had the honour to attend in so many places in Australia. They show
that there are behind us sharing our aspirations, great masses of intelligent
Australians, willing to give of their own time and effort to build the
Australia we believe in. 



p 69/ 109
STATE COUNCIL MEETING OF THE VICTORIAN
DIVISION OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
Melbourne, Vic. JULY 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John' Gorton
Mr. President, Mr. Premier and Delegates:-
This is, as the President has said, merely a fleeting visit.
I have to be in Queensland by lunchtime, then have a meeting of the
Women's Sections from all over Queensland, and then attend a fund-raising
dinner for one of our candidates. So you can see, it is not an uncrowded
day. But this part of it is one that I would not, for anything, have missed.
I speak to you at a time only some months before there will
be a decision made by the Australian people as to what Government will
carry them on and through those exciting seventies which beckon to us now.
It is my hope, and my belief, that with your help the Australian people will
choose as their pilots through these years ahead a government which
continues those policies and those philosophies which have, over the last
twenty years, transformed this nation; a government which will adopt new
approaches and policies to take full advantage of those great opportunities
which await us. It is a little inhibiting speaking to you on the eve of a Budget,
but perhaps I might remind you of some of the things which have been done
in the space of very little more than a year or eighteen months, things
which already indicate, I think, the courses we will take in the future. I
would remind you that we have adopted an entirely new approach to the
system of building road communications throughout Australia and Victoria,,
and this is an important avenue of approach, not just a gimmick. For the
first time, there has been a cost-benef it analysis of the construction of
roads and where they should be. For the first time there is no longer a
requirement that a fixed amount of the total road money available whether
it Is of cost-benef it or not should be spent in particular areas, and for
the first time there is a requirement that the congestion of the cities should
be relieved by a proper road programme. Accompanying these new
approaches has been the addition of half a billion dollars for the road
programme.
&amp; 4) 10 
71 -2
I. / 3
We have, let me remind you, taken the not inconsiderable
policy decision to enter, or perhaps I should say re-enter, the field of
overseas shipping so that Australia will have ships plying with Australian
produce between this country and Japan, between this country and the
United Kingdom, between this country and the United States. And this will
not only be profitable, it will save invisibles in our import bill. And it
will also enable us to know precisely what the economics of this trade are
and to see that our producers, and to this extent I speak of our primary
producers for they provide the bulk of our exports to see that our
producers are not mulcted by freight charges higher than they should be.
We have accepted a responsibility in the new changed
situation to our north, although let us make it quite plain that we cannot
take over the role of sheriff which Britain had. But we will be clearly
seen to be members of the posse and have there in that region, visible
Ifor all to see, an. Australian presence. And these were not easy decisions
to make, and are but some of those new approaches in this relatively brief
I would add just one more to them before I leave. We have,
I think, already shown our awareness in a practical way of those of whom
I have so often spoken and those whom I believe you think of so often that
is the handicapped amongst us, the ill, the aged. This will continue, and
it will continue in the seventies at an increasing tempo, with more people
coming in ( for our immigration programme is already a record), with
more development taking place, with more overseas capital required to do
it and more Australian ownership being offered in that development and
the key word is " offered". And as those material goals before us are
reached, we will not only seek to look after those ill and aged of whom I
have spoken, but try to see if we cannot improve the quality of life in
-' Australia, as the material resources of Australia grow. And by the
quality of life I mean the opportunity for people to train themselves for
whatever field of endeavour they may wish to enter. If they wish to train
to be a television producer, a film actor, a plumber, a carpenter, a farmer,
in the field of business management, a scientist whatever it is they wish
to be; that opportunity to receive the necessary training is what we would
wish to see provided as part of the quality of life. And to try to see that
our younger people are brought up with the opportunity not only to achieve
that of which I have spoken but to take part in outdoor activities surfing,
skiing, riding, in whatever it may be that Is a healthy outdoor interest
and is as much a part of the quality of life as is intellectural attainment.
These things become easier as material resources grow,
but they are an integral part of a full life in a nation such as Australia,
and will be achieved under the leadership of the Liberal Party, and with
the help and assistance which you of the Branches, however you may
differ on minor matters, are united to give us. 
-3
a-A G*% IJ
ak* j Pa__
Pill Wh~ at a difference there is between those of you in this hall
who will argue out matters of detail but on matters of ideology the climate
which provides employment and growth are as one. What a difference
between some other meeting, which I seem to have heard is taking place
somewhere or other in Melbourne, where the whole of the time appears to
be devoted to pretending that those deep schisms which exist don't exist
and can be papered over and can be hidden for at least long enough to
pretend to the people there is something difference from what there really
is. We will come before you, as we always have, putting
programmes that can be achieved without inflation and without pretence. We
will make no promises that can't be carried out. But if I may, just before
I close, be a little repetitive, I would like to bring to the attention of those
of you who have not already read it, a little piece of doggerel I wrote at
Question Time one day in the House no-one was asking me questions at
the time, so I thought I would put the time to good use: which seems to
me to put in one nutshell the different approach of our opponents, particularly
their Leader. And the little piece of nonsense runs like this and of
course you will understand it is in the mouth of the Leader of the Opposition
I promise you, I promise you
To do anything at all you want me to
And if I get rather lost
As to how much it will cost
I can always raise taxation
On guess who? You.
Well, you think of it and he'll promise it. But this will not be our approach.
It would not be the approach you wanted. It would not be the approach you
would support. But with that support you give us and I thank you for it
now I am sure that we will see, with the team of candidates we have,
that towards the end of this year there will be opening for Australia three
more years of Increasingly exciting government and increasingly exciting
development for this nation which we all love. 



MELBOURNE PORTS ELECTORATE I SEP 19,
LIBERAL PARTY DINNER HELD AT
ST. KILDA TOWN HALL, VIC. _ L
AUGUST 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
I would like to assure you, Sir, and everybody here that
this particular function is one that appeals to me very much indeed,
because I am here primarily not entirely but primarily to do what I
can to get you to do what you can to help Kevin Randall win the seat of
Melbourne Ports. And this is an entirely possible thing, based on the
redistribution. On the figures for the 1966 election, if they are maintained,
Kevin could win by 1, 500. They may not be maintained because 1966
was an all-time record. But even if they aren't, I think that those of you
who have seen the calibre of his campaign and who have planned the future
campaign with him, would agree with me that even if the 1966 figures are
not maintained, it is perfectly possible that he will win by 2, 500. I think
and hope he will. And this depends not only upon what he does, or I do or you
do, but on the message getting through to the electorate. We must make
known the record of what has been done by the Party he seeks to support
and the attitudes now adopted by the Party which he seeks to support. And
we must provide a look into the future as envisaged by the Party which,
when elected, he will support.
Even at the risk of boring you, may I, because it is so
important, recapitulate some of those things which in a relatively brief
space of time have been done. When I say " in a relatively brief space of
time" I mean the time during which I have been entrusted by my colleagues
with the leadership of the Liberal Party. You are familiar with the two
decades of transformation under Liberal Governments and of the climate
created by these Governments since 1949. It is this climate that has
given us unprecedented prosperity, unprecedented employment and new
horizons. I do not dwell on that that is of the record. But in the last
seventeen, eighteen, nineteen months, there have been a niumber of highly
significant actions taken by the Government which Kevin Randall is going
to support, actions which are going to react on the future of Australia for
generations to come. / 2 
-2
There was the significant decision to which I will refer
again later when I mention the Democratic Labor Party the significant
decision regarding retention of Australian forces in South East Asia. This
was not an easy decision in the circumstances in which Great Britain
announced an accelerated withdrawal from the countries to our North and
the circumstances in which the United States indicated that she would
maintain an interest in those countries but showed some hesitation in
committing troops to that particular area. So, I repeat, it wasn't an easy
decision for Australia to make in all those new circumstances to leave
some troops in that area as a visible indication that we regarded ourselves
as of the region in which we lived. Not as a nation that would move in to
take Britain's place but as a natioa which would seek to contribute by
economic means, by technological means, by opening up the avenues of
trade and by assisting in the event of external attack. That decision was
taken and so we will have the air force, navy and army there to work in
with the region which must help itself as an earnest of Australia's
participation in the region.
There was a decision which in my belief will in a decade be
shown to be one of the most significant Australia has made in the field of
trade. That was the decision to enter overseas shipping with Australian
ships and Australian crews; ships flying the Australian flag, plying between
this nation and Japan, this nation and the United Kingdom, this nation and
the United States. Only three ships so far, but setting an example which I
hope will be followed by private enterprise and which, if it is not, will, I
hope, be expanded by government. For we are an island continent, we do
depend on trade and we do depend on exports. Our riches abroad are
amassed because of what we grow at home, and we should not dissipate
those riches by paying to others the freight for transferring what we grow
to the markets where they are sold. And we should know, and know without
question, what is a proper price to pay for those who freight cargoes from
Australia abroad. There is no other nation yet which has grown great
without having its own ships, and we have taken the first steps along these
lines. We have made an approach in some ways pedestrian not
I suppose emotionally exciting, but nevertheless of great importance in that
we have had a look at the whole road construction programme in Australia.
For the first time we have tried to get a cost-benefit analysis of what
returns will come from the building of what roads in which particular area.
As a result, we have abandoned previous formulae and have set aside for
the next five years $ 600 million to be spent in urban areas to try and
overcome one of the problems which so besets us. That is to get a free
traffic flow, to enable freeways to be built, to allow people and freight to
come in and out of urban centres without being held up and without
frustrations and economic loss. 
We have tried, and I think with some success in the time
that we have had to advance along the road of providing for the ill and the
old and the invalid and the needy. We said we would do this in the
Governor-General's Speech from the Throne. And in the first Budget
brought down we did take some steps in this direction. We did remove
from those who had long-continued illnesses in hospital the fear that they
would not be able to be looked after for the duration, though there are still
things to be done in this matter in nursing homes.
We did pay attention to the needs of families without
breadwinners. We did a number of other things with which I will not
weary you. And in this last Budget again we raised the payments to those
who were most needy, we paid particular attention to the needs of widows
with children and we looked after those who had been most seriously hurt
in war in the defence of this country. We did these in an unprecedented
way in that never in the space of little over a year had such rises been
made in basic pensions and in, pensions for totally and permanently
incapacitated servicemen. But we did more than that for basic to the Liberal belief
is an assertion that we do not want to have a welfare state conception
which believes that people should be looked after from the cradle to the
grave without being required to make some effort themselves, without
being required to put into the nation rather than just take out. And we do
believe, as a part of Liberal philosophy, that those who have in their
lifetimes practised thrift and self-help should not thereby be penalised
when they come towards the end of the race of life. So we have made a
breakthrough there in this Budget of great significance not yet I think fully
realised in the community, in which a single man or a single woman can
still receive some benefit from the state until his or her income reaches
$ 44. A married couple can still receive some increase, some benefit
from the state until their income reaches $ 80 per week. There is incentive
now to earn more, even if you are on a pension, to contribute to
superannuation, to save in other ways and this in itself is good and right
and proper from a Liberal point of view. But it also, I think, has the
practical advantage that in time to come there will be less and less call
upon social service payments because there is this incentive to thrift and
to self-help. In other fields, too, we have not been idle. In the areas of
defence and foreign policy I have already spoken of the great decision
to involve ourselves in joint defence of the countries to our North. And at
this point, Sir, may I express some slight surprise at what the Party
known as the Democratic Labor Party has, I gather, been saying about us
in the last few days. Indeed, wherever I have gone today, it seems to me
some reporter has sprung out from behind some pillar or from behind some
door and poked something into my face and said, " What is your reaction to
what the DLP or Senator Gair or Jack Little or somebody is saying?". And
I haven't bothered to answer them because I was saving it for tonight. 
4-
I think in short comfpass that my reaction is this and ought
to be this: That the Democratic Labor Party is a properly constituted
party in Australia, that it had its genesis in a real fear of the infiltration
into the Labor Party of communist ideas through the unions which the
communists controlled and which were represented at the Labor Party
organisation and through the unwillingness of the Labor machine and the
Labor Political Party to attack communism in the unions or in public or
indeed at all. And the men who formed that party were men of principle
and they laid their seats in Parliament upon the line because they were
men of principle. Many of them must have known that they would lose
those seats when they took this action fifteen years ago. But they acted
because they believed what they were doing was right, because they
believed the ALP as it stood and I interpolate " as it stands" was bad
for Australia, was infiltrated, had no interest in the defence of Australia
and had a wrong foreign policy. It was becaus~ e they believed all these
things they stood on principle and formed a new party.
Since that time they have supported Liberal principles and
Liberal approaches because these were more in line with their beliefs than
were the approaches of the Labor Party. And now it is up to them as a
political party operating in freedom to decide which approaches they wish
to support at this coming election.
There are two things, however, of which I am sure and in
which I believe most of you would support me I think perhaps all of you
would support me. One of them is that no great political party such as
we are should tailor its policy or change its policy from what it thinks to
be right merely in order to attract some support which ought to come to
it anyway. Nor should it submit to what could be described although I
do not so describe it as political blackmail.
And the other points I want to make are these. You will
remember that I said just now that those who formed this Party were men
of principle who believed that what they were doing was good and right for
Australia. What is their choice in this election now coming up? They are
interested in the defence of this country. They are interested in the
foreign policy of this country. Can they support candidates from the Labor
Party who would immediately sign a Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty
without waiting to see whether Australia's interests were adversely affected
by doing it; and could they reject a Liberal Party candidate who would
want, of course, an effective and efficient treaty of this kind but would not
wish to sign it until he was sure it was effective and efficient and that our
interests were not jeopardised by it. Could they support a candidate from
the Opposition Party who would quibble and haggle and argue with the
United States of America over whether a defence base of joint interest to
our two countries could be established in Australia? Would they do this in 
' r 5
preference to a Liberal Party candidate who would say the ANZUS Treaty
is the strongest guarantee Australia has got for its future survival, and
if we are to have that treaty and make it work properly then we are
required, not by a Treaty's written terms, but in decency required to
help to provide a joint defence defence bases which being of interest arnd
importance to the United States are therefore of interest and importance
to ourselves. Could they support the Opposition's attitude on that as
opposed to a Liberal Party attitude?
Gould they support an Opposition attitude which says that
National Service training would be abolished at once should they be elected
as against the Liberal Party attitude which says that we will in the future
need to keep, post-Vietnamt forces of such a size that National Service
training must be retained? It will need to be retained for the purposes of
defence itself and this is secondary for the immense benefit it brings
to those young men who go into National Service training and come out so
much better citizens than when they went in.
Could they support an Opposition candidate who would at
once support in his Party the withdrawal from Malaya and Singapore of all
our forces ground, air and naval who would immediately scuttle from
the area and once and for all indicate that we were not concerned with what
happened? Could they support that as against a Liberal Party candidate
who would, while not being prepared to inherit the burden that a great
power, Britain, previously took on, while not being prepared to enter into
mini-Vietnams, nevertheless was prepared to keep a force in being there
to help against any extraneous invasion which might come?
Sir, if this Party, the DLP, with its basic principles,
professing the beliefs it still professes, could back Opposition candidates
supporting the policies I have put before you in preference to Liberal
candidates supporting the policies I have put before you, then the principles
on which it was formed will have been repudiated and the reason for which
it came into being will no lorger exist.
And so, it is up to this Party to see, this Democratic Labor
Party to see whether the choices being what they are, they can support
people who stand in defiance of all they have said they believe, as against
people who stand not for all they believe but much more so than do our
opponents of the Labor Party.
There has been in the last week or ten days much discussion
about what the newspapers have defined as some great cha,-nge in policy by
this Government towards the Soviet Union. I am always interested to read
and know the difference between what some man says in Parliament in
this case the Minister for Foreign Affairs and what the newspapers say
he almost said in Parliament and make it the news. What in fact was said
by the Minister for External Affairs was this. / 6 
6-
He pointed out in his speech that the Soviet Union stands
condemned for its invasion of Czechoslovakia, the anniversary of which is
now with us. Hie used the words that the Soviet Union adhered to the
pernicious doctrine of only limited sovereignty being allowed to those
communist states who were around the periphery of the Soviet Union itself.
He pointed out the need to be on guard against the Soviet Union, not to be
lulled, to be careful all the time in all dealings with that country. But he
did go so far, and I think that this is sensible, as to say that we in Australia
had things we wished to see happen in the smaller Asian countries to our
North. We wished to see them retain their independence. We wished to see
them grow economically. We wished to see the benefits of that economic
growth passed down to the peasants and the workers from the higher strata.
We wished to see the avenues of trade opened to them so that they could
help themselves. We wished to see them left in peace against extraneous
attack. And he then said that we had so far not heard what the Soviet
Union proposed about these countries, but they had spoken of some ideal
of collective security that they hadn't spelt out. If their idea of collective
security should turn out to be on all fours with what we in Australia want,
if the Soviet Union should cancel some of the debts which are owing to it
from these countries, should help them economically, should help them
technologically, should help them to retain their independence, then we
would because these are the same objectives as we have be prepared
to examine such proposals with interest. That cannot surely in any man of
commonsense be said to be a change in policy but rather an expression of
hope, hedged with careful doubt but an expression of hope that perhaps
the objectives we have for the safety of the countries to our North and
therefore for our own, might possibly be brought about. At any rate, I
see no great change in emphasis there, no great change in policy but
merely an acceptance and an understanding that there are changes happening
to our North and we will need to examine from all sources whatever may
be put before us to help our own objectives and no-one else's.
Well, that is my reaction to the approach of the DLP.
What now remains to be done in this country? I have sketched
quite briefly some of the things we have done. I've set out our attitudes
and the facts of foreign policy. I've made an excursion into how those
approaches in defence and foreign policy may affect another Party, but
what remains to be done when we get re-elected, as we will
First, ( I do not put these in any order of priority) but first,
there is undoubtedly a need to build up our own defences in this country
on land, on sea and in the air. But we will not go to the point of diverting
to that build-up all of the increased prosperity of Australia. I do not
believe we will need to put more of our GNP into it. We will need to put
more money into it. We will need to increase it. Perhaps as time goes
by we will need to increase it even faster but for the moment we are 
7-
ourselves under no imminent threat of attack. We must assume that attack
can come in the future. But for the moment, having said that that must
happen, there are other things to do. There are more steps to be taken
along the road of helping those who are in need, particularly I would
suggest large families on low incomes. And there are a number of other
highly significant steps which ought to be taken and which I don't propose
to tell you about until we make the policy speech in October. These will
be spelt-out steps I will then put before you.
They will in themselves be important but what will also be
important are the objectives which they seek to attain. And these will be
the continuing objectives of the Liberal Party only changed as " the times
they are a-changing"; the continuing objectives of creating a climate for
material growth and to see that to the greatest extent possible the savings
of Australians are allowed to be put into the development of Australia.
There will also be the objective of creating a climate, apart from the
purely material kind, which provides individuals with the opportunity to
develop themselves and their internal capacity to be an actor, if that is
what they want, or a scientist or a horticulturist or whatever it may be.
To enable them to express their own personality in whatever it is
even if it happens, as in the case of Kevin and myself, that they should
want to be politicians and persuade other people to put us where we want
to be. Sir, I don't think there is any other party in Australia, I
don't think there is any other group in Australia, I don't think there are
other men in Australia who can achieve what we can if you give us the
opportunity to do it. This decade ahead promises to be the most exciting
in the whole of Australia's history, promises to give us the greatest growth
in manpower and material benefits and in industrial muscles in Australia's
history. It is a decade in which we will come of age, but con-e of age in a
Liberal way if the people choose as believe they will.
We have candidates I ask you to support. We have Kevin
Randall who I believe will be elected with your support. And if he is
elected, then he will help Australia and he will help the Government and
in that way, in the long term, perhaps contribute to the creation of a
nation that will be the admiration and the inspiration of the world and of
great assistance to all mankind. 



K( INGSTON ELECTORATE LIBERAL PARTY DINNER
Glengowrie, S. A. J, 2 September 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr, -Lphn Gorton*
Mr. Chairman and Miss Kay Brownbill or after what you said about how
one-eyed everybody is should I call you " Madam Cyclops" you did say
durinig the course of your introduction that I was going to be stuck with the
people of South Australia and I was going to be stuck with you do you
remember? Kay, there is nothing I would want more than that we would
be stuck with you in the House of Representatives for years and years to
come and I hope that all of you present here will keep it that way.
But it is true to say that I have an interest in the people of
South Australia and the State of South Australia. Let me make this quite
clear even though I am speaking in South Australia that it is not an interest
which transcends my interest in the people of We,-tern Australia or New
South Wales or Victoria or any other part of Australia but which takes no
second place to the interest I have in people in the other States.
And this has, I think, been shown I know it can be argued
against by the Opposition but it has been shown by a number of things
which have been done and I hope tonight to be able to indicate one other
area in which we have, as an Australian Government, an interest in this
State. You have got here, and have had for some time an
Australian-renowned, and I think I could almost say a world-renowned,
Festival of Arts. You have taken the lead in Australia in getting this Arts
Festival running and getting people coming to it from all over Australia.
It has been an enormous success. And you are now engaged, I understand,
in an appeal to build a proper centre in which to hold some of this Arts
Festival. The State Government is very generously contributing to this
and so is the Lord Mayor and his Council. But after the State Government
has contributed and after the Council has contributed, there is a requirement
for the raising of $ 300, 000 of public subscription in order to obtain
the total amount required. Your Premier, who never lets an opportunity
pass to make suggestions to the Australian Government how they might
take a greater interest in South Australia, wrote to me and suggested that
the Australian Government might open up a certain Act we have in order
to enable donations to this public appeal of $ 300, 000 to be tax-deductible.
This would be in the same way as they are tax-deductible to appeals for
the Sydney Opera House, I think I find that rather difficult to understand
because it's for so long: and other projects of that kind. And we had
some little discussion about this because had this happened and it's not
going to happen but had it happened and had we made donations taxdeductible,
probably the Australian Government would have lost say
/ 2 
$ 150, 000 out of the $ 300, 000 because it would be about $ 1 in every $ 2 that
the donor would have saved. And we were prepared to do this if your
Premier was prepared to accept it. But then we had another talk and we
both agreed that perhaps it might be more suitable for the State of South
Australia and perhaps it might be more suitable for those interested in
the Festival of Arts if instead of doing this, the Australian Government
was to donate $ 200, 000 of the $ 300, 000 that was sought to be raised by
public appeal. And so this is what the Premier and I have decided would
be the best course of action to take and this is what I said in the beginning
is another example of an interest in the State and people of South Australia.
I propose to take advantage of this opportunity you have
afforded me tonight to speak of some matters that are important to the
country, are important to you, and important to me.
Now, I am not going to go through all the things which are
of significance to Australia which I think are going to be the subject of
decision by people in this room and those whom people in this room can
influence. I want to talk really on only a couple of subjects. And one is
the future defence and security of this country because I think that is at
stake in this election and we have heard insufficient about it.
We have an Opposition which, if it became a government,
would be prepared to abandon National Service training and has said so
without equivocation. I look to the post-Vietnam period. Surely we would
need to mainrLain in Australia in our new situation an army at least of its
present size, post-Vietnam. one-third of our present army is made up
of National Service trainees. Can we afford to allow a government which
would in effect cut our army by one-third, because that is what it means.
Or is it not better for us as we grow stronger, as the conditions in which
we live change from those in which we have all grown up, is it not better
for us to do as we would propose to do and that is to maintain National
Service training in order to ensure that the forces of the size we require
are kept in being for we no longer have the shields we used to have.
This is of great significance, I think, to the future security and defence
of Australia. I think it would be utterly wrong to put into power in this
country a government which would withdraw immediately all ground, sea
and air forces which we now have stationed in Malaysia and in Singapore
as an indication and an earnest of our interest in the security of that
region. Because if the people were to decide that the Opposition should
become a government, then the Five Power Treaty would be shattered and
there would be no longer in the areai to our North any Australian military
presence whatsoever. This, I believe, is ingrained in Australians and
properly ingrained in them that this would be a course detrimental to
our future security. And this is of importance to Australia's future. / 3 
3-
Would it be sensible for us because we depend basically
for our ultimate protection on the United States of America, and through
depending on the United States of America, we depend on the ANZUS
Treaty would it be sensible for us to refuse to play our full part in that
Treaty? Should we say to the United States, " You want to set up some
kind of a defence base, something like the North-West Cape, some other
kind of base which will be of importance to your defence and to our defence
and therefore to our joint defence, you want to do this? Well, we are
going to quibble about it. We are going to argue about it. We are not
going to let you do it. We are going to renegotiate the arrangements under
which the bases which now exist are allowed to exist". Would this be
sensible? Because this is what the present Opposition would do were it
the Government. It is what we would not do. And if it were done I believe
it would break the spirit of the ANZUSTreaty riot necessarily the letter
but break the spirit and that it would for that and other reasons make us
able to rely on protection from this Treaty from the United States with far
less certainty than we can now rely. For a small country such as ourselves,
this again is something of great significance to our security.
Again, I don't suppose there is anybody in this room who is
not horrified at the thought that nuclear weapons exist in the world and of
the destruction they can cause. But they do exist and they do so in some
countries, particularly in China not so far from us. In those circumstances,
don't you think it is detrimental or could be to Australia's security to sign
a Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and give up all chance of protecting
ourselves against any possible future attack unless and until we were
certainly assured that the protection we gave up would come without fail
from some other source. I believe it would be playing with the future of
Australia's children if we did that, If we can get an effective and an
efficient and a proper treaty, one which gives us full protection, of course
we want it, of course we will sign it. But we won't sign it until we reach
those conditions. The Opposition will, at once and without question, and
that is another matter of great significance to Australia's future defence.
On this subject of defence and of foreign affairs, I have been
latterly thoroughly astonished at the interpretations which have been put on
a recent speech made in the Parliament by the Minister for External Affairs,
Mr. Freeth. When I arrived in Adelaide today, somebody poked a microphone
into my face at the airport and said, " What about this defence arrangement
with the Russians?" It seems to be an odd kind of growth with nothing
whatsoever to back it at all, and I'd like to take this opportunity to talk
to you a little of this matter.
Sir, let me go into the history of this a little. The Minister
for External Affairs set out in a speech he made in Parliament, in the
first part of that speech, the approach of President Nixon and of the
United States to the problems of Asia and of South East Asia. He said how
he and we welcomed the President's pledge of the continued interest of the
/ 4 
4-
United States in the cQuntries of Asia and the President's intention that
the United States would fulfil its treaty commitments.
The Minister pointed out that the President emphasised the
security of the countries of Asia must primarily be a matter for themselves.
The Minister reaffirmed that we ourselves in Australia have always believed
that successful resistance to aggression, either direct or indirect, depends
in the last resort on the will and ability of the peoples of the countries in
that area to resist either subversion or aggression. And the President
pointed out that he wished and the Minister stated that we wished as we
have stated before that those countries would develop sufficient strength
in themselves to be able to protect themselves while being helped in the
meanwhile. And the Minister emphasised and this is important that by
sufficient strength, he didn't necessarily mean military strength alone.
We meant also and even more importantly in many respects an
improvement in the standards of living in those countries, the installation
of efficient and honest and incorrupt administrations and public services,
the fostering of harmonious relations with neighbouring countries and the
easing and eventual abolition of communal tensions and racial clashes
within those countries. For all of these matters of which I have just spok-en
are the basis of will and ability to resist aggression, are the basis of will
and ability to resist subversion. These are matters which are sine qua non
if a country is to resist aggression and subversion and this is what we
seek. And in seeking to attain these objectives, as the Minister pointed out,
we have helped and we will continue to help, for these are our objectives
and they are in our national interest to attain.
Now, against that background let me carry the story further.
Mr. BrehZnev recencly stated that the Soviet Union was of the opinion that,
and I quote, was of the opinion that events are putting on the agenda
the task of creating a system of collective security in Asia". And we know
no more of it than that, and the Minister indicated that we knew no more of
it than that. No proposals in any depth or anything else have been put
forward except that one indication of an interest. There have been no
proposals, but as I pointed out at the beginning our objective and the
objective of the United States is to develop regional co-operation, economic
development and therefore security. We recognise in Australia as well,
perhaps better than anyone in the world, that Russian communism has as
its objective, as its ultimate objective, the spreading of the system of
communism throughout the world and is in that sense an imperial power.
We should feel, as we have made it clear that we always
would feel, that our ultimate security in Australia would be threatened by
the establishment of any Russian naval or military bases anywhere in our
own region. We feel that any military alliance between Russia and a
country in our own region would pose a threat to ourselves. We cannot
forget Czechoslovakia and Hungary and the Berlin airlift and all the sorry
chapters of the past. 
We have no Intention, nor have we ever considered as the
remotest possibility any military understanding between ourselves and the
Soviet Union or any active military involvement by Soviet Russia in any
collective security arrangement among the countries to our North. For
we think that would be dangerous for us. That should be made clear. I
hope it has now been made clear.
But if, and as yet we do not know, but if proposals are
eventually put forward to help build the economic strength of countries to
our North and those proposals have no strings attached, if proposals are
put forward to lend influence to persuade countries to our North to join a
collective security pact amongst themselves without a Russian military
presence and that is our objective then we should at least be prepared
to examine such proposals, albeit we examine them with caution and with
scepticism and without gullibility. And this was all the Minister for
External Affairs stated in his speech. Yet for some reason I don't
understand, it has been built up and puffed up as if there was some great
change of policy or some sudden soft-line approach towards the USSR. I
don't understand the interpretation, Sir, and I reject it, though I reaffirm
that if acceptable economic help to attain our objectives is suggested, and
is suggested without strings, then it would be ridiculous riot to examine such
suggestions. And I reaffirm that if help in attaining a system of collective
security among the nations of our North amongst themselves is offered
and that is our objective then it would be absurd not to examine those
suggestions, although with the scepticism I have mentioned. That, Sir, is
our approach on this matter. I wonder what the approach of the Opposition
would be? On their past performance, on the way in which they have
excused all the Russian excesses except those in Czechoslovakia, I doubt
very much whether the stand that we have taken on this matter would not
be altered by them in a direction which would in the ultimate endanger this
country. These are all matters which should be in your mind and in the
minds of all Australians when on October 25 they choose whom they wish
to govern them for the next three years.
I have no time now to talk of other issues of significance
and importance in this coming campaign. There are other matters of
social services, of the general developmert of Australia, of the lives which
Australians can lead, but in a meeting such as this and at a time such as
this, I will not go into them, other than to say this. What we will do in
the future by way of development and by " we" I mean all Australians
what courses we will adopt to help those amongst us who are In need of
assistance, what actions we will take to provide more opportunities for
all people throughout our country will in the ultimate depend on those
first matters which I have raised before you. That Is the ability to retain
our own independence, to build up our alliances: to contribute to them with
our own defence forces because that is the rock upon which our development
and indeed our very existence will finally stand. / 6 
S--6-
When you go out from this room, I want you to do what you
can in your own way to see that Kay is returned for this seat to support
those policies, those defence policies I have put before you and those other
policies which at a later time and at a more appropriate time I will also
put before you. For it is the Members you elect that keep a government
in office, and if you agree with the policies proposed, and I hope you do,
and if you are satisfied with your Member, and I know you are, then come
with us in October because we need you and I think Australia needs you.
I 



AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATION
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE LUNCHEON
Hotel Canberra, Canberra, A. C. T. 19 September 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Group-Captain Nicholls, Mr. Buchan, Distinguished Guests, Mr.
Ambassador:-I think the first thing I would like to say to you is that I
welcome this opportunity on behalf of the Government to welcome the new
Ambassador from the United States, Mr. Rice, and his wife. We hope
that their stay in this country will be thoroughly enjoyable for them and
that it will help to cement even further the relations between our two
countries. I know they will be welcomed warmly wherever they go in
Australia, and I hope they go throughout the whole of this nation.
This gathering is a continuation of an association which
had its roots in the trials of the Second World War. It was then, I think,
for the first-time that there became a really close relationship between
the United States of America and our own nation. I know that as long ago
as 1908, Commodore Perry came out here with the Great White Fleet and
Alfred Deaki, who welcomed that fleet, spoke of " our American cousins"
And that was long ago. And there has been a continuing feeling along those
lines since that time.
Indeed, one of our most different and most well-known
politicians, Mr. King O'Malley, who was instrumental in founding the
Commonwealth Bank, came either from the United States or Canada it's
not quite clear. But at any rate, it was quite close to the United States,
if it wasn't in it: But that feeling really came to have far more deep-seated
roots in the Second World War. There are perhaps many people in this
room, or some people in this room who do not remember this because
the years are quick and memories are short, but we were threatened, as
we were, with actual invasion of our country, and that was strange to us
for we are one of the few countries in the world that has never had to suffer
an invasion. And when there was a sweep down of apparently irresistible
military power, closer and closer to Australia, culminating in ail attack
on New Guinea itself at Milne Bay, it was then that there came to our
assistance soldiers from the United States. It was then at the Battle of
the Coral Sea, which you have celebrated for so long, that the tide was
turned back. And those joint operations for they were joint operations
of our two nations, struck feelings of gratitude from the Australian people
q / 2 
-2
which I think have never withered and which I believe, even though younger
generations follow us along, will also never wither away.
This was why for so many years the highlight of the year
for the Austral ian-American Association was what was called the Coral
Sea Celebrations, and that was why for so long top admirals and generals
and air force officers from the United States were brought out by your
Association to tour Australia and to talk to your members. And I think
it right, proper and wise that you decided that the years having passed,
there should be a wider and deeper and even more significant association
than just the memories of the times when we stood together and some of
us fell together. And so you have thought it right, and I think it right, that
you should bring out here as your guest distinguished citizens from the
United States in all walks of life, that you should seek to broaden year
by year the kind of association between our two peoples, that you should
seek to see that we do not just look back to the past but accept the present
and look to changes in the future. Therefore you seek to broaden out into
student exchanges, in which young people from America come here and
young A ustralians go to the United States and you seek to have closer
cultural relationships. seeking by these means to get those who are
going in the future to be the leaders of our nation, to know more of the
United States and those from the United States who may be leaders of that
nation to know more about us. And we must never forget that each single
student who comes to Australia and spends some time here at one of our
schools and goes back to the United States is not just one person but is a
person who has a wide range of friends to whom he or she can speak, and
by speaking to them of how life is in this country, can do far more in
spreading amongst that community a knowledge of our own nation.
We have, of course, co-operation between the United States
and the Australian Government on many fronts, You have spoken of defeince
itself and I am not ashamed to say I believe that the true protection of
Australia in the years ahead while it is growing, while it is strengthening
itself, while it is strengthening its own defences, depends in the main on
the United States and on the ANZUS Treaty.
If it were not for that, we would in the charged circumstances
of the world, with Britain's shield having been removed from our North,
with the world in ferment, we would probably have to divert far more of
our resources than we should to building up to an even greater extent our
own defences. It is this Treaty which enables us to build our own defences
because as you said, the United States quite properly looks to people to
help themselves. But it also enables us, with some security, to build the
industrial muscles, to develop the industries, to bring in the population
which, in the long term, will be the real basis of our strength. And so
this is a sine qua non of our continuing development at the rate at which
/ 3 
3-
history demands we must develop over the next few years. That is one
aspect of co-operation. just recently you, Sir, from the United States fired the
imagination of the world, by sending for the first time men to wralk upon
the surface of the moon. A science fiction story which would have been
labelled, a decade ago, or fifteen years ago, by most people as nothing
but a science fiction story yet one which has turned out to be fact. And we
played some part in co-operation in that. It was Australian tracking
stations which helped in the mission. There was an Australian scientist
engaged in the planning. I am informed by reading a speech which you,
Sir, made of something which I didn't know before and that is that the
sunglasses were designed by Australians. And we even have a sample in
this country of moon rockts weighing some ounces I'm not quite sure how
many, but when you think of the distance they had to be carried, you will
realise that an ounce is the equivalent of a ton: We have them here, and
this is another example of co-operation between us.
Thinking back in this space programme to the first time
when men circled the earth and in order that they shouldn't lose their way,
the citizens of Perth turned on all the electric light available so that they
would know where they were, much to the subsequent fury of the Perth
electric light ratepayers! These are merely some examples in the field
of scientific advancement in which we are co-operating co-operating
well in that so many of the inventions we make in Australia are developed
in the United States, and co-operating indeed in other ways.
We are co-operating on the far-flung frontiers in Australia
and we are a nation with frontiers still. Those of you who have at any
stage beein in the newly -developing towns in Western Australia or the
Northern Territory or Queensland will agree with me that there is there a
feeling of excitement in the air, a feeling of endeavour. There is a feeling
of pride when the length of railway line laid in a day breaks a world record,
a feeling of enthusiasm which goes with frontiers. Mind You, they aren't
the old frontiers of the West the West as we have seen it on television.
Nor are they the frontiers that many of us, including my wife and myself
came to, when we came back to Australia from abroad, because those
were, in my case and you can duplicate it in yours the sort of frontier
in the North of Victoria. There was no electricity and you had something
called a Coolgardie safe if you wanted to keep anything cool. This was a
contraption in W~ ihich you put a lot of water at the top and which was supposed
to keep your food from going bad, but I was never able to discover in fact
that it did. But these new frontiers are not like that. In these places,
there are shopping centres houses with air-conditioning..... swimming
pools community centres. The development going on is superb and
the advantages to this nation are immense and the advantages to those
United States citizens who provide some capital towards it are also
immense a co-operation there to the benefit, I think, of both of us. A
/ 4 
-4
co-operation in bases such as the North-West Cape base, such as the
other joint defence arrangements that we have. You could go through a
whole field and we would find, I think, as we went through that there
have probably not been any other instances where two nations have so
closely co-operated for what they believe to be the good of all.
Indeed, I would like to cast your minds back to something
I once said in the White House when I was being entertained by President
Nixon because it came in for a little comment in Australia at the time.
And having considered it, I think it was quite a reasonable thing to say.
refer to something about " Waltzing Matilda With You" and I would like
to tell you the background of that. I had been talking about the difficulties
that former Presidents of the United States had had to encounter, difficulties
which Lincoln had had to encounter in his problems over State/ Federal
financial relations, and which in many respects, because there was so
much division in the country then, bore some relation to the problems
and difficulties that President Johnson and President Nixon had to bear on
Vietnam. But I finished up saying and I still believe this is true
whenever there is an attempt by the United States or the United Kingdom
or any other country to try to raise the living standards of the underprivileged
peoples of the world, to try to improve the economies of underdeveloped
countries, to try to ensure that countries will retain their independence
against attack, whenever there are such endeavours and such approaches
by such countries, then we will go " A-Waltzing Matilda" with you. Perhaps
it should have been phrased " for we will then endeavour to follow the same
road" becauc I think we would and have endeavoured to follow the same
road of trying to lift the living standards by trying to develop the economies
and by trying to see that people govern themselves in independent states.
All these things of which I have spoken are areas of closer
co-operation. We have no doubt whatever that should we ever need
assistance in time of danger to us, the United States would provide that
assistance to us as we would help in our way in troubles she might have.
We believe that the basic desires of our people and the United States
people and our Governmentl and the United States Government are the
same, both for the widening of the horizons of life for our citizens and
both for attempting to bring peaceful conditions and better living conditions
to peoples in the world outside our countries.
In all these matters, there is a basic sameness, a basic
unity between our countries. This is something your Association can
help to further and this is why the Government takes such an interest
in your Association and what it is doing.
There are, of course, other fields in which co-operation
between our countries is not as entirely close as perhaps we would like
it to be. For example, it would be very nice if the United States, having
an insatiable appetite for meat, were to enable us to export, in order to 
meet this appetite, some of the meat which at the moment we are not
allowed to send there. There are other areas such as sugar which seems
to be engraved on the heart of my friend and I say that genuinely my
friend, Senator Fulbright, as deeply as Calais was engraved on the heart of
Queen Mary. There is the long-standing question of whether it might not
be good and strengthening for both our countries if the kind of wool which
we can produce in Australia were allowed in to the United States of America
without such a crippling duty on it. But these, Sir, are merely passing
thoughts and introduced into this gathering in the hope and the belief that
all the areas of co-operation I have spelt out and which this Association
so strongly supports will be able to spread over in time into these other
areas of co-operation. But having said all that, and having at timcsendeavoured
to be not too deadly serious in saying it, it still remains completely and
irrevocably true that if this world is to be, in time, the kind of world that
we would like it to be, then the co-operation of men and women of goodwill
in the United States and Australia and in other countries must be fostered.
It must be furthered and the men and women of each of these countries
must learn more of each other, must learn more of their ideals, must
learn more of their problems. This you are doing. For this we give you
our thanks. And because of this I have been proud and honoured to have
been asked to talk to you today. 



HIGH COURT JUDGMENT ON STAMP DUTY
Extract from speech made by the Prime Minister, Mr-'
John Gorton, in the Boothby Electorate, South Australia
27 September 1969
( The Prime Minister handed over a cheque for $ 200, 000 as a Commonwealth
contribution to Adelaide's Festival Hall).
" Of course, this is not going to solve by any means the
problems that your Premier and all the other State Premiers have just
recently run into. You will recall, all of you, that a short time ago there
was a High Court Judgment which cast doubt on the legal validity of the
taxes which the States, all of them, were levying in the way of their own
taxation field of stamp duty. If this legal judgment I'm not quite sure
whether it will but if it does cast doubt and possibly make invalid this kind
of State taxation, then this is something which is going to affect the Budgets
of every State in Australia in greater or lesser degree, certainly the Budgets
of this State, and it is going to have a fundamental effect on the taxation
capacity of the States to raise the residual revenue they want.
I think your Premier and other Premiers would agree with
me that they are now facing, because of this uncertainty, a very grave
problem indeed. I would like to say to your Premier, who is going to meet
all the other Premiers tomorrow in Melbourne to discuss this matter, that
we do not think it just a matter which is a problem for the States. This is
a problem for the Commonwealth just as much as it is a problem for the
States, because it casts the whole relationship into the melting pot.
I don't know what the Conference of Premiers may decide
to do tomorrow. But I do know and I want to make this perfectly clear,
that we, as a Federal Government, realise that it is a problem extending
beyond the States. If possible and if we are asked, we would be prepared
to pass validating legislation to enable the States to continue to do what
they have been doing in the way of taxation, if they wish to do it, though we
do not know whether that validating legislation itself would in fact be
constitutional and would stand up to a challenge. But what we can do in order
to support the States in the problem they are now facing, we as a Commonwealth
Government will do. And if we cannot pass validating legislation because of
the Constitution this is not clear then we will certainly confer with all the
Premiers in order to ensure that their Budgets are not wrecked and that
some other way is found for providing the revenue they may lose as a result
of this Judgment in the High Court. This is of great significance to all of
us and this, I think, should be known and established." 



EMBAGOEDEMBARGOEDEMAGD
FEDERAL ELECTIONS 1969
POLICY SPEECH
PRESENTED BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON
NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA UNTIL 8 P. M.
WEDNESDAY 8 OCTOBER
EMBARGOED. EMBARGOED 
INTRODUCTION: A little less than twenty years ago the Australian people
dismissed a Labor Government and installed a Liberal/ Country Party
coalition. They were tired of controls, for the sake of controls. They
were dismayed by unemployment and general strikes. They were frightened
of the doctrinaire socialist approach of a Labor Party strongly influenced
by communist unions. They were sick of stagnation.
So they turned to us who believe the individual is the basis
of the state, and that the state will best progress if the individual is given
the greatest possible amount of freedom and of opportunity to take risks
and to reap rewards. Since that time Australia has progressed at a rate before
undreamt of.
In the last ten years alone our exports have doubled.
Our work force has grown from under four to over five
million and they are fully employed.
There has been, and there continues to be, a spectacular
rate of growth due to a high rate of capital inflow, yet
inflation has been kept in check.
A little less than two years ago, I became the Leader of
the Liberal/ Country Party coalition, at a time when Australia was faced
with new problems and changing situations at home and abroad. And I
report to you that, in less than two years, we have done much.
We have decided that even though Britain withdraws from
our North we shall keep ground, sea and air forces there
as a visible expression of our continuing interest in helping
to preserve that region against possible external attack.
For we believe that to meet our needs at home we must
be prepared to accept insofar as our power allows
our responsibilities abroad. We cannot choose one, and
reject the other. We must try to meet both our
responsibilities or we may meet neither.
In 1968/ 69 our economic growth, at 8. 7 per cent at constant
prices, has been greater than at any previous period in
our history.
Last year dwelling construction reached an all-time record
with 138, 000 commencements and 130, 000 completions. / 2
L 
-2
* More migrants were brought to Australia than in any previous
year.
* We have removed the financial fear of those faced with long-term
illnesses in hospitals.
* We have increased the basic rates of all social welfare pensions
by unparalleled amounts.
* We have introduced a tapered means test and provided taxation
concessions as an incentive to saving and to thrift.
* We have provided greatly increased sums for education and
have broken through the cobwebbed barrier which previously
prevented us helping the running costs of independent schools.
* We have made known the terms and conditions which we expect
overseas investors to observe when contemplating new
ventures in the development of Australia.
* We have sought to protect Australian-owned companies from
unfair take-over offers.
* We have established an overseas shipping line so that Australian
produce can begin to be carried in Australian ships and so
that we will know what are fair freights to charge Australian
producers.
* We have added half a billion dollars to funds available for roads
and ensured that much of this money will go to alleviate the
urban traffic problems which have been clogging our cities.
I have given a necessarily brief and incomplete account of
our stewardship over the last twenity months. And I am proud that we have
achieved what we have.
As a result:-
* We find ourselves with the respect of the United States, and of
Britain, for not reneging on our responsibilities to stand
ready to counter the threat of communist expansion through
the use of force.
* At home we enjoy that strong, growing and balanced economy
so vital to the achievement of our national destiny.
But the jobs, the development, the growing material strength
essential as a basis for defence and for social welfare all of these depend
on an economy most delicately balanced, on an economy in which we must
take care that the demand for labour and pressure on resources does
not exceed present pressures. 
3-
For if this happens as a result of irresponsible promises
being made and accepted, then all these things will be in jeopardy.
We cannot get something for nothing.
And the result of the Opposition's promises would be either
a great increase in inflation which will hit the wage earner and the pensioner
most severely or an increase in taxation which would hit all Australians.
In the result we would have gained nothing and paid a great price for it.
You see around you the results of what we have done and
the increasing opportunities for greatness because we have done it or
rather because you have done it under the conditions of Government we
have provided. Do not risk this. Do not put it all in jeopardy turning to an
Opposition which still believes in nationalisation, in direction for direction's
sake, which is strongly influenced in at least one state by communist
influenced unions and which makes promises they cannot keep.
I believe there is too much at stake for Australia to risk
a Labor Government still controlled by non-elected outside bodies a
Government which would make us falter in our steps towards greatness.
I turn now to the specific policies we shall follow if you
re-elect us as a Government.
But, I repeat, we must apply these policies against the
background of that responsible economic management of which I have
spoken and against a background not only of our needs as a Government
but also of the needs of the states as Governments.
Our task is to protect Australians against inflation and
increased burdens of income tax. Our task is to continue immigration,
to continue the inflow of development capital, to continue full employment,
to ensure that we do not try to do more than we have the men and resources
to accomplish. This must and will be overriding. Others may make
glittering and irresponsible promises for which you will, in one way or
another, pay. We will not. / 4 
4-
DEFENCE: Adequate defence is the rock on which national security
stands. Without it, debate on internal matters could be academic. Over
the years ahead we shall maintain and increase our defence capacity.
There are more Australians under arms today than ever
before in our history except in time of major war. They are better equipped
and they have greater mobility.
We shall keep the Army up to at least its present strength
of nine battalions. We shall retain National Service training in order to do
it. For it will no-. otherwise be done.
We shall improve the capacity of theAirForce, in fighter,
reconnaissance, and strike aircraft and shall see that aircraft provided frr
Australians to fight in are the best obtainable in the world.
We shall strengthen the 1Mvy with the types of ship the Navy
advise us that they most require including the new light destroyers and
the fast combat support ships asked for by that Service.
We shall progressively increase the sums spent on defence
in the years ahead, for to do less would weaken our own security and invite
the suspicion of our allies both within the region and without.
We have already announced that Learmonth Airfield, in
Western Australia, is to be upgraded to an operational base on the Indian
Ocean. We believe that broad considerations of Australia's
geo-political position and national development point to the conclusion that
naval support facilities in Western Australia will also be required in the
future. Our fleet numbers will increase and we will have to take an
increasing interest in the Indian Ocean as the British withdraw. Therefore
we have decided that we should begin the planned development of a naval
base at Cockburn Sound in Western Australia.
The first step, as recommended in the study made by our
consultants, is the construction of a causeway linking Garden Island
( Garden Island, Western Australia) to the mainland. We shall at once
proceed to the detailed design of this causeway and will begin construction
next financial year. Thereafter the naval facilities will be progressively
installed over a period. 0 
Our alliance with the United States under the ANZUS Pact
is vital to our defence. It requires that we should be true allies, that we
should be prepared to give, as well as expect to receive, assistance.
Therefore we shall continue to co-operate with the United States in the
construction of bases, for our joint defence. Bases of value to us both,
in Australia. We shall not sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
until we are sure that it is an effective Treaty, that it provides real
protection to its signatories, and that Australia's security in the future Is
not endangered.
VIETNAM: On Vietnam, we believe that we were right to help the
people of South Vietnam resist aggression. And we believe we are right
to continue to do so.
The immorality in the Vietnam War lies in the aggression
of the North against the South. We do not seek the conquest of North
Vietnam, nor domination of North Vietnam.
What we seek is an opportunity for the people of South
Vietnam to choose the kind of government under which they wish to live.
We believe this to be a proper aim, and that to leave Vietnam before
the South Vietnamese people are assured of this right would be a tragedy
in itself and would hold the seeds of future tragedy.
Should there be developments which result in plans for
continuing reduction of United States forces over a period then we would
expect to be phased in to that programme and would see that we are. But
we will not unilaterally withdraw. To do so would be to abandon an
objective to betray our allies, and, I believe, to imperil our future security.
MALAYSIA / SINGAPORE: Australia cannot fail to be affected by what happens in the
nations in the region to our North.
What affects their security can ultimately affect our security.
We will ther-efore adhere to our decision to maintain in the region of
Malaysia/ Singapore forces of all arms and will maintain in Australia a
capacity for swift additional assistance. / 6 
-6-
We willcontinue to support the concept of a regional security
pact in that region in which we will participate.
But we will exert all the influence at our command to prevent
participation by Russia in such an arrangement. We believe that our
security would be threatened by the establishment of any Russian naval
or military bases in that area. We believe that any military alliance or
arrangement between Russia and a country in our region would pose a
threat to ourselves. For we cannot forget Czechoslovakia and Hungary
and other occupied nations, and we believe that Russian communism still
has as its objective the spreading of its system throughout the world. / 7 
-7-
TAXATION REFORM:
I turn now to a subject that is of great concern to the
average man. That is income tax.
In recent years many changes have been made to meet
specific needs. These include increases in wives and dependants'
allowances, deductions for education, larger deductions for life
insurance and so on.
But with rapidly rising incomes the existing taxation
structure needs to be reformed.
The operation of the present progressive rate scale has
shifted a growing proportion of the weight of taxation on to
personal income taxpayers, especially wage and salary earners.
A Iarge number of taxpayers in the lower and middle income groups
with incomes ranging from modest levels up to those earned at
executive, administrative and professional levels are involved.
To correct thi s will be a maj or task of great complexity.
We have and are still studying this problem so that beginning in
the next budget we can bring forward speci fic proposals aimed at
improving the system and correcting the inequities which have
developed. As a responsible government we must proceed within
the limits of what is economically feasible at any given time. But
our aim wi 11 be so to reduce personal income tax, over the three
year period beginning with the next budget, that at the end of that
time we will be providing relief, to lower and middle income
earners, of the order of $ 200 million as compared with the amounts
which would be payabl e by them under the present income tax
structure. / 8 
-8-
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT:
We shall adopt new specific proposals for National
Development. Because lack of water is one of the greatest limitations
on Australia's growth, we shall set aside $ 100 million
over the next five years, to be spent in co-operation with
the Stat es under t he national water resources development
programme, This money will be available for water
conservation including conservation in small dams for
flood prevention and mitigation and for carrying out
surveys of underground water resources.
We shall, during the next Parliament, take Australia into
the atomic age by beginning the construction of an atomic
plant at Jervis Bay, to generate electricity. We believe
that Australia will make increasing use of atomic power in
the years ahead and that the time for this nation to enter
the atomic age has now arrived.
We will embark on developing the Port of Darwin at a cost
which is estimated, together with ancillary services, at
some $ 16 million.
We shall build the Port Augusta/ Whyalla Railway at an
estimated cost of $ 8 million.
We shall build the Port Pirie/ Adelaide Railway, at an
estimated cost of $ 30 to $ 50 million over two years.
/ 9 
9-
-DUCATI ON:
Our direct assistance to education throughout Australia is
great and growing. We are providing science blocks and libraries for
all schools. We are providing $ 10 million a year for secondary technical
schools. We have allocated $ 10 million a year for state-controlled
teacher training colleges, and we are now engaged in a co-operative
study with State Education Departments into the future needs of
education at the school level and this survey covers both state and
independent schools.
When that survey is completed the States and ourselves will
discuss the assistance we should each provide to promote the ftvrther
development of education in all schools. And the survey will include
the provision of in-service training for Australia's primary and
secondary teachers.
There is also a clear need for more educational research, a
need for greater co-operation and co-ordination of effort in particular
fields, and we shall provide $ 250, 000 a year, beginning in the next
budget for this purpose.
We shall introduce, under the control of the Department of
Labour and National Service, vocational training schemes for married
women and single women who have been restricted by domestic
responsibilities but who have now reached a stage where they may wish
to enter employment. And we shall set up a scheme to give vocational training to
workers displaced by technological change who may need training to
convert their existing skills into skills required for alternate service.
And in recent years the government has greatly supported
scientific activity at all levels.
We now intend a new and significant step.
Vie are an island continent and we need a much greater
knowledge and understanding of the biological and physical
recources in and beneath the sea around us.
We shall therefore establish an Institute of Marine Science
at Townsville. 
10
EDUCATION: PAGE 2
The Institute will have an independent directorate, and
research in the area of the Great Barrier Reef will be one of the first
priorities of the new Institute.
The capital cost is estimated to be of the order of $ 3 million
and we expect that it will become a centre of excellence that will give
Australia the world reputation in marine science which she already
enjoys in the field of astronomy.
SOCIAL WELFARE: I do not believe that there has ever been, in such a concentrated
period, so much done to improve social welfare as has been done by my
government. We promised and we have matched performance to that
promise. We shall continue general improvemait in social welfare as
and when we can responsibly do so, without causing inflation or
increasing tax burden. And we regard increasing the help given to
poor families as of greater importance than abolishing a means test
so pensions can be paid to rich families.
During the next Parliament we shall pay special attention to
the needs of the young family; to the positive rehabilitation of the
handicapped and invalid so that they may return to normal life; to a
more fruitful partnership with voluntary bodies, including both church
and lay bodies, who serve the old, the sick, and the needy.
We shall pay pensions at standard rates instead of at married
rates to aged couples who lose the economics of living together by
reason of failing health for example if one or both of them is in a
nursing home. We shall give capital assistance on a 2 for 1 basis to approved
institutions which give training for the various kinds of handicapped
children the blind, the deaf, the spastic, the crippled and the mentally
retarded. / 11 
11
SOCIAL WELFARE: PAGE 2
The results already achieved through the aged persons
homes and sheltered workshops encourages us to expand our policy
of partnership with voluntary bodies.
The Meals on % ieels organisation is one of the worthiest
such bodies in the community. In the next budget we will make
available to each separate organisation in the Meals on Wheels
organisation a $ 1 subsidy for every 10 meals served in the past year,
such money to be used for the expansion of their activities, or to be
donated to another Meals on Wheels organisation of their choice.
HEALTH: In health, the removal of financial hardship arising from
illness has had a high priority with us. Today we not only describe
our objectives, we can point to our achievements:
Full hospital benefits for hospital patients who are
chronically ill;
Supplementary nursin-i home benefits for patients needing
and receiving intensive nursing care;
Special benefits for handicapped children under 16;
Medical and hospital benefits, without payment of
contribution, for persons receiving unemployment or
sickness benefit, or for families with incomes below $ 39
a week and for migrants during their first two months in
Australia; Special financial assistance to the States for the development
of co-ordinated programmes cf home care to strengthen home
nursing and home care services, particularly for the frail
aged. All this has been done. It has gone far to eliminate financial
hardship for people with special needs. Only one problem of any
significant size remains in relation to people with lengthy illnesses.
Some people after paying health insurance contributions for many years
find that they are obliged to spend long periods under intensive care in
/ 12 
12
HEALTH: PAGE 2
nursing homes as distinct from hospitals.
We shall negotiate with the health insurance funds to arrange
for the payment of increased benefits, properly related to reasonable
nursing home fees, for persons who have been regular contributors
to health insurance funds and who need intensive nursin-1 home care.
At the same time we have been moving to bring in improvements
in the Nhtional Health Scheme so that it will operate more efficiently,
more economically and more satisfctorily for the community as a
whole. Vie have the Nimmo Committee Report which defines the areas
where reforms are needed for example, more economical management
by some of the health funds and a reasonable, orderly policy in the
alloc-ation of reserves. We shall attack and overcome these problems
and will bring about the reforms that are necessary.
WY,-e are well advanced in negotiations with the medical
profe ssion and the health insurance funds so that all patients will be
assured of medical benefits more closely related to doctors' charges.
Commonwealth medical benefits and fund benefits will be
increa Fred so that the difference between the benefit entitl ements and
the common fee charged by doctors will not at any time exceed
even for the most complicated and costly surgical procedures. For
simpler procedures which are less expensive, the difference between
the benefits and doctors' common fees will be very much less.
This is estimated to cost the Commonwealth some $ 16 million.
The successful introduction of these proposals will mean that no
section of the community which is prepared to insure itself need
flear hardship from the cost of medical services. 
13-
HOUSING: The Home Savings Grant Scheme has already benefited
some 153,000 young couples.
Hitherto the grant was only payable if the value of the home,
including land, did not exceed $ 15, 000.
We shall increase this limit and the grant will now be
payable for houses which, including the cost of land, do not exceed
in value $ 17,500.
This amendment will apply to people who contract to buy
or build their houses on or after Monday 27 October 1969. 
14
IMMIGRATION The factor which prevents Australia doing all that we, and the
State Governments, wish to do is not primarily lack of money or indeed
pressure on materials. It is that we do not have all the manpower we need.
Bringing increasing numbers of migrants to this country, and
providing conditions which induce them to stay here, and to become
Australians, is therefore one of our fundamental tasks.
280,000 settlers have come to Australia since I took office in
January 1968 and in this last year a record 175, 600 arrived.
We shall in the next three years intensify our efforts in this
field. And, internally, we shall take new initiatives.
Because of the importance of the English language to migrants
the Commonwealth, recognising its obligations, is prepared to take the
initiative in promoting, and to accept responsibility for financing:
1. The expansion of existing facilities for the instruction
of adult migrants;
2. The provision of intensive full-time English language
courses for those who must know English in order to
follow occupations for which they have been trained;
3. And, special classes in existing schools for migrant
children of all ages to ensure that they achieve the
education to which their intelligence and natural skills
entitle them.
Further, within our community there are people in need and
unaware of information which could relieve them from worries they need
not endure. Their own knowledge of the range of benefits, services and
assistance available to them is inadequate and we will propose to the States
that grants be made through the municipal authorities to subsidise the
employm ent of suitably experienced people who might provide the
information and the guidance which these migrants need. 
15
ARTS We believe a nation not only expresses itself through its
material achievements, but also through its participation in, and its
development of, the arts.
The late Prime Minister established the Australian Council for
the Arts and this year we increased by 70 per cent the money available to
foster the development of music, ballet and theatre, in Australia. We
established an Interim Council to inv stigat and report on the establishment
of a National Film and Television Training School.
We believe that it is time Australia developed its own film
industry and we shall, in our next period of government, establish an
Australian Film and Television Development Corporation to administer a
film and television fund which will invest in, and make loans to, film and
television producers for the making of quality films and programmes in
Australia with a significant Australian content, and otherwise to encourage
the production and distribution overseas of A ustralian-made films of high
quality. An amount of $ 1 million will be provided as the initial capital
for the Corporation and supplementary grants will be provided during the
early years of its operation so that the Corporation will have available, at
the beginning of each financial year, one million dollars and amounts
repaid from its investments or advances will be retained by the Corporation
for further development. / 16 
16-
TRADE: Australia has begun to emerge as an industrial nation. More
and more we look to the continued healthy growth of our manufacturing
industries for our strength and our security.
The Government believes it is essential to ensure that its
policies adequately reflect the important role manufacturing industry plays
in the nation's economy.
Industry cannot be expected to achieve the full development of
its efficiencies and skills alone. In today's world, industry needs the
support of effective government policies.
In the life of the next Parliament, we will re-examine present
government activities and policies in this important area with a view to
strengthening the Gov ernm ent's programme of assistance to Australian
industrial creativity and efficiency.
But the development of manufacturing industry ultimately
depends on the protection given to industry in the Australian market against
import competition. Australia must have continued industrial growth to create each
year the new jobs required to sustain a growing population and a dynamic
immigration programme. The Government regards its tariff policy as a vital
factor in providing a firm basis for this industrial growth. The traditional
policy that reasonable and adequate protection should be given to economic
and efficient Australian industries has served this country well and will not
be changed. The Government retains full responsibility for Australian tariff
policy. The Government recognises that in cases involving relatively high
protection the benefits have to be weighed very carefu'jy against the possible
effects on other industries and the community generally. But, the Government
does not accept any pre-determined upper limit to the level of protection
which might be accorded. The decision in each case must be determined
by the Government and by the Government alone in the light of all
circumstances of any particular case. / 17 
-17
PRIMARY INDUSTRY: The Department of Primary Industry which will issue a
supplementary statement is continuing its intensive study of the long-term
problems of rural industries.
The Government has recently had before it special reports on
these questions and in the recent budget speech announced a number of
measures to assist primary producers.
The policy of providing compensation in the case of primary
industries that suffered from British devaluation, in cases where loss is
unavoidable and demonstrable, will be continued in 1970 on the same basis
as it was in this year.
The A pple and Pear Industry has submitted a proposal for a
stabilization scheme; and the Government will give full consideration to
these plans.
SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT:
In the past, the Commonwealth Government has encouraged
several forward-looking transport policies, for example railway standardisation,
the development of beef cattle roads, and container shipping. It will continue
to implement measure s which will lead to the reduction of internal transport
costs. The-problem of traffic cong: estion in the citie-s is on-2 of great
urgency. We have made a significant contribution to easing that congestion
problem through our allocations for urban art-: erial and sub-arterial roads.
But there is a great deal more to be done, espe cially in improving public
transport systams. The populations of the major cities ar. e growing so that by 1981,
Sydney could have C-population of 3.3 million, and M-elbourna 3. 1 million
and with this prospect, it is vital that public transport service2s do not decline.
/ 18 
18
SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT Page 2
We will direct attention to this and to shipping and to port
problems. In recent years the shipping industry has undergone major
changes the introduction of roll-on roll-off ships, specialised bulk
carriers and container ships. It is important that the trends towards more
modem ships should be continued because it means lower freights.
The changes in shipping technology have in many cases made
existing port facilities obsolete. There is therefore an urgent need for an
extensive study of port needs and for putting work in hand which will provide
what we need over the next ten years.
We shall do this and we shall set up a Bureau of Transport
Economics, to analyse the costs and economics of transport in Australia,
and, in co-operation with the States, where necessary, will seek to take
measures to reduce such costs. / 19 
19
On October 25 you will make your choice.
You will choose which defence policy you prefer,
You will choose which foreign affairs approach you prefer.
You will decide whether to continue with that responsible
economic management which has brought us such prosperity, growth and
employment opportunity or whether to accept irresponsible promises for
which you will, in one way or another, pay,
You will choose between growth with stability and our opponents
proposals designed to bring inflation.
You will decide whether our record on social welfare and health
is such that you believe we will make further advances as soon as possible.
You will choose between our proposals to lighten income tax
on the family man and proposals which must prevent such a lightening
and are likely to lead to an increase.
The future is in your hands.
I ask you to consider your choice very carefully.
For Australia's sake I ask you not to put all our present
achievements at risk not to put all the great possibilities for the future
and present at risk.
For Australia's sake I ask you to support the Government on
October 
19
On October 25 you will make your choice.
You will choose which defence policy you prefer,
You will choose which foreign affairs approach you prefer.
You will decide whether to continue with that responsible
economic management which has brought us such prosperity, growth and
employment opportunity or whether to accept irresponsible promises for
which you will, in one way or another, pay.
You will choose between growth with stability and our opponents
proposals designed to bring inflation.
You will decide whether our record on social welfare and health
is such that you believe we will make further advances as soon as possible.
You will choose between our proposals to lighten income tax
on the family man and proposals which must prevent such a lightening
and are likely to lead to an increase.
The future is in your hands.
I ask you to consider your choice very carefully.
For Australia's sake I ask you not to put all our present
achievements at risk not to put all the great possibilities for the future
and present at risk.
For Australia's sake I ask you to support the Government on
October 



ABORIGINAL POLICY
In-May, 1967, as a result of the Referendum, the Commonwealth
received a new responsibility for Aborigines. During the lifetime of the
last Parliament we have fashioned a policy to meet that responsibility. In
the next Parliament we intend to develop it still further.
My predecessor, the late Harold Holt, first set up the Council
for Aboriginal Affairs, and I took the next step by appointing a Minister-in-
Charge within my own Department.
Our basic aim is to give our Aboriginals the opportunity to be
self-supporting, and to end the " mentality of the hand-out". We want them
to choose for themselves their own future, and to regain their initiative and
independence. Not all will make the same choice, since their various
circumstances are so very different.
The constitutional powers of the Commonwealth in this field are
not exclusive, but we share with the States. It is not our intention to usurp
State functions, particularly because we believe that decentralisation and
regional administration will be in the interests of the Aborigines themselves.
Our grants to the States last year for A boriginal advancement were
5 million: this year they will be 4 million. These grants are used for
the purposes of housing, education, health and employment.
We have sponsored training schemes, education schemes and
schemes of regional development. Through our Aboriginal Enterprises
Capital Fund, we are making it possible for Aboriginals to own their own
businesses, whether on an individual or a group basis.
We believe that Aboriginals should be able to retain features of
their own culture where they so choose. The work of the A ustralian Institute
of Aboriginal Studies, which was set up by us, will help here. We are
encouraging Aboriginal handicrafts and arts. We aim to create a higher
degre., of mutual respect between Aboriginal Australians and other
Australians. We gratefully acknowledge that, towards these ends, there is a
great deal of work being done by non-Governmental organisations, including
both Church bodies and lay bodies. We aim to utilise the great reservoir
of goodwill towards the A botiginals which exists throughout the community. 
ABORIGINAL POLICY Page 2
Our plans for the next phase are as follows:
1 Regional schemes such as we have worked out in
collaboration with the A boriginals themselves for
Prnhem Land will be followed both in the Northern
Territory and in conjunction with State administrations.
2. Increased allocations will be made for Aboriginal
housing in both the States and the Northern Territory:
in addition we shall be encouraging Aborigines to make
use of our Aged Persons Homes programme and of finance
through co-operative building societies.
3. Where a State has land for Aboriginals, we will provide
through our Capital Fund the resources to develop it for
Aboriginal advancement and under Aboriginal ownership.
4. We intend to involve Aboriginal communities in their own
local government and in the maintenance of law and order
among themselves to the greatest possible extent.
We shall continue and expand our programmes for
Aboriginal health and education, with the aim of ensuring
to them, in practice as well as in theory, all the
advantages enjoyed by other Australians.
6. In recent years, most discriminatory legislation against
Aboriginals has been abolished. We intend to see that this
process is completed in the life of the next Parliament upon
both State and Federal levels.
7. Our policies of research into all aspects of Aboriginal
welfare will be continued. We shall continue to fost. r
Aboriginal culture and to give them a chance to participate
in sport. We shall press on with our programme of
helping other Australians to appreciate both the value
of their culture and the problems which face them.
We do not intend to take the easy way of deciding everything for
the aboriginals, and telling them what they are to do and what they are to be.
Instead, we will take the slower and better way of consulting them, and
working out plans in accordance with their real wishes. 
PRIMARY INDUSTRY
Following its established and proven policy of consultation and
negotiation with the primary industries, the Government has continued and
will continue to introduce measures designed to stabilise and strengthen
these important industries and thereby to strengthen the economies of the
countries, towns and cities which depend on them.
The Government is well aware of the cost pressures which national
policies of rapid growth and development have brought to bear on the primary
industries and has constantly sought to devis e new measures to offset these
pressures. Coupled with low and in some cases, declining prices on overseas
markets, these pressures have caused considerable difficulty for many
primary industries. In addition to the many established methods of offsetting these
special difficulties such as production subsidies, stabilisation schemes,
bounties on fertilizers, equalisation of petrol prices, tax concessions,
building of beef roads and establishment of water conservation projects, the
Government has recently introduced significant new measur-s designed to
further lighten the cost burden falling on primary producers.
One of the most important of these is in the area of estate duty
where for the first time the Commonw calth has moved to give special
concessions on the estates of primary producers by raising the existing
statutory exemption by 20% and in addition reducing the amount of estate
duty payable in proportion to that part of the duty attributable to the value of
real assets such as land, livestock, plant and machinery.
Further measures introduced in the recent Budget included
increases in both the superphosphate and nitrogenous fertilizer bounties
bringing the cost of these bounties up to $ 65 million a year. Tax concessions
for primary producers have been extended to allow the cost of all structural
improvements for conserving water or fodder to be deductible in full for tax
purposes in the year in which the expenditure is incurred. This measure is
seen as a very strong incentive to farmers to conserve more water and fodder
on their own properties so they can better cope with the droughts which are
a feature of Australia's weather pattern. For direct relief of drought effects
the Commonwealth over the last four years has provided by way of grants
and loans a total of $ 119 million.
Australia's biggest foreign exchange earner, the wool industry,
is on the threshold of big and important development. The Government,
again to help wool growers to meet their cost problems, has offered to almost
double its contribution towards research and promotion while halving the cost
to growers. This would mean that the Government, if this offer is accepted
by the industry, would provide up to $ 27 million a year for research and
promotion. 
PRIMARY INDUSTRY Page 2
The wool industry also is now examining the Government's
offer of finance for the industry's new marketing proposals. These
proposals came forward from the Australian Wool Industry Conference and
the Government, after careful examination made certain changes in the
proposals and offered up to $ 7.3 million a year to assist in their
implementation $ 1.2 million more than the assessed cost of the original
proposals. The Government's offer has been formally conveyed to
representatives of the A. W. I. C. for consideration and the conference will
have the assistance of the cost/ benefit analysis now being revised by the
Australian Wool Board in coming to a decision. The Government believes
its offer, if accepted by the industry, will be a means of helping the
industry to take a vital first step in the modernisation of the wool industry,
without interfering with its traditional and well proved method of selling
through the auction system.
With the wheat industry facing serious difficulties because of
very hard production and diminishing world markets, the Government has
responded to the industry's request for help in introducing a delivery quotas
scheme to bring production and markets more into balance. The Government
agreed to the industry's request to guarantee finance totalling $ 440 million
to allow a first advance of 10 to be paid on all quota wheat this season.
Recently, the Government arranged with the A ustralian Wheat
Board for an additional 60 million bushel of storage space to be provided
so that all wheat produced this season can be taken into storage by the
middle of next year. Last year the industry's stabilisation plan was
renewed for a further five years. Under the plan, the protective cover over
the industry has been increased by extending the guaranteed export price to
200 million bushel'-of wheat, compared with the 150 million bushel,
previously. The plan also fixes prices for wheat consumed in Australia and
these are subject to annual variation as a result of movements in certain costs.
The Government has entered into strenuous negotiation to ensure
that Australia's access to the United States Meat Market is maintained and
if possible increased. These negotiations led to a worthwhile increase in
the quantity of meat entering that market from Australia although Australia's
share of the total market declined. The Government has provided at a cost
of more than $ 5 million a year an export inspection service to ensure that all
meat leaving A ustralia meets the highest standard of quality demanded by
overseas consumers. This service has helped Australia keep markets it
could otherwise have lost. Support to the Dairy Industry has continued, this
year including substantial compensation for losses resulting from Britain's
devaluation of her currency two years ago. Total devaluation compensation
paid or committed to all Australian primary export industries has now
reached approximately $ 86 million. 
PRIMARY INDUSTRY Page 3
The Government has actively assisted the sugar industry
by taking a leading part in the negotiation which produced the new
International Sugar greement and by entering into a new domestic
agreement with the Queensland Government on the domestic pricing
arrangements for sugar. In addition the Government has made loans
totalling about $ 24 million to the industry to assist it in recent periods of
difficulty. These are examples of the many ways in which the Government
is continually working to ensure the stability of Australia's primary
industries. One which has attracted a great deal of attention is the rapidly
developing fishing industry in which the Government has taken a number of
steps such as the claiming of an exclusive 12 miles fishing zone for
Australian fishermen; the establishment of Navy and Air Force patrols to
police the zone; the enactment of laws . o give Australia control of the
living marine resources of the Great Barrier Reef; the conclusion of an
agreement with Japan, providing for the phasing out of all Japanese
fishing operations within the 12-mile zone and the closing of Australian
ports to foreign fishing vessels. The Government has acted to assist a
number of other primary industries in a variety of ways and is currently
examining the problems of others in an effort to find ways cf helping the
industries concerned to overcome these problems. 
PRIME MINISTER'S POLICY SPEECH 1969
Supplementary Statement on Health
Commonwealth medical benefits and fund benefits will be
increased so that the difference between the benefit entitlements and fees
most commonly charged by doctors will not exceed $ 5 even for the most
complicated and costly surgical procedures. For simpler procedures,
which are less expensive, the difference between the benefits and doctors'
common fees will be very much less.
At the same time, we firmly believe that the patient should
carry a personal responsibility for a portion of the cost of medical services
he receives. Significant reductions in the proportion of the medical
charge that will be met by the patient will be achieved by making substantial
increases in both Commonwealth medical benefits and fund benefits. For
our part we are proposing an overall increase of 30 per cent in
Commonwealth medical benefits at a cost of $ 16 million a year.
The health insurance funds will also increase their fund
benefits and to do so small increases in the rates of contributions will be
necessary. In most States these increases will not exceed 5 cents a week
for a single person and 10 cents a week for a family contributor to the
highest table available. In N. S. W. where doctors' charges are higher
than in other States, an increase of 7 cents per single contributor and
cents a week respectively for family contributors will be necessary. In
order to simplify the scheme and to ensure an adequate coverage for
contributors only one medical table will be available in each State when
the new arrangement commences.
The increased benefits will be applied selectively so that
the biggest increases will be made for the high cost services where the
need is greatest. We are confident that contributors will willingly accept
the small increase in contribution rates in the knowledge that it will bring
them a far better medical benefits coverage than they have ever had before.
We are aiming at the following margin between total benefit
entitlements and doctors' common fees:-
General Practitioner Services
Surgery consultations 80 cents
Home visits
Other services graduated up to
For the more costly services the margin of $ 5 to be met by
the patient will be as low as 2 per cent or 3 per cent of the cost of the service. 



EMBARGO: 7. 15 p. m. 10 October RADIO TALK NO. 1
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
OVER ABC NETWORK ON FRIDAY 10 OCTOBER
Proper defence is the foundation on which any nation'ss
security is built. If we are to run our own affairs in our own Australian way
if we are in the future to be subjected neither to attack nor the threat of
attack then defence is essential. It is the more essential to us now we
are becoming increasingly isolated, and the adequate defence of Australia
demands two approaches. One is that we should build up, over the years ahead, our
own defence forces; that we should have a standing Army of at least its
present size backed by a modern C. M. F. that our Navy should grow;
that our Air Force should have the best aircraft obtainable; that, in short,
we should look to our own efforts for our own defence.
The second is that we should retain and strengthen the
alliances we have; that we should play our part in such alliances,
particularly with the United States, and should be prepared to give, as
well as expect to receive, help.
You know that we, of the Liberal Party coalition, will
maintain and strengthen our own forces. But you have been told by the
Opposition that they will not. They have undertaken to abolish National
Service training, thereby reducing our Army by a third.
They have undertaken not to acquire the F 111 strike
aircraft, even though the Air Force advice is that Australia needs this
aircraft and that it is the best strike aircraft in the world today.
They have undertaken to equip the Navy not with what the
Navy wants but with a few patrol boats only.
So under Labor, our own defences would deteriorate just
when they should be improving. This is bad enough but even more
disastrous would be the effect of Labor's policies on our alliances. o. / 2 
-2-
They propose to withdraw at once from Vietnam unilaterally,
just at the time when President Nixon is calling for steadfastness, so that
the enemy will negotiate a peace giving the South Vietnamese a choice of
government. I can think of nothing more calculated to damage our standing
or to drive America into isolationism.
They propose to withdraw all our forces from Malaysia/
Singapore and, in practice, to wash our hands of helping in the military
defence of the region to our North. Again, there could be nothing more
calculated to deter Britain and the United States coming to the help of that
region, the destiny of which affects our destiny, in case of attack.
They propose to quibble and cavil and renegotiate the question
of defence bases in Australia, even though these bases are for common
defence, to help our defence, as well as that of the United States.
So their proposals boil down to reducing and rendering
less effective our own defence forces and to taking international action
which will weaken ANZUS, strengthen isolationism in the United States,
deter Britain from helping Malaysia/ Singapore and damage severely our
own standing. We will do none of these things. The Labor Party undertakes
to do them all. This is perhaps the greatest issue for you to decide on
October I hope and believe that for our nation's future security you
will decide our policies are best for Australia and for Australia's future.
Note: This talk will be broadcast by the ABC National Network at
7. 15 p. m. ( EST). 



ElMARGO: 7. 15 p. m. Wednesday 15 October RADIO TALK NO. 2
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. JOHN GORTON,
OVER ABC NETWORK ON WEDNESDAY 15 OCTOBER
In my last talk to you, I spoke of the disastrous effects which
Labor's approaches would have on our own defence and on our overseas
alliances and on Australia's future security generally.
Tonight I will talk of domestic approaches.
The essence of our own approach is that we regard it as our
first task to maintain full employment, to maintain the inflow of overseas
capital for development, to continue immigration at least at its present
level, to continue growth, to protect Australians against inflation and,
gradually, to lighten the burden of income taxation.
In short, our first task is to protect and promote our present
prosperity and, at the same time, to seek to lighten income tax burdens.
In the field of social services, we have done much indeed,
I think, more than any comparable Government has done in any comparable
period of time. And we will obviously do more as it becomes economically
responsible to do so.
But we will not put our present prosperity at risk. We will
not put greater income tax burdens on the wage and salary-earning family
man. We will not risk that inflation which hits the pensioner and the wage
and salary-earner hardest, but which hits all Australians and which will
inhibit that immigration, that growth, that capital inflow which job
opportunity demands should continue.
The Opposition, on the other hand, is prepared to put all
this in danger. They have made promises which will require hundreds of
millions of dollars a year to keep, hundreds of millions of dollars a year
without any provision for increased defence, without any provision for
national development, without any provision for the growing needs of the
States. And those hundreds of millions will come from you the present
income tax payers. / 2 
-2-
They will come either by way of increased taxation or by
way of a lack of reduction in taxation or by way of inflation hitting your
pocket. But one way or another you will pay for there is no way of getting
something for nothing. Apart from this general difference of approach between the
Opposition and ourselves, there is a particular matter on which we and the
Opposition differ. As you know, we have already introduced the tapered means
test and age taxation concessions which are real incentives to thrift and
which give real rewards to the thrifty. And now we believe that the first
call for the future on resources for social welfare should be the alleviation
of the lot of those who are still poor.
The Opposition, on the other hand, will provide $ 370 million
a year, not one cent of which will help the needy but all of which will go to
pay pensions to the well-off, for $ 370 million a year is what their plan
will cost if it is put into operation.
We believe that this is essentially wrong and we reject it
because we believe, as I have said, that the lot of the needy should have
first call on our resources.
Our efforts in the next Parliament will be devoted to helping
the children of needy families, to rehabilitation of the handicapped and the
invalid so that they can return to normal life, to giving capital assistance
to institutes helping handicapped children, to ensuring that the buying power
of the pensions we have recently raised does not, over the period, fall, and
to increasing social welfare generally as economic conditions permit.
This to us is a worthier aim than that of the Opposition and
we hope that you on October 25 will agree with us and agree that it is
better for Australians and for Australia.
Note: This talk will be broadcast by the ABC National Network at
7. 15 p. m. ( EST). 



0. E MBARGO: 7. 15 p. m. RADIO TALK NO. 3
19 69 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, OVER ABC NETWORK
ON FRIDAY 17 OCTOBER
In my previous talk to you, I dealt with the lack of
policy of the ALP in matters of defence and of foreign affairs. Also
I spoke of how I believed their policy of running out of our overseas
obligations and then cutting our own defence forces imperilled
Australia's future security and, indeed, made it quite possible that
the existence of Australia as an independent nation might, in the years
ahead, well be threatened by these policies.
And so, naturally, they have in their policy speech no
provision for increasing Australia's defences at all. Rather, as
would be expected, do they have a proposal to cut Australia's Army
by one-third by abolishing National Service Training, and this we
will not do. And also they have a proposal to deny the Air Force
that strike aircraft which the Air Force and all our military advisers
say Australia's defence needs. So they have no policy in those
directions. But when you examine the propositions put before you,
they don't have policies in other directions either. There arc no
policies for development which have been put before you by the Labor
Party. We, on the other hand, have put specific proposals.
We have proposed to build railways in South Australia.
We propose to establish an Institute of Marine Science so we can
learn about the Barrier Reef and help to protect it. We propose to
take Australia into the atomic age by establishing an atomic plant
at Jervis Bay. We propose to help the film industry in Australia so
that our talent can be employed, so that the pictures we make can be
exported and so that people overseas can see what the real Australia
is like. These are some of the specific proposals that we have put.
There are no such specific proposals to counter them from the
Opposition. Further, we have in what we have said, made it clear
that we realise that the State Governments will in the years ahead as
our revenue rises, need more and more revenue themselves so that
they can, as their population grows, provide the schools, the roads,
the hospitals, the other services they now give. e. / 2 
-2-
There is no indication whatsoever in the speeches of
the Opposition that they realise there will be this need. No indication
whatsoever. All there is is an indication that they will bypass the
States; that they will in education, for example, set up a Commission
to examine ten thousand schools and assess the needs of each. Whereas
we are already working and have been for months been working with
the States not to bypass them, but with each State Education Department
to assess, so that they could assess, the needs of their own schwls.
This surely is a better way to do it.
Then we have in one field only these large promises
in welfare large promises, very costly promises, promises which
will lead to inflation and yet promises which Dr. Cairns, one of the
economists in the Labor Party, has already said may be so costly that
they won't be able to be carried out. It is not surprising he should
say that because in the Opposition, no matter what the Leader wants
to do, he is told what to do by an outside body.
Let me give you one example of that. In Bendigo nct
long ago, the Leader of the Opposition went to the people saying,
" My policy is to make a grant for education. I will give half to State
schools; half to independent schools. Elect my candidate". And a
few scant weeks later he had to change that under dictation.
You cannot rely on what a Parliamentary party, dictated
to by an outside body, will do no matter whatever they may promise
to do. 



EMBARGO: 7. 15 p. m. on 20 October RADIO TALK NO. 4
1969 FEDERAL ELECTION
TALK GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
MR. JOHN GORTON, OVER ABC NETWORK
ON MONDAY 20 OCTOBER
Good evening. What do you see as the needs of Australia
in the years ahead? What do you see of the opportunities for Australia
in the exciting 1970' s we are just entering? How do you believe we
can make the most of these opportunities and satisfy these needs? I
see it this way. I believe that if we are to grow at the rate that history
demands, if we are to continue the development towards greatness
which we have so much advanced in the last twenty years, then we
will need in these years a continuing inflow of development capital
from abroad. This is so that our iron ore can be mined, our nickel
can be used, our oil can be used instead of importing oil, our factories
can be improved, our industrial muscles can be strengthened and
more and more employment and more secure employment can be
provided. Of course we want to participate with Australian capital
in this development, but in the years ahead we will not be able to
save from our own resources as much as is required for the ? ace of
development that history demands that Australia should have. So the
first need, I believe, is for this continuing development anid that will
depend on a continuing development capital coming to Australia.
Side by side with that need, and not to be put second
to it, is the need Australia has for more people, for greater
population, for more and more migrants coming to Australia, for
more and more Australians being born and growing up and working
for their nation. My Government has brought in record numbers of
migrants in this past year, but in the 1970' s we will need more and
more and more if the development and the employment and the
prosperity we now enjoy are to grow as they can with the opportunities
now facing us. / 2
6 
1 -2-
Both this development capital and the inflow of
population will be threatened should inflation strike this country.
If, as our Opposition suggests, hundreds of millicns of dollars
should be thrown into the economy when there is not manpower to
match it, when there are not resources to match it, then there will
be little new built, and what is built will cost more. And there will
be burdens placed on the fixed income earner, on the pensioner,
on the primary producer and that being so, there will be a diminution
of the growth and of the prosperity we now enjoy.
The real growth of Australia depends on a properlymanaged
economy, and it is a properly-managed economy which
these false and worthless Labor promises now threaten to damage.
For if you accept these propositions, then what will happen will be
that there will be a paper printing press, turning out worthless money
to meet such worthless promises.
But it is not only the development and the growth. It
is not only the increasing population Australia needs. We will need,
too, in these years ahead, strong friends. While we continue to look
after ourselves, while we continue to improve our own defence, we
will still need strong friends. We will not get them by reneging on
our alliances with the United States, by walking out of Malaysia/
Singapore, by niggling about joint defence bases in Australia, by
slapping our allies in the face and cutting our own security.
These are the needs of Australia in the 1970' s. They
can only be met by a Liberal Government. Don't be misled by
promises which can't be kept and which can be broken on the dictates
of an outside body. 



DECLARATION OF HIGGINS POLL
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton NOVEMER 1969
The first thing I would like to do is to express my gratitude
to the electors of Higgins for the majority they gave me. I also want to
express my gratitude to all those who worked so hard during the eleCtion
campaign, manning booths, sending out literature and doing all the work
required for a successful election. I thank you very much indeed for that
and I pledge that I will try to be a representative in the new Parliament
worthy of your work and support.
I am pleased to see that the Government has been returned
with a majority which looks as if it will be a good working majority of
seven or nine, because I feel it would have been, as I said in the campaign,
dangerous indeed for Australia if the Government had not been returned.
And that is the second point I want to make.
Having said that, I think that I should point out that there
was undoubtedly a swing against the Government during the election
campaign. It was a swing greater than would be expected. One had to
expect a swing of some kind back from an all-time high but not one
sufficient to lose 13 or 14 seats, and not one of the magnitude, particularly
in States outside Victoria, which was shown.
I think this is an indication that while the Government has
been returned, the electorate has not been completely satisfied. There
is some dissatisfaction shown by the vote and it is necessary for that to
be identified and rectified. This will be the task of my Government
assuming it is my Government after Friday, and I confidently believe it
will be to do this and to examine our policies searchingly so that in the
next election we can win overall as convincingly as you have allowed me
to win in this division. This we pledge ourselves to do; to examine all
our policies searchingly for that purpose.
Thank you very much. 



LINKING OF EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY
Broken Hill, N. S. W. 29 NOVEMBER 1969
Spech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. McCusker, Mr. Mayor, the Hon. the Premiers of New South Wales
and South Australia and Parliamentary Colleagues both Federal and State
and Ladies and Gentlemen:
Mr. Askin, Mr. Hall and I have each -just driven a dog
spike, suitably embellished with gold or silver plate, into the track at the
back of us. It is not for me to say how skilfully we did the job:' I think
we were assisted by the fact that the hole was probably bored out beforehand
for us to put the spikes into: But at least they went in, and that means
that officially the East-West Standard Gauge Railway is just about complete.
On the 12 January, the first through train will journey across
this country unimpeded by break of gauge, and travelling in 65 hours some
2, 500 miles across a bridge of steel which spans this continent and which
serves and will serve not orly as a bridge but as a tie that binds.
Each of the Premiers and myself have, I think, some
special right to be present and to meet you and to take part in this ceremony.
Mr. Askin has a right because Broken Hill is a part of New South Wales
and, theoretically at any rate, subject to the laws of New South Wales.
Mr. Hall, because Broken Hill can really be regarded almost as a suburb
of Adelaide, being only some nine hours away. And myself, I think, because
the Coalition Government some time ago took the first steps in the work
which came to fruition today and is providing something like half the
financial cost of it.
For the first time in more than a hundred years, this bridge,
this tie will be operating, and it will add a new dimension to the East-West
traffic; it will open a new chapter in our history. It is not possible today
to name all those who have played their part in the effort which came to
fruition today, but inevitably the names of the late Sir Harold Clapp, the
late Mr. Eddie Ward, the Minister for Transport in a previous Government,
and I think above all, my own Ministerial colleague, Mr. Wentworth,
come to mind. It was Mr. Ward who first started negotiating with the
States in these matters, and it was Mr. Wentworth who chaired the
Government's Parliamentary Committee on Standardisation I am not
sure that that Committee was ever appointed with the approval of the
then Government but it went ahead anyway under Mr. Wentworth' s
guidance. And it was the work of that Committee and the response by the
Commonwealth and State-Railways Commissioners who joined so
wholeheartedly in this co-operative effort which led to getting the same
gauges on the main Australian trunk routes. It is very fitting indeed, I
think, that Mr. Wentworth should be with us at this ceremony. / 2 
-2
What I have been speaking of is something that has been
done, and since it has been done it is virtually a part of the past, so we
should turn our eyes to the future. And in this field of transport in the
future, there are three more projects coming up, coming rapidly up.
The first is the construction of a new railway from Port
Augusta to Whyalla which will give Whyalla its first rail link with the rest
of Australia. The second is the construction of a standard gauge connection
to Adelaide from this East-West line which will take three years and cost
some $ 50 million. The third is a study of proposals for a new standard
gauge line to Alice Springs to eliminate the break of gauge at Marree and
to avoid the disruptions to traffic which natural disasters from time to
time have caused. These are continuing steps in the development of our nation,
and I would stress two things about them. One is that transport costs in
Australia have been, and are, a major factor in the whole of our business
and commercial activity and in the prices at which goods are finally sold.
These costs represent a greater part of national expenditure than do the
transport costs of most industrial and developed countries, and this must
present a continuing challenge to all Governments State and Federal
to all citizens, to all those engaged in the work of seeking to overcome
this transport cost imposed upon us. If we can overcome it together, we
will have taken one of the great steps forward towards reducing the costs,
the final cost of things which people buy.
And the second thing I want to stress is that in the field of
transport, whether it be by air or by sea, or by land by rail
developments such as we are seeing today will continue and help to make
us think as one nation. It is one thing to say that a people is indivisible,
that the nation is indivisible, but it is another to know in practical terms
that this in fact is so in the minds of all its citizens. And I think this work
will help to knit us together.
I congratulate all those who have taken part in the planning
and construction of this standard gauge right down to the fourth-last dog
spike that has been hammered into the track. The job has been well
planned, well done and will, for all the future of Australia, be a great
contribution to the nation.
I wish all those who use this trans-continental railway
safe, fast and comfortable travel, and I think that you all realise, you
here today, that you are in fact, as you are, taking part in a really
historic ceremony. 



CIVIC RECEPTION ON ThE OCCASION OF THE
LINKING OF THE EAST-WEST STANDARD GAUGE
Broken Hill, N. S. W. 29 NOVEMIBER 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Premiers, Distinguished Colleagues, both Federal and State and Gentlemen:
For some reason or other during the past three-quarters ox
an hour or so, I recalled two sayings which I think, perhaps, might be
known to you. One is something to do with an orphan called Oliver Twist
whom you may remember had a particular request to make after a heavy
meal. And the other I hope nobody, including me, will take this
personally the other was that description of Australia as a land where
there were fewer people to the square mile and more speeches to the
square meal than in any other civilised country! At any rate, this addition,
I promise you, is not going to be for long.
I suppose there is no city in Australia whose name is as
well known internationally as is the name of this city of Broken Hill. I
don't know whether it is the city itself which has become a household word
in the markets of the world where people in some esoteric fashion deal in
stocks and shares and futures and all these other things, or whether it is,
because of the giant Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. which started here.
But in any case it is a name known throughout the world.
I don't suppose, either, that any of us here have lived long
enough to know what this area was like before this city was built. I
understand, from what I have read, that it was a bleak featureless
landscape, except of course for " The Barrier" and " The Hill", populated
by almost nobody, an area to which one could come only by stage-coach
or in the course of boundary-riding. And there is a story told and I
think a true one of a visiting preacher coming to this area and running
across a young man digging a fence post hole, and stopping to talk to him.
The young man, not having any other human company for so long, bubbled
over with conversation and couldn't be stopped talking, because he was so
happy to see a fellow human being. Finally the preacher stopped him and
said: " Listen my son, have you been to Communion?" and he said: " Well,
I don't think I have, but I was at Menindee last week! Another instance,
I think, of the isolation of this area! / 2 
-2
But look at what it has turned into. And can't we take it,
perhaps, as a symbol of what Australia has done in wresting a living from
a harsh and arid land under bad conditions, without the help of the smiling
landscapes or the heavy rainfalls of Europe or countries where the land is
not so forbidding. We have come into this interior our fathers and our
grandfathers and have turned it into what it is, and what we have turned
it into is merely a challenge to what we must turn it into in the next
generation. And here again today in Broken Hill was a new step forward
in Australia's history. We have spanned the continent before the hard way by
land, the overlanders further north, driving their cattle across; we have
spanned it the easy way in recent years by air. We can now span it,
without being impeded, by rail one more step in the continuing progress
of this country. It was a great honour for me to drive ( in a way which I
wouldn't consider to be extremely expert) that spike into the railway today,
but I would like, in reply to what Mr. Fitzpatrick has said, to say that if
I am going to be charged any dues by the Union for this, then I want to have
a union ticket and I would be perfectly happy to pay the dues, or one-365th
of them, if I could get a unicn ticket:' You see, I ran into this once before.
I came from country much like this rainfall of eleven inches if we were
lucky and the country looked much the same. We were growing oranges
and we had a packing shed and I used to work eight or nine hours a day in
the packing shed and so did my wife and so did three other people. We
were approached at one time by the Storemen and Packers Union who said
we should all take out union tickets. I was delighted because I would have
made more money paying myself than I was able to make out of growing
and selling oranges. But unfortunately they wouldn't let me join. They
said: " No, you are the boss. You can't have a union ticket. I hope this
won't apply on this occasion, but if there is any suggestion of dues, at
least I'll get the ticket:
I said this wasn't going to be long, and it isn't. It has been
a pleasure to have been with you. It has been an honour to have been
associated with the greatness of accomplishment of all those who over the
years have planned and constructed this great work. Before I sit down, as
I said at the station, Wentworth is a name that must be associated with this
work. I echo the Town Clerk in again saying this. But it wasn't only
because of all the work over all the years that he put into it that I asked
him here today. It was because I was quite sure if I didn't, we would have
his wife parading up and down in front of us with a huge placard saying,
" Where's Wentworth?" as she did when the Melbourne / Sydney line was
opened! So for both those reasons, Bill, we are happy to have you with
us, and I congratulate all concerned on this work. 



PRESENTATION OF AUSTRALIAN FILM INSTITUTE
AWARDS FOR 1969
National Library, Canberra, ACT 2 DECEMBER 1969
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Professor, Distinguished Guests and Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is usual, of course, to say that it is a pleasure to talk to an
audience gathered together for whatever purpose it may be. On this
occasion it is more than true because I think that what you have done in the
past, and what we can, if I may say so, do together in the present and the
future, will bring a new dimension to Australian life. We can show the
rest of the world what Australia Is, how its people live, and impress on
them the fact that there are other things than avant-garde kangaroos or
Ned Kellys in this great country of ours.
You m~ ay be a little surprised to hear me say that because I
am sure that a number of you would remember some years ago, as a
Senator when I didn't have to watch my words so closely because they
were taken to mean what in fact they meant and weren't interpreted by
others and then criticised as a result of the interpretation I pointed out
in the course of a debate that I was attracted to the kind of television film
and other films in which booted men advanced towards each other at the
crossroads of a small town in the Western, used the immortal line from the
" Secret Life of Walter Mitty" " I wouldn't do that if I wez yew, Toledo".
I also found some attraction to the kind of private eye film where somebody
went out into the night with a couple of revolvers, was attacked, hit on the
head by beer bottles, knocked into the gutter, and five minutes later was
able to get up and lick his weight in wildcats. This attracts me because
it is the sort of milieu to which I am accustomed if you understand what
I mean! Well, at the time that caused a little comment and I think for
most of the population it caused a certain amusement because they agreed
by and large with it. To a section of the population engaged in writing,
particularly political correspondents from Canberra, it gave an opportunity
to hold up their hands in horror that such a Philistine had come amongst us.
But you must remember that at this stage and in that context, those remarks
were made against a background of speech after speech after speech dealing
solely and exclusively with culture in the films.
Now I'm no Goering. Every time I hear the word. " culture",
I don't want to reach for my revolver, but I do want and did want to have
some opportunity to feel other than like a cultured pearl, if I may say so,
and occasionally to swim into the sea and have these folk things before us.
. e/ 2 
2-
But I think on the whole I might in the intervening years have been
justified because you will agree with me, won't you, that critical taste
on the whole has tended to catch up with me.
I understand that Westerns are now high fashion and Western
fans include the critics of " Les Cahiers du Cinema" and " Sight and
Sound", so perhaps one was a little avant-garde oneself at that particular
time. But on becoming Prime Minister, it did seem to me that the
film industry here in Australia had reached that climax, that point
where a decision had to be made, which occurs in all the best Westerns.
And so one of my earliest acts was to push forward plans for the
Australian Council of the Arts as a whole and I pay tribute to my
pre decessor for having announced its inauguration and we nominated
the Council Members in June, 1968. They met a month later and their
Film and Television Committee had its first meeting in November of
1968. The Interim Report of that Committee was in my hands by
May 1969. It was adopted without any alteration, the moneys asked for
were provided without any reduction which is even more unusual and
in this year's Budget, provision was made for 11300, 000 $ 100, 000 for
setting up an Interim Council to plan for a National Film and Television
School The personnel for that Interim Council have been announced and
the first action they are going to undertake is to all go overseas to study
things, and then come back again and tell us what we ought to do. But
at least that has been launched, and I think the travellers will be launched
in about another three weeks.
Then there was $ 100, 000 for the setting up of an experimental
film fund to which you referred mainly for short subjects, short subjects
which could be exhibited either on the television screen or as film in
theatres. And then there was an exhibition fund another $ 100, 000 for
the promotion and distribution of such experimental films.
After the election, as I told you, the Council was named.
But there are going to be interesting decisions to be made. Should the
school be part of a university the National Film and Television School
should it be part of a university so the film is seen essentially as an
art form? I don't believe it should, but that will be a matter of
recommendation and discussion and decision. I would prefer to see it in
rather more practical terms. Perhaps it could be seen, and this is
coming closer to it, I think, as a film school linked with one of the
colleges of advanced education where technologists of all kinds and
we must include in this, I think, if it doesn't upset people directors,
producers, designers of scenery, script write14, all of whom have rn're
than a merely theoretical part to play a practical part to play in the ./ 3 
-3-
development of film and television in Australia.
Or should it as another alternative, and perhaps the best
of the lot, should it be a part of some entirely new not college of
advanced education, not university some entirely new centre where
not only the National Film and Television School sets up for its purposes,
but wher e the National Institute of Dramatic Art might perhaps set up
for its purposes instead of in the University of New South Wales, where
possibly the School of Opera or Ballet might also se t up for its purposes,
and where all these art forms which have so much in common could
perhaps cross-f ertilise aach other. Well these, and perhaps other
things of which I haven't spoken, are the recommendations for which we
are waiting and which, as soon as they are received, will be considered
and on which a decision will be made.
I am told by people closely associated with the industry that
the films of the 1970' s may have very little in common with the films of
the 1950' s or 1960' s in terms of form or content. As to the truth or
otherwise of that, I don't know, but the experimental film fund, I suggest,
is particularly important because through its tactics, through uts trials,
perhaps through its errors, the new writers, directors and editors of the
Australia of the 1970' s will be discovered. And we hope soon to advertise
for applications for assistance to the Australian Council of the Arts and
the Australian Film Institute.
I said in a policy speech in 1969 that if we were returned as
the Government, we would legislate for a film and television development
corporation ( recommended to us again by our advisers), and that this
legislation would be brought down in the first Session of 1970. An initial
capital grant of one million dollars will be provided, and as that is spent,
or as part of it is spent, it will be topped up each year to bring it back to
one million dollars, and the fund will be administered by an independent
board, whose members will be announced after the bill becomes law.
I want to emphasise to you that this fund is intended for
investment in films. It is not intended as a give-away programme.
It is intended for investment. We will be indicating our optimism by
such an investment, but we mustn't be expected, and I am sure it would be
wrong if we did underwrite all the cost of a film or films in this
programme. Producers will still be expected to have a substantial
equity in a film and to show faith in their artistic judgment, and I would
hope and expect that distributors those people whom I am sure many of
us think of a the bA man in the Western films, stalking along in a black
hat and black gauntlets the distributors should also be prepared to invest
in such an enterprise and share the losses, if there are losses, and
profits if there are profits. / 4 
-4
We believe, for we have optimism, that after a period of
time, properly-made investments in film industries will be bringing in
profits and that then there will be no need any longer for the public,
through the Government, to top up the fund each year. That is our
objective, and the measure of our success will be gauged by that.
I hope that the Government, having shown the red badge
of courage or in the case of a Liberal Government, the blue badge of
courage should in turn encourage all investors to back this industry.
We do expect profits in money terms. Above all, we expect
profits in human terms. Our industry, I think in Australia, is one of
the oldest in the world. I am told that " Soldiers of the Cross" was made
in 1899 in Australia in Murrumbeena and frankly that is all I know
about it and probably that is all most people in this room know about it,
but at least there was a film made at that time in Australia. I would like
to see it now. I am sure it has got all thcse jerky little motions they had
in the films we used to see in the past. But that initial silent movie era
was stopped in Australia by the introduction of the talking film, as so
many of the film stars of the time had their careers ruined by the
introduction of the talking film because it didn't seem quite in place for
somebody playing the part of the Queen of Rumania to have a Brooklyn
accent. So in Australia's case there was no great desire apparently in the
rest of the world to hear an Australian accent. And the film industry was
hurt further by the depression and suffered years of official neglect.
Well, the Government has given support to other arts since
the 1930' s ballet, drama, opera. Films in the 1960' s seem to us, and to
me, to be a logical extension. of what we have been doing with increased
momentum in the last couple of years.
The demand for film is very much greater on television than
it ever was when the picture theatres were at their peak. I am told that
18-year-olds today have seen over 500 feature films by watching television
which is more than we ever used to see as children or as 18-year-olds,
travelling each Saturday to see the " Perils of Pauline" in the silent movies.
So even to keep up a respectable proportion of Australian
interest, to be able to show, to lift up to the world a mirror to this
country of ours, we must produce more films and we must produce more
videotape material a a 
I assure you, Sir, and this audience, of my own personal
determination, of my own personal commitment to this, and of my own
personal burning desire that it should be successful for the sake of
Australia and for the sake of the people living in it or some of the
people living in it. Because this gives another opportunity for individuals
with particular talents in this field to be able to express those talents,
express their personalities, have a real reason, an interest in living,
and this is part of what a modern society must provide to all those who
are components of it.
We have done well in the field of painting, of course; that
is perhaps better known than any of our other arts overseas. If in the
next ten years, in the exciting seventies, we can in the film world
produce the equivalent of a Drysdale or a Dobell, then we shall have
amply justified the work that all you gentlemen have done and the support
that you in the audience have given.
We need to be able to see ourselves through the world of
film ourselves through other eyes if you like but the eyes behrzd the
camera. This we need to see in our own country, but even more, I
think, we need other countries to see just how we live and how we think
and how we dispute and what we do.
I doubt if many people living in Asia or in Europe would
have any real idea of what life in the United States is like, if it were
not for films and of course they haven't got any real idea of what life
in the United States is like because they see films, but at least they have
an impression which they get through films! I would hope that it would
be our chance to give an impression, and a true ippression, to people
of the world of what our couitry and our people are like in the city, in
the country, and in the problems which beset each one of them and in
the way in which they seek to overcome them.
I think that in this way we can make a contribution to the lives
of many people in this nation. Through the exciting seventies and at the
end of them, I hope there will be established here a film industry, not
yet as great as those in other countries, but so great that its ultimate
greatness cannot be denied and cannot be prevented. And if this does
come about, then this will be one of the most delightful things for me
personally because I will feel I have had some part in it and I wi 1
feel it is e thing worth having done. I will be able to hold that to myself
even though I haven't done the work that all you others have.
And therefore, Sir, I thank you for having asked me along
tonight, and it was a real pleasure to be able to come. 



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
WILLIAM QUEALE MEMORIAL
LECTURE
Delivered b_ the Prime Minister, MrlJohn Gorton
At the Bonython Hall, Univers ity of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA
11 DECEMBER 1969
" EDUCATION FOR MANAGEMENT"
Mr President and Gentlemen
Twice in the last few months, men from this plonet earth
have walked the surface of the moon. We saw them on our television sets
and we heard their voices in our homes. Now that is part of the history of
our times. We are back in an everyday world of our own, coping with
everyday problems. But we know that what was previously held impossible,
has been shown to be possible. We have seen this gigantic achievement, and
it should help us all to strive for similar break-throughs in the more mundane
problems which face us.
This, you may say, is a far cry from Education for
Management which is the subject of my lecture tonight. This, you may
say, has little to do with the late William Queale whose memory we honour
tonight and whose memorial lecture it is my very great privilege to be
delivering. Yet it is not, in fact, far removed, and let me tell you why.
The targets for man's first landings on the moon were set
a decade ago. Studies were made, equipment was designed and manufactured,
personnel selected and trained, test flights in space were carried out and
the moon flight itself planned on a world-wide basis. At every point
management techniques were under ruthless test, and without those
management techniques, the moon flight would have failed.
Secondly, the moonshot was a pinnacle of achievement
symbolising a new age, and that new age challenges management to seize
new opportunities, to adopt new methods, to aspire to new horizons.
William Queale, I am sure, would have agreed with that
for he was a man with a vision. It was not my privilege to know him,
though his record and his works are familiar things in the Australian
story. We are in his debt for that which he did for Australia and we
assemble here tonight to acknowledge that. / 2 
-2
I chose to speak to you tonight on education for
management because of my personal interest in the subject and
because I believe, as Disraeli said of England, that " Upon the education
of the people of this country the fate of this country depends Education
of all kinds, but not least education in management.
Management is, I suppose, the science of
using with the maximum economy, manpower, physical resources and
intellectual skills in order to produce the maximum result. The goal
of the skilful manager is to produce, or at least to work to, a blue-print
or masterplan so that the goal, or goals, are set with absolute clarity,
that they are understood at every level of the hierarchy, that each man
knows the job he is to do, and does it without interfering with the work of
others, as expeditiously as careful planning can provide. And he must
be ready to abandon a blue-print, or a masterplan, when new and better
methods are proved, or other changes are evident. These are the tasks
of the manager and administrator.
I would like, first, to sketch the background to education
for management and tell you a little of it s history in Australia. Then,
if I have your patience, I will talk of management' s role in national
development. For the first half of this century our society continued
to develop logically from the revolutions of long ago social,
industrial, scientific and political revolutions which gave mankind
courses to steer and which divided him with " isms" and into comnfunities
distinguished by their wealth cr thdir pvierty, by their social standards or
their technologies, by their political freedoms or their subjection to
arbitrary rule. Two world wars drove mankind fast along these courses,
for better and for worse. The forced draught of war frantically
stimulated man's inventiveness in material matters. He flew, he
learned to communicate across great distances, he discovered
antibiotics, radar, the jet enc'fiTe computer, the guided missile,
nuclear power and he burst IA~ te space age. These were all extensions
of what had been happening.
Then in the last decade or so, he began to separate from
his past. It became clear that all around us things were beginning to
happen that were not an orderly extension of the past, a refinement and
a development of old systems, tested and brought to a level which
satisfied the generation into which we were born. We were facing something
new. / 3 
-3
Peter F. Drucker, Professor of Management at New
York University's Graduate School of Business has this to say
" The last half century has been an age of continuity....
the towering economic achievement of today, the affluent,
mass consumption economies of the advanced countries, their
productivity and their technical powers, are built foursquare
on Victorian and Edwardian foundations and out of building
blocks quarried then. They are, above all, a fulfilment of the
economic and technological promotion of the Victorian and
Edwardian eras and a testimony to their economic vision.
" Now we face an age of discontinuity in world economy
and technology..., it will be a period of change in technology
and in economic policy, in industrial structures and in economic
theory, in the knowledge needed to govern and to manage...
While we have been finishing the great nineteenth century economic
edifice, the foundations have shifted from under our feet.
Drucker goes on to make the point of the need for
" knowledge workers" as distinct from the emphasis on "~ manual workers
So we come face to face with education and management.
Look around us and what do we see? We see a world
very different from the one our fathers knew, from the one we knew as
children and that is not because it is jusi so much older. We are in a
new age of burgeoning technological and scientific change. We are in a
new age of discussion as to how best to use the new tools, the new
knowledge, the new technologies, with which we are now provided.
Tais is the task of the managers, and the hardest factor
to cope with in an advanced community like ours is the " knowledge"
explosion. The hour still only contains 60 minutes and the day only
24 hours but the amount of paper work which has to be dealt with rises
in an exponential curve. As measured by manpower, number of periodicals
or scientific papers, science is growing exponentially with a doubling
time of about fifteen years. Almost ninety per cent of all scientific
endeavour in the history of mankind has been undertaken during the past
fifty years. During the past fifteen years the same number of scientists
were produced as existed during the entire previous period of science.
Exactly the same is true in the social sciences and history. Where can
one begin to burrow through the mountain of paper to make an informed
judgment, except with benefit of computer? / 4 
It is important to understand these changes and
opportunities, for as we understand them, so we shall shape our skills
and condition our hearts and minds to extract the greatest benefits
from them. Thereforel we must look to education even more than we
have in the years gone by.
As our pioneer forbears searched for water to open up
an arid land and as our farmers planted the first grain so that they could
live, so must we, in much the same way, turn increasingly to education
to equip our nation for the long journey ahead. And education, by itself,
is not enough. It is how we apply education to the brave new world of the
seventies, the world which our children will inherit, that will determine
our future and our fate, in a society where knowledge grows and skills
abound. It is true, I think as Drucker postulates, that the most
rapidly growing area in international trade is probably no longer trade
in goods, but trade in technology, in patents and licences. This imt vitably
is creating a new economic and industrial environment for which we
must be educated and which we must know how to manage.
In Australia, as elsewhere, knowledge is growing in
importance in relation to experience. This is inevitable but the trend
is not absolute. There will always be some things that only experience
of life and the years can give. Computers cannot dispense wisdom. Y" Ot,
by and large, we have to accept that experience without knowledge is no
longer of the value that it was. By the same token, knowledge without
experience has a diminished value.
There are, I think, five elements we need to make up
the ideal for our education system.
The first, naturally, is an opportunity for everyone
of school age in Australia to have equal access to
opportunity for education, provided they are good
enough academically. This, by and large, we have.
The second is adequate resources in staff, buildings
and equipment to do the job. The problem is
identified; the final solution is not.
The third is a tertiary education opportunity for all
who have the ability to use it. This depends on
resources. 4 
-The-fourth is a proper adjustment of education
methods and systems to meet the demands of the
new age. This need is recognised, but not yet
satisfied.
-The fifth is more intensive research into fundamentals,
into priorities and methods. ' ibis, too, is recognised.
Much remains to be done.
Today forty per cent of the Australian population is
under twenty-one and therefore of school and university age. And the
young are staying at school longer. The percentage staying on beyond
the age of compulsory attendance is nearly double that of ten years ago.
University enrolments have risen in ten years from 47, 000 to 107, 000
in 1969 and are expected to reach 127, 000 by 1972.
1 quote these facts to show the growth in higher education
and the pressure that is on the system.
There has been, in recent years, an increasing direct
interest by the central government in education. The responsibility for
education outside the Commonwealth territories is primarily one for the
States but for financial reasons there is an interlocking of activity between
the Commonwealth and the State Governments. There is also constitutional
provision for the granting of financial assistance by the central
government to the States on terms and conditions approved by Parliament.
Under these arrangements the Commonwealth is able to
make significant cortributions to education in Australia.
I do not want to bore you tonight with too many figures,
but may I quote just a few to illustrate the point of increased Government
interest in education. The Commonwealth Government is spending on education
almost five times as much per head of population as it was ten years ago.
The amount has gone up from $ 44 a head to $ 22 a head. The total has
risen from around $ 40 million in a polqulation of nine million to $ 265
million this year in a population of 12: i million.
At the same time, the Australian States have more than
doubled their net expenditure on education, per head of population, in
the last ten years and they are now committing nearly one-third of their
total revenue and loan moneys to this end. / 6 
6-
All this has not been enough to solve the problem, but there
are many other calls being made by society on the resources of the community,
and we have, in education, at least been advancing.
In tackling the range of problems we face, and being
mindful of the five elements for an ideal system which I have mentioned,
the Commonwealth and State programmes have touched the whole area
from pre-school to postgraduate and adult education.
It is appropriate for me, I think, to confine myself
largely to the tertiary level for this is where the established education
system and management training come closest together.
A good geea education is, of course, basic to any
professional competence, but it is at the point where specialisation has
taken place that management training is most needed. We must ensure that
the expert is not " grooved" or his vision narrowed by the blinkers of his
specialisation. In talking of management training at the tertiary level,
it may be appropriate for me to mention here that the first university
to introduce a course in commercial studies was the University of
Adelaide which had an Advanced Commercial Certificate in 1902.
The University received a benefaction in that year of
1l, 000 from Mr Joseph Fisher, which was to provide an income for " the
promotion of the study of commerce in the University". The need was
justified on rather negative grounds as was made clear by the inaugural
Joseph Fisher lecturer who said
" The slow starvation of hundreds of young, briefless
barristers, and the forlorn outlook of scores of ' general
practitioners' relegated to the back block townships, must
eventually work a cure by giving pause to the enthusiasm which
creates these in such profusion. Their places would be more
than supplied if it were possible to offer a truly educational
course having a direct bearing on business life equal to that
lavished on the professions."
Well, we've come a long way, I suppose, because
frankly, I do not know of any starving barristers today and most of our
GP's " go bush" only by choice. Adelaide's first commercial certificate
was followed by diplomas and degrees and commercial studies available in
a variety of courses eventually became part of our tertiary education
system in all States. The concept of management training as part of / 7 
-7
commercial studies was introduced in a limited way at a much later date.
Now I come to the resources we have today for management
training, either as part of, or in addition to, commercial training in
the higher levels of our education systems.
The most relevant management education courses are for
Master's degrees in Busiess Administration at the Universities of
Adelaide, Melbourne, New South Wales and Monash. This year the total
enrolment at all of them was 406.
Then there are courses, full -time and part-time, for
diplomas in management, in business studies and business administration
at some of our advanced colleges of education and our leading technical
schools. Something like eighteen institutions are currently providing
these courses over the whole of the Commonwealth.
Supplementing these courses are others with which industry
itself is closely associated. For instance the Australian Administrative
Staff College at Mt Eliza in Victoria, the Summer School of Business
Administration at the University of Melbourne and the Institute of Administration,
run by the University of New South Wales at Little Bay.
Other universities have plans i this field of business
administration ranging from studies at Diploma level to a Master's
degree. Now all this is good up to a point. You will see that
the existing facilities are mostly for undergraduate studies. These are
essential and there will have to be more of them. But when we come to
a discussion of the nation's future needs at postgraduate level in management
we find ourselves in the middle of a continuing deb ate. Should each
Australian State and the Capital Territory bave its own university or its
own College of Advanced Education staffed and equipped for this purpose?
Or should resources be concentrated in one or two
institutions of excellence2 Should we accept the problems posed by
location and possible interstate jealousies for the sake of a concentration
of effort and staff and equipment.
I do not profess to know, but a decision has to be made and
made without too much delay and for myself, I incline towards the
avoidance of too much duplication. But this is a problem to the solution of
which managers themselves should devote their thoughts and decide their
attitudes. / 8 
-8
In some respects, Australia has been slower than some other industrial
countries in its development of management training. The first Master's
Degree in business administration was not available until 1962 and our
education resources are no,-t yet fully geared to the surge in national
development which is upon us, particularly in the mineral industries.
Until about eight years ago, an Australian business
executive who wanted management education at the highest level had to
go abroad and usually he went to America, to renowned institutions like
Harvard and Stanford. Many still do.
And yet, for years before that we had shown the world
we could grow the best wool, wheat and meat in the world, we could
build aeroplanes and ships and develop major industries. Some of our
scientists and medical men had been pre-eminent in their fields and
of world-wide reputation. Australians, in fact, were proving they
could succeed in any company.
But they had little opportunity for refining their admninistrative
skills. The specialist was in his slot. There was little incentive
for him to broaden the base of his management skill.
Now we are seeking to overcome that. Industry at
large is beginning to recognise it as the Institute of Management did
long ago. The demand from traduates and undergraduates for management
training is rising sharply. So too is the demand from industry.
I envisage the solution emerging as the result of joint
development by governments and industry. Most of you will be familiar
with the decision the Government made in May of this year to Institute
an inquiry into Australia's future needs in the field of post-graduate
education in management and how best these needs could be met.
This followed the study made by a panel from the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council which set the future needs of
industry as high as five hundred Masters of Business Administration a
year. Since our decision in May, representatives of the
Commonwealth have been abroad to visit a number of leading business
schools and, as a result, the Commonwealth has invited a group of
overseas experts to conduct the enquiry on the best method of management
training for Australia. Some acceptances of these invitations have
already been received and I would expect the Minister for Educat ion and
Science to be in a position to announce further details about the enquiry
very soon. / 9 
79
I believe, here, we are starting at the right point.
I turn now to management for national development. The
size of the task in Australia hardly needs restating before a distinguished
audience like this, for you are all, in your respective spheres, deeply
involved. It is primarily an exercise in responsible government and
" responsible government? as the late Sir Frederic Eggleston once
said is " the attempt, never completely successful, of free democracies
to secure in an integral process an effective forum, proper consideration
and decision and effective execution".
I see it as an exercise at three levels. First we have
the application of political principles to the formation of policy by
governments. Then there is the administrative arm of government,
which is non-political and continuous, and which provides the tools
governments need to do the j ob. It has vast skills and inherent
qualities of management. I refer to the Public Service.
And finally there is private enterprise which makes
the heart of a nation whole. This we might define as a huge, sprawling,
incredibly diverse association of individuals and comnirinities, bound
only byecononic 17,7 v: d cubject to economic sanctions.
Let us look for a moment at the political level in the
exercise of responsible government. No political philosophy can succeed
in a democracy ( though it may survive) unless it has a concept of
management which is based on the human values of the individual, a
respect for his liberties and an understanding of the forces which motivate
him. There must be incentives to work and prcper rewards for labour.
The opportunity to live without fear and in dignity must be his.
In our early civilisation, man's needs were few. They
were concerned with subsistence and survival. Management was a
primitive exercise in looking after oneself. Today those needs still are
there but they exist in a new environment which is made complicated and
demanding by man himself because of the development of his knowledge,
his skills, his inventions and his innovations.
A political philosophy has to encoutipass in this modern
age full regard t r the liberty of the individual and also recognise a
framework of society in which that liberty can exist. It must be committed
to the security of the social system in a world caught precariously between
the eternal values and the forces of destruction. 
10
It has to be flexible and it cannot be so if it does not
accept the virtues of compromise. Henry Clay, in writing of the Federal
system in America, said compromise was the cement that held the Union
together. " All legislation", he explains " is founded on the
principle of mutual concession.... let him who elevates himself above
humanity, above its weaknesses, its infirmities, its wants, its
necessities say, if he pleases, ' I will never compromise'; but let
no one who is not above the frailties of our common nature disdain
compromise" That, I am afraid, is commonsense, though compromise
must never involve abdication from principle. It seems to me that, in
meeting the challenge of the change around us, we have to be concerned,
at political level, not only with the art of compromise, but with a fuller
understanding of how to manage the " knowledge worker" of whom I have
already spoken. He needs and expects more than just " a living. He
must be challenged to achieve greatness in his own field, not so much by
people as by seeking to attain objectives objectives which others may
regard as unattainable. Governments have the task, in a management sense, of
defining the objectives of a society. In material terms those objectives
in Australia can be summarised quite briefly.
We want to see Australia free, independent, secure and
prosperous.
We want people and capital resources to develop this
continent.
We want to increase our self-sufficiency at home and
enlarge our markets abroad.
We want to play a responsible part in the community of
nations with a proper recognition of our regional
responsibilities.
" We want to provide the greatest variety of opportunity for
self-fulfilment and purposeful living to the individuals
who make up our nation. / 11 
11
Those objectives may be as old as our sovereignty, yet they
are constantly taking new forms. New objectives are also emerging which
are less tangible but of real importance, but I will come to them a little
later. I have spoken a good deal on the political level of management
in national development, but perhaps I may be forgiven because of my
direct involvement in it.
The second level I want to talk about now is the Public Service.
This is the link which joins succeeding governments and it has management
responsibili ties of a high order.
While the politician has to make the ultimate decisions and is
accountable to his peers and his constituents for what hie does or does not
do, top management in the Public Service still has weighty responsibilities.
This is where the translation of policy decisions into administrative action,
advisory functions and a whole range of support activities exist. Facts,
figures, analysis, assessment and advice must flow continuously to the
Cabinet, the Ministry and the Parliament.
I believe the Service performs these tasks well. Its probity
is unquestioned and its record second to none. The officers of the Service
are part of the new breed of " knowledge workers" as well as the architects
of management techniques in government. The Service has come a long
way in the second half of this century. University graduates are joining in
greater numbers and occupy many posts in the higher echelons.
It was not always so and in the first thirty years or so of
Federation, entry was by examination at the age of fourteen or thereabouts.
This led W. K. Hancock to write in 1930
" Democratic sentiment, applauds the sound argument that
every office boy should have a chance to become a manger
and perverts it into a practical rule that no-one shall become
a manager who has not been an office boy.
I quo te this to show that in the administration of government,
a vast transormation has already taken place and the process is still
going on. The higher educational qualifications in the Public Service and
the training in management practices which the Serivce provides internally
and externally are powerful reinforcements for the system of responsible
government. / 12 
-212-
In recent years the cross-pollination of industry and the Public
Service ar-officer-iel-baa. beon increasing. The fact that industry now
turns frequently to the-Public Ser'-Ice in its search for top executives,
top managers and specialists is a tribute to the system and the quality
of the officer it attracts and trains. Similarly the opportunities the
Public Service-itself provides do attract recruits from industry.
In thi s sophisticated, twentieth century world, I do not believe
the Public Service should be separated from industry by any significant
barriers or artificial divisions of skill providing the traditional rights of
the public servant are protected. After all, the differences between the
responsibilities each accepts and the service each provides are not
very great. The real barrier has been the non-transferability of
superannuation. To remove this barrier the Commonwealth Government
has accepted the concept of " portability of pensions" a clumsy phrase
perhaps but one which means that, subject to certain conditions, a
Commonwealth public servant does not lose his superannuation rights if he
transfers to different spheres of Commonwealth employment, to the
State public services, to the universities or to industry. It would seem
eminently sensible for this to become a general principle in all sectors
of employment. Though I know the industry has reservation as to this.
May I now take the third level of activity in managing for
national development. I refer to private enterprise. This is your
territory, gentlemen.
Now private enterprise has provided a great deal of the
thrust tbat has taken Australia to the point of development we are at
today, and it is indeed the base of our free enterprise society.
It was private enterprise which opened up our rural lands;
it was private enterprise which gave us our manufacturing industries.
It was private enterprise which first drew from the earth the mineral
wealth that today has given a new dimension to our growth, our export
opportunity and our national economy as a whole.
But it has not, and I probably need not remind you, done t,,.-se
things exclusively on its own. Governments had to create a climate
of opportunity and indeed to provide important incentives. This they
have done, and through this we have seen the development of a partnership,
ragged though it may appear at times, between the public and the
private sectors in order the better to attain our national objectives. / 13 
13
It was private enterprise, too, as I told you earlier in my
historical reference to education for management, that inspired commercial
education at the tertiary level. It was also informed private enterprise
which began to advocate higher post-graduate education for management.
But private enterprise in my opinion, is not pulling its weight in one
important field; research for industry has been too much dependent on
Government finances.
I say this frankly because I think it merits your consideration
and because it seems to me that research should have a very high priority
when we are working out which way we will go in the next decade.
This applies to management needs as well as management policies.
An analysis by Dr Peter Stubbs of the Institute of Appled
Economic Research at the University of Melbourne showed that while the
Australian research effort overall was small the percentage contribution
made by the Government sector to the total amount spent was far greater
than the percentage contributed by the Governments of other countries
in their own economies. The countries he selected for comparisons were
the United States of America, Britain, Belgium, France West Germany
and Holland. Of the estimated gross national expenditure on research and
development, the Government sector in Australia contributed around 73 per
cent and the next highest government contribution was in Britain where it
was 64 per cent.
Dr Stubbs makes it clear that in this field Australian industry,
that is the private sector, has played a very small role both in its
proportion to the Australian national effort and in absolute terms when
compared with other industrial countries.
I bring this to your notice because if we are to gvrasp the
opportunities the future holds, we have to be inventors and innovate
and it is top management which has to frame the policy towards innovation.
By inn ovation I mean the act of bringing invention to fruition, the
development part of " research and development" Invention we know as
the act of creating a new product or process and Australians have a good
record here, but development of an invention to tliFe point where it becomes
commercial does not occur in Australia to the degree that it should.
No-one can be an innovator without thorough research and a
study of all the possibilities and no-one can be a successful innovator
without management skills. / 14 
14
We need the most advanced and specialised managerial skills
we can attract. There have been regrettable cases in the past when
citizens have had abundant gifts to offer but they have been unable to fit
into already existing patterns of organisation. No matter how radical
we may think ourselves, most of us are deeply ingrained with conservatism
in organisational matters.
An example is that of the Greek town planner and architect
Constantinos Doxiadis. Dr Doxiadis was a leading architect in Greece
before the Second World War, and in that war he led the Greek underground
and was awarded the British OBE. After the war he was a Cabinet Minister
and directed Marshall Plan operations in Greece. Following a change of
government in 1951, he lost office and decided to migrate to Australia.
Once in Australia he found that technical difficulties about
qualifications prevented him from contributing as much as he would have
liked and for two years he grew tomatoes in Western Australia. He wrote
several books on town planning and in 1953 returned to Greece. He made
one more attempt at Australia in 1956 but was unable to find an appropriate
post for his talents.
Since then he has founded his own university in Athens, and has
begun massive town planning projects in Greece, in Philadelphia, Washington
and Louisville in the US, in Baghdad and Khartoum, in En gland, South
America and Asia. Only Australia has made no use of his genius. He
won the coveted Aspen Award and is a member of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences.
I would like to think that if Dr Doxiadis were to come as a migrant
now, with -our growing sophistication and our recognition of the need for
advanced managerial skills, he would not be rejected. But I cannot be sure.
I put it to you, therefore, that when we look at our management
standards and the contributions which come from the public and priva te
sectors, we should also look at our research needs and explore ways in which
government and industry can come closer together. Some progress has been
made in recent years and the Australian Government has made finance
available through special committees for both fundamental research and
applied research in industry. But I believe there is room for more direct
activity by industry and the field of development and application of new
inventions in techniques and processes. / i 
15
Given wide-ranging and effective research, I believe we then
have a solid ground floor from which the practitioners of the three levels
of national management can operate. These levels, as I have explained,
are represented by the politician both in government and opposition the
Public Service and private enterprise. How well they fit together is the
measure of our capacity tcget the job done. I believe they fit remarkably
well and we see this across the whole panorama of national activity today.
When I spoke earlier about our material objectives, I spoke of
a different, non-material range of objectives before us. These may be
stated simply as the objective of a more satisfying life for our citizens.
In concerning ourselves as a people. * i th what makes for a
more satisfying life, we have to admit that we are mostly only vaguely
interested in what is happening to our environment, and what is more
important what, indeed, we are doing to it. The sins of commission, I
think are perhaps as great as the sins of omission.
We all of us as citizens pollute the very air we breathe,
we savage our unique wildlife with little s1u me, we slay our fellows on
the roads with monstrous carelessness and we accept the congestion of
our cities as though urban sprawl was the fault of somebody else.
We blame everybody but ourselves for the grey areas in our daily lives.
You may ask: What has all this to do with education for
management? What has this to do with education for national development?
I think it has much to do with those things. For the success of government
efforts in this direction depends heavily on . an educated public opinion,
on the bre aking down of the barriers of " it doesn't matter" and " I don't
care". This is where private enterprise, which I have loosely descri ed
as a " free-acting association of individuals and communities" has to make
up the partnership and take up the challenge. It is a challenge to the
" knowledge workers" and the managers to help create the climate in which
an articulate public opinion can flourish and where people will come to say
simply " I do care" and where as a result a more satisfying life will
be the more easily attained.
It is a brave man, indeed, who is dogmatic about the kind of
people and the kind of nation we will be in the next century, but as we move
towards its beginning, I believe the desire for a better life and a sense of
involvement in the making of a nation are things close to the heart of most
Australians. These things we cannot achieve by some kind of imperial
rescript. They will come to us if we make a conscious effort to read some
of the signs around us, as I'm sure William Queale did in his day, and if
we keep the human values straight. An educated public opinion is our
starting point. i16 
16
So tonight, Mr President, we have looked historically at
our record in education-for-management and the need to do better if we
are to succeed in a world of change. We have looked at the base structure
of education development in Australia and the elements of government and
the people which form the management team for national development.
We have looked ar our national objectives in material and human terms.
And we have grounds for confidence, but none for complacency.
believe that if governments and people continue to question and to strive,
and are not bound by the concepts and practices of the past, we can stand
up to the weathering of the centuries.
You may ask " What of the future if we do all these things?"
I am no prophet but let me tell you what I see, from the shape of things
as they are 0 1 see Australia as a nation of perhaps twenty-five million
people by the end of the century. That is double our
population today.
I see Australia as a society retaining political freedoms and
using that freedom plus skilled management to provide
economic freedom and more opportunity for creative
self-expression.
* I see Australia as a nation of explorers probing the seas,
and the discoveries of the earth, and seeking new and better
ways of providing more and better material things.
0 1 see Australia developing in an environment we seek to
protect and not destroy.
a I see Australia as growing in tolerance, as increasing in the
realisation that there is a common and a noble task for
all sections of society to work for in harmony.
I conclude, Mr President, by saying just this. We are all practical
men. Of necessity we have to be. But we can have our dreams. And I
say " let us have those dreams".
Thomas Jefferson, a long time ago, said " We must dream of
an aristocracy of achievement arising out of a democracy of opportunity'".
You and your successors, I and . ni y successors, have the chance
in this niation to translate those dreams into reality.
I Mifn k you. 



TALK TO THE NATION
REDUCTION OF FORCES IN VIETNAM
STATEMENT ON RADIO AND TELEVISION BY THE PRIME
-MINST EK, 1KJJHTGORTDN 16 DECEMBER 1969
Tonight I want to talk to you quite briefly on possible
future developments in Vietnam.
In my Policy Speech before the last election, I had this
to say to the Australian people
" Should there be developments ( in Vietnam) which result in
plans for continuing reduction of United States Forces over
a period, we would expect to be phased in to that programme."
Since I spoke, developments have taken place, and you have today heard
the announcement by the President of the United States that a further
000 troops are to be withdrawn over the next few months.
What has happened is that the President has judged that
there has been more improvement in the military situation than he
previously anticipated, and that the programme of training and arming
Vietnamese troops to take over more and more combat duties has been,
and is being, successful. It has therefore been possible for United States Forces
to be reduced without endangering the objectives for which they, and we,
entered the Vietnam war.
The objectives remain. They are the objectives of
attaining a just peace and of enabling the people of South Vietnam to
live under a Government chosen freely by them, and chosen without the
threat of terrorism or armed aggression from abroad.
I am sure the President of the United States will never
abandon these object ives and neither will we.
But it appears the growing strength and confidence of
South Vietnamese Forces will enable them to play a greater and greater
part in attaining those objectives. If this proves to be true, it will lead
to that continuing reduction of United States Forces of which I spoke in
my Policy Speech. / 2 
-2
Therefore I have spoken directly with the President of the
United States, in accordance with arrangements made on my last visit,
and we were in complete accord in agreeing in principle that should the
future situation permit a further substantial withdrawal of troops, then
some Australian troops should be included in the numbers scheduled for
such reduction. Such agreement in principle is all that has been reached,
or all that can at present be reached.
Implementation of this arrangement can only occur in the light
of future military developments in Vietnam and after full consultation and
agreement with the South Vietnamese Governmen t and New Zealand.
I expect that there will be much baseless speculation on these
matters, and indeed there already has been. So I wish to make it clear
That there is no firm timetable for further withdrawal of
United States troops of which I know;
That there is no timetable fixed covering at what stage any
Australian reductions would be phased in to the next United
States withdrawal;
That there is no arrangement made as to how great any
Australian reductions, which may take place in the future, will be.
These are all matters for the future and dependent on future
developments and those future developments cannot now be
accurately forecast. But these things are sure
" We will not unilaterally withdraw any of our forces
" We will not abandon the objectives for which we entered the
Vietnam war
" We will participate in the next reduction of forces at some
stage, when it comes. But the extent and timing of that
participation remains to be settled in discussions between
all the Governments concerned; and
" We will not participate in any reductiorsof our own forces
which in any way endanger those of our forces which remain.
I am sure we will all be happy when the Vietnam war has reached
a successful conclusion. I believe we should be happy that the South
Vietnamese themselve s are able to take over more and more of the
burden of the day. We will remaini to attain the objectives which we started
out to reach. But we are glad we are able to make reductions without
endangering those objectives.
Goodnight. 


14 January 1970
Mr Vice-President and Colonel Stafford:
It is with a considerable amount of pride that on behalf of the Parliament and people of Australia I accept what you have brought back from one of man' s greatest adventures.
When the first successful landing on the moon took place, I described it as a dramatic fulfilment of man's urge "to go always a little further, to explore and know the formerly unknown, to strive, to seek, to find and not to yield". I think it was this desire of the human spirit which was exemplified by this co-operative effort, a co-operative effort for peace, a co-operative effort to find out more, to know more, so that we in this world might in the future be the better off.
It is very appropriate that you should have given us two photographs, one of Australia, the other a photograph of the North American continent, because I think you would agree it is true to say that part of the success of this historic mission was due to people from the North American continent and to people from Australia. And how appropriate it is that there should be here today so many men and women engaged in work at those tracking stations which were an essential and integral part of this great adventure.
We thank you -  I do on behalf of the Parliament and the Australian people -  for the moon rock and for the flag of this country which you took on this mission. On behalf of the Parliament and the Australian people, I thank too all those Australians and Americans who were engaged in being such an essential part of this magnificent enterprise.
We all thank you, Sir, and may these first trips be only the beginning of a continuing adventure for mankind and for both our countries in the future.



FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON DOMICILIARY
NURSING
Melbourne, Victoria 2 FEBRUARY 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Madam President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Thank you very much for your welcome, Madam
President. My wife and I are glad indeed to be with you on this
occasion and to have the opportunity of extending, on behalf of
the Commonwealth Government, a welcome to all delegates, but
particularly, perhaps to those delegates who have come from overseas.
It is good that we have with us today delegates from
the World Health Organisation, from the North American continent,
from Europe, from Asia and from the Pacific. I take some small
personal satisfaction in having made the conference arrangements
a little easier, due largely to the persistence of Dame Ivy Wedgwood.
I wish at the beginning to pay tribute to the organisers
of this Conference, the Ff. rst International Domiciliary Nursing
Conference the Royal D ',. xrict Nursing Service of Melbourne.
Beginning in 1885 with a. si-aff of two nurses, they are now
recognised as the senior home nursing service in Australia, and
the conference owes much to their initiative and hard work.
But they are not the only organisation in Australia.
Twelve years ago, when the Commonwealth Government first
began to financially assist these organisations, there were some
19 organisations employing some 200 nurses. Now there are 78
organisations employing more than 700 nurses, engaged in
succouring the ill, in rehabilitation and in after-care throughout
Australia. You have chosen as the theme of this conference
" Domiciliary nursing in a Changing World". What is the nature of
this change referred to, as far as it concerns the matters you are
going to discuss? Over the last two decades there have been
great advances in the methods of treatment of the ill. and in the
technical ability to heal. But in this period there has also been
what is perhaps a more important change a determination on the
part of nations to see that this technical capacity to heal is applied
to the individual, to see that schemes are brought into being in
countries of the world whereby these new methods of medical and
hospital care are made available to all individuals in a community 
and that none is debarred from sharing in them as a result of his
financial sit uat ion. This is indeed a great change, and perhaps what
you had in mind. But it is not an easy matter to arrange. What do we
want as a result of applying our minds to this change in attitude
towards our citizens? We want a scheme which covers the great
bulk of the cost of minor and major illnesses to a patient, whether
that cost be incurred by medical attention, hospitalisation or by
other methods of care and rehabilitation. We want a scheme which
requires some contribution from the individual, high enough to
impress on his mind that these matters are extremely costly, and
yet low enough t o ensure that all can join in the protection offered.
We want a scheme that is efficient from the point of
view of the patient, to whom we direct our attention. And we want
one which costs the tax payer as little as possible, consistent with
the effective operation of the scheme, and consistent with it being
extended to all our citizens. So this is what we want. Not very
difficult to state, but quite difficult to attain.
So we need to cover medical diagnosis and treatment,
hospitalisation and the other cares of which I have spoken. This
involves great and growing costs to the community, as
experience has shown in our country and every other country
which has involved itself in matters of this kind. This is true
whether the method of a scheme adopted is a compulsory one or
a voluntary one. In either case, there are great and growing costs.
Major problems leading to this cost, ones that we must
seek to guard against, I think, are unchecked rises in medical fees by
doctors, rising hospital costs as costs rise generally through the
community, the over-use by patients of medical or hospital facilities,
and the over-treatment by some doctors of patients who will add to
the income of the doctors tdu t over-treat them. I emphasise SOME
doctors. These are problems common to all schemes, again
whether they be compulsory or whether they be voluntary, and
overcoming these is a major matter for all those who wish to see
the proper operation of the health scheme I postulated at the
beginning, working in our community.
But in any case, even if we do overcome them, costs
will still tend to rise. They will rise because of the cost per bed
in hospitals. Perhaps this gathering might devote some of its attention
to seeing whether the cost per bed in hospital is necessary at its present
level, whether perhaps some of the stainless steel, some of the bronze 
some of the general what sball I call it the general greatness
which is put into the building of hospitals is essential for the care of
the patient. There is a great field to be covered in hospital
construction, and in what is required for different classes of patients
in hospitals. In any case, this is just, in passing, one aspect which
this gathering may perhaps wish to take into consideration.
Perhaps more directly concerning this gathering is that
home nursing contributes to keeping down the cost of treating
patients in hospitals or even in nursing homes. Yet it does, of
course, far more than merely keep down the cost of treating patients.
It pays attention to the inner desires of someone I referred to hitherto
as a patient, but who is more than a patient, who is a living, sentient
human being. It pays attention to the scial and emotional desire of
such people to be treated in surroundings they know, in the company
of families they love, in their own homes. So it does far more than
merely keep down costs. It contributes very greatly to actual
healing, if actual healing is helped, as I believe it is, by the state
of mind of the person being treated, and this is the great significance
of this movement. There is another matter I would ask you to consider.
As the technical capacity to treat those who are ill has increased,
so there seems to have been an increase in the amount of training
and the number of certificates required by nurses. And I am sure
this is right and proper. But I wonder if all those nurses who make
home visits for domiciliary care need to be quite as highly technically
trained as some other nurses involved in hospitals perhaps need to be.
I am told by doctor friends ;-and I have some doctor friends
I am told by doctor friends that in many of these cases what patients
at home need more than anything is what they describe as TLC or
tender loving care, which involves the smoothing of a pillow, the
makcing of a bed, the bringing of a cold drink, the talk about little
matters of the day, the provision of a hot water bottle which in
themselves, the laymen would think, did not really require triple
certificates in order to be able to be devoted to the welfare of the
patient. But I just put this question to you and look to you for the
answers to it to come back in due course.
I am sure the answer to that and other questions of
significance will emerge from this Conference and will be of help
to me, and to the Parliament and to the nation, for on these matters
we will in the year ahead be hearing a very great deal indeed, and be
seeking to make advances in solving some of the problems involved.
It is of some help and some sustenance to those who try to devote our
attention to this to know that here in Melbourne, and in Australia today, 
4.
we have this conference concerned in the same affairs, preparing to
devote its discussion to those affairs, and we know that out of that
discussion there will be help for us in our attempts to be, as it were,
the midwife between the Australian nation and those who are sick in
the Australian nation, so that what the Australian nation wants to do
for those who are sick, we may help them do in the most effective and
efficient way possible.
I must finish by congratulating and thanking all of you
for having devoted your attention to the thought and care for
those who are less fortunate than you. That in itself will, I think,
be a reward for you to know you have done that, but a rather more
concrete and rather more significant reward will be if from this
Conference there emerges proposals which a government is able
to consider and perhaps adopt for the good of the people of this
nation. 



AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT
N. S. W. DIVISION ANNUAL DINNER
Sydney, N. S. W. t
Presentation of John Storey award to Mr. W. W. Pettingell
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
FEBRUARY 1970
Mr. President, Mr. Pettingell, Ladies and Gentlemen:
One of the great pleasures for me tonight, and I am
sure one of the great pleasures for you, is that before I came
it was stipulated that I had not come in order to make a speech
or to leave a message with you, but merely to appear on an
occasion which seems to me to be one which deserves the
greatest support which the government of this country can give.
I come for two reasons. One is because this is a
gathering of the Australian Institute of Management, and as the
politician of caricature says " In this gathering I say without fear
of contradiction that the Australian Institute of Management is an
extraordinarily fine body of men. And if there may be some
amongst us who cavil a little at men being selected, then to those
I say that I fall back on the legal precept that the greater includes
the less. And I mean this because what is required in this or
other developing countries for we still are a developing country
is capital, wherever we can get it, to the greatest degree that we
can, subject to some small reservations as to the conditions on
which it comes; and labour, which on the figures recently released,
is getting more and more in demand and less and less available.
But there is something over and above that, for what use
is capital, what use is labour if it is not managed in such a way that
from it the greatest possible benefit is received for the country? You
can have a factory in which you have adequate machinery, in which you
have a workforce of competent people, but what can you get from it if
management is not capable of utilising what is provided?
It is true, I think, as our trade union leaders would say
and indeed I would say, that what is produced in a country is basically
produced from the skills and the devotion and the work of the man on the
factory floor, the man who runs the lathe, the foreman, and the people
in the work force. It also remains true that in any given factory you
could have exactly the same skills on the factory floor, exactly the 
2.
same number of people, but you could have a production which was
small if the management was bad, or a production which was great
if the management was good. And this is the great contribution
that can be made to the growth of this country and to the well being
of all who are in it. And because the Institute of Management does
this, it is one of the pleasures to me of coming tonight.
There is another, Sir, arising out of something
which you said in the course of your speech. I thinkc, if I may
paraphrase, you said that in the world today everybody knows what
everybody else has and wants it. If I may speak personally for a
moment, I am not unfamiliar with that approach! But this is not
necessarily a bad thing, provided those who want it are prepared
to earn it, are prepared to see how it has been achieved and to put
In the effort and the brain power and the devotion which is required
to get it. In this case what you have said is good, but of course if
somebody, some other country sees what has been attained here and
wants it, and doesn't want to put in that kind of effort, but merely
expropriate it or take it away, then this does no good at all.
And because this Institute of Management seeks to
disseminate amongst the people of this country the techniques by
which these things can be attained, that is another reason why I
think it is of such significance to this country of Australia.
But the second reason why I am so glad to be here is
that it is a gathering to honour Mr. Pettingell, whom I see not for
the first time today. You will have heard, if you didn't know
before, he is indeed a man for all seasons. Indeed, hearing of
how he sailed a partly finished boat to Hobart, one can only tremble
for Ted Heath if that boat had been finished before he started.
But seriously, Sir, no words of mine can add to the
record which was read to the assembled gathering as to what you
have done and what you are continuing to do. A man who has
always sought the most direct route to whatever it is he sought to
attain, and who I am glad to say is still doing it. He has been one
of the pioneers of business management in this country, one of the
people who has recognised that it is necessary if you have a factory
force, if you have people working for you, to mobiise their talents,
to utilise their skill to the greatest possible extent, and to realise
the full potential of those for whom he is responsible in his sphere,
to the benefit of his company, to the benefit of the people so utilised
and to the benefit of the Australian nation.
I am glad to say that there is a growing realisation of the
importance of management and of the importance of research. You
will know that there are experts coming to Australia on February 24-
3.
( some of you will have dealt with them before) to advise on the
setting up of a School of Business Management in this country, a
post-graduate school, a real attempt to bring the techniques to the
younger people who more and more will be taking over management
in the expanding economy of our nation.
And it affords me pleasure, not only that this is
happening but that I will be able to get a bit of my own back by
going to industry and saying, " Now you can provide the money
that is required for the setting up of this school for the benefit
of everybody. I still remember somebody promising me $ 10 million
if we did it and I intend to collect that IOU. Of course that will
only cover a part of the cost:
But because of what you have done, Mr. Pettingell,
a nd what those others in this room have done and are doing,
because of the overriding significance of management for the
full realisation of what we can do, because you are here tonight
being honoured and because of those who are here to honour you,
I have had the greatest delight in being able to be in some small
way associated with this function.
May I finish on this note? A short time ago, I went to
Adelaide to deliver an address called " The William Queale
Memorial Lecture" on management and training for management,
and used these words, or something like these words: We have seen
just recently the most extraordinary occurrence in man's history.
We have seen people walking on the moon. The planning for this was
started a decade or more ago. The people who took part in that
journey deserve all the tribute we can pay them. But they could not
have got there, they could not have walked on the moon, they could
not have come back, had it not been for management techniques,
for management planning, for the overseeing of every detail which
led to that great and successful adventure. If that is so in a
dramatic way, then if the same devotion and the same techniques,
are applied to providing in this country the greater opportunities
that are possible, this may be even greater than the success of the
management techniques which led to the journey to the moon. This
is very largely in your habds and in the hands of people like
Mr. Pettingell, and it is for this reason I have been honoured to be
with you tonight. 



QPE" ING OF THE NEW MIDDLE SCHOOL AT
CHRISTIAN BROTHERS COLLEGE,
WAVERLEY, N. S. W, FEBRUARY 1970
Speech by the. Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr Chairman, Your Grace, Parliamentary Colleagues both Federal and
State, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
May I thank you for the warmth of your welcome and thank you
in particular, Brother Simmons, for what you had to say and tell you that I regard
this occasion to be an honour for me and one which gives me great satisfaction.
I regard it as an honour because I have been asked to be associated
today with those who planned and worked and strove and finally completed their
task. And I find it of immense satisfaction, because as I look at this new block
and cast my mind into the future, I believe there will come from it and from the
resources which it includes, hundreds and hundreds of young men into the
Australian community, better educated than they would otherwise have been. I
believe they will be inculcated with the desire to put their talents and their
privileges at the service of their country, and contributing to this nation not to
any segment of it but to this nation more than they would have been able to
contribute had this building not beetr conjtrucfed.
This, of course, is a special day for Waverley. It is a concrete
illustration of the advances now being made in educational thinking, in educational
techniques, and in the application of technology to make teaching more easy, more
interesting, more satisfying and more comprehensive. It is, too, a shining example
of the use of funds, both private and public, to the best possible advantage from the
poin . t of view of getting value for every dollar spent.
This Middle School block, Sir, is a notable addition to a notable
school, a school with a long history and fine tradition. And I would like to
congratulate Brother Simmons and his staff and the members of the College Advisory
Council on what they have achieved and what we see before us today as a result of
that achievement. I think, too, that this is a justification if justification were needed
of the policies of governments, both State and Commonwealth but I speak for the
Commonwealth of the policies adopted towards providing encouragement and some
assistance to Independent schools; a policy based, I believe, on principles of
justice, of economic commonsense, and of an appreciation of how best to serve
the true interests of education generally throughout our nation. a. / 2 
Allow me for a moment to set before you what in fact that policy
towards education is, because there seems to be some mistaken belief growing
in the community, some mistaken idea that governments are only providing
help to independent schools, that such schools are the pampered darlings of the
Commonwealth Government and this is not true.
It is true that Commonwealth spending on education in Australia
has risen to $ 22 a head of population from some $ 4 ten years ago, but the vast
majority of this sum and the vast majority of this increase is provided for
sectors of public education, and that should be borne constantly in mind. Science
blocks have been provided throughout Australia to all secondary schools, which
means that 75 per cent of all monetary provision for this has gone to public, not
to independent, schools. Libraries a programme now getting well under way, but still
to be brought to full fruition are being provided to all secondary schools
throughout Australia, which means some 75 per cent of the finances provided goes
to State and not to independent schools. Expenditure on secondary technical
education, so essential for the future of our nation, is almost entirely confined
to'government schools. Teacher training colleges are provided with unmatched
funds by the Commonwealth, on condition that ten per cent of the places reserved
in them for trainees are reserved for those who will teach in independent schools.
In colleges of advanced education, in assistance to universities,
the public sector is the sector which receives all expenditure.
So no-one can say that the needs of publi c education are being
in any way ignored, and that is the first point which I wish to make.
Yet there are those who oppose any assistance being given to
independent schools, who oppose the provision of science blocks to such schools,
of libraries to such schools and, more particularly, oppose the recent provision
of assistance towards the running costs of such schools.
I believe that those who so oppose this policy are completely
wrong. I can understand though I would entirely reject an argument advanced
in some quarters that there should be no private independent schools allowed.
That at least is a simple argument, and, I think, simply refuted. But I cannot
understand the argument which would say to some Australian citizens " Although
you have paid your full share of taxation for a public school system which you do
not use, thereby relieving the strain on it; although you have paid additional
charges and are paying them to provide a school of a type which you prefer
although you are doing all this, yet you should nevertheless be prohibited from
receiving any assistance at all from the taxation revenue to which you have
contributed. This seems to me to be entirely unjust, and that is why I said
earlier that our policy is based on principles of justice the policy of giving
some assistance. vo e. / 3 
And the economic argument which supports the provision of
assistance to independent schools is irrefutable. How much more would be
required from the taxpayers of Australia if there were to be no private schools
tomorrow, and those who attended them were to be moved to a state system
tomorrow? What great sums would be required, not to improve the existing
state schools, but merely to keep them at their present standards? I think
the economic argument and the commonsense are quite unassailable.
But moving to the interests of education, you, Brother Simmons,
said that what was required of our educational institutions was that they should
have independence, that they should seek for excellence and that they should
be able to experiment and to have variety. What better way can these ideals
be achieved than by having a state school system on the one hand, and independent
school systems on the other, so that there is no risk of uniformity being applied
by a central education department. There is an opportunity for innovations
suich as we have seen here today, and innovations not only from independent
schools they can come both from state and independent but innovations which
once they are made and once they have been proved to be successful, are not
confined to the sector which made those innovations, but are available for the
whole broad field of education throughout Australia.
So both from the point of view of justice, of economic commonsense,
and of serving the. interests of education, I believe the policies of
assistance which have been adopted are right, and I assure you that those policies
will continue and will not be changed,
There are those who think that by expressing disagreement and
opposition to these policies, which they have a perfect right to do, they are
serving the interests of the state sector of education. It may well be indeed
I believe it is that if they were to achieve the objectives they seek, they
would not be defending government schools at all, but merely preventing the
improvement of government schools, which will be able the more quickly to
be improved if the independent schools are provided some assistance over and
above the burdens borne by those who support them, to enable more of the
taxpayers! dollars to be left to improve the state school system itself.
We as a government are not interested in just one sector of
education. We are, as you know, awaiting the report of an enquiry by all state
governments into the needs of education, both in state schools and in
independent schools throughout Australia. We believe that the method of such
an inquiry by each state government is the best way to carry it out. We know
that there are further improvements required to primary and secondary
education generally. And we will, as time and opportunity permit, seek to play
our part with State Governments in this field. But because we are interested in
the whole field of education state as well as independent we will not turn
our backs on our interest in the independent sector. a o. a / 4 
May I, Sir, before I declare the Middle School open, merely
say this That as long as there are throughout Australia people who are prepared
to give of their income, to give of their time, to give of their effort in order to
try to create better opportunities for education, then I think that we can face
the future with a high heart. Because there will come from all our schools in
greater numbers those better able to grapple with the new problems which will
face us, those provided with the technical skills to harness the inventions now
being made for the service of mankird, and those with a belief in rightness, in
service and in dedication which must be the true end and requirement of education
in whatever school that education may take place.
And now, Sir, I have great satisfaction in moving to the tablet
and declaring open this new Middle School of Waverley College. 



AUSTRALIAN MINING INDUSTRY COUNCIL
THIRD ANNUAL DINNER
Canberra, ACT 9 MARCH 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
Mr. President, Parliamentary Colleagues, Distinguished Guests and
Ladies and Gentlemen Thank you, Sir, for your introduction and for the generous
way in which you and the people in this room have honoured the toast to
your guests. I appreciate what you have said. I am sure my fellow guests
appreciate it too, and if through the press of affairs, Sir, it is impossible
for me to make this an annual event, at least I can assure you that both
myself and my colleagues will make quite sure that it is at least a triennial
event for a long time to come.
Sir, although your Council has not been in-existence for a
long term of years, as years go in our national history, I believe it has
already made its mark on Australia, on Government, both State and
Federal, and on the way in which the mining industry is conducted in
Australia. As I stand here before you and see the representatives of
so many companies, my mind's eye leaves this room, as I think perhaps
yours can do, and instead of being here in a hotel in the National Capital,
it moves away to the areas where you and your companies are operating.
It swings thousands of miles North, for example, to Weipa, where, in the
last war the Air Force landed on a lot of little brown pebbles, and they
wondered what on earth it was; and they were landing on bauxite where
there is now an aerodrome on probably one of the largest bauxite deposits
in the world. It comes south to Gladstone, where that bauxite is turned
into alumina for the great benefit of overseas companies: To Kambalda,
Sir, this hot, dry area which has given Kalgoorlie, the city of legend,
a new lease of life. Because after all, it is far more profitable to mine
nickel than gold today, unless of course, you can find some alluvial
deposit where you pick up the nuggets! / 2 
Or to Gove again a great bauxite deposit, or to those
dreaming areas in the North-West of North Australia where for so long all
the experts, all the geologists told us there was no iron ore; it was a
waste of time to look, there just wasn't anything there. This was not
entirely the West Australian Department of Mines' geologists, although they
had a good deal to do with it but there to this area today, where Mt Tom
Price ( with not much Australian equity) but where Mt Tom Price and close
to it, Mt Whaleback have some thousands of million tons of iron ore
reserves. And where a stone's throw away in terms of our national
dimensions, there is the yet unexploited Rhodes Ridge with 3, 000 million
tons of iron ore reserves three times as much as the two great mines
I have mentioned. And where, hiding over the horizon, and known to many
people, so I am giving nothing away, is Mcamey's Monster, yet to be
proved, but again at least as large as Rhodes Ridge.
Leaving aside altogether the deposits at Robe River, leaving
aside the deposits which Broken Hill has taken up recently, we can go from
here to all these frontier areas where the companies which you gentlemen
represent are taking from the soil of Australia riches which were previously
undreamt of an which are the sinews of our growth at present and in the
future. I have mentioned but a few of the new areas being developed,
the new frontiers, and what frontiers they are. Because as you go around
and look at them, here are the pioneers living in air-conditioned houses
provided by the mining company, with electricity, electric refrigerators,
with shopping centres, swimming pools, and thanks to the benevolence of
the Postmaster-General soon to be with television. What a wonderful
way of pioneering that is, particularly for somebody with a memory as I
have of Aladdin lamps which had to be trimmed every night and a kerosene
refrigerator and later an electric generating plant of one's own which
only went when one went out and kicked it. Indeed, these modern facilities
are provided by your companies to see that people will go and vork in these
areas. Of course in some States not all but in some States, much
more than this is done. I was told by a representative of one significant
company that they didn't particularly mind building the railroads and
building the ports and the harbours and building the schools, but they thought
it was a little tough when they were asked to build the gaol:. But they
went ahead and did it anyway! ./ 3 
It is a little hard to believe that all this advance, that all this
minerals explosion really began only some ten years or so ago. Until
1960, there had been a 20-year-old ban on the export of iron ore from
Australia. Indeed, our mineral exports in 1959/ 60 were valued at
$ 168 million. Today they are worth $ 759 million, and before the end of
this decade well before the end of this decade they will be bringing
us in 000 million. What an immense acceleration in what a short
period of time. And to emphasise this, in 1960, our exports of iron ore
were a few hundred dollars. This year they are to be worth $ 142 million.
Coal exports, ten years ago, were worth $ 121 million. Today they will
bring us in $ 142 million.
This is an immense expansion in such a short space of time
by the companies and the enterprises that you gentlemen in this room
represent. And what now? What is going to happen in the future?
It seems to me inevitable that although Japan is our major
trading partner now in the export of iron ore, Europe will supplant it as
soon as sufficiently large ships are able to be brought in to cut down the
cost of freight to Europue. After all, we have got hematite of 64% or
65% 0 iron ore content and they are scratching around at 30% 0 or sonething
of that kind. They have to mine it. All we have to do is to get to the
top of a hill and take the hill away:
And I believe, myself, that before long, the United States
of America must be a strong customer for iron ore of the quality we have.
If US Steel does not come out here and build its own steel plant to use the
ore we have, then our ore will go to the United States in order to make
steel there. It will be cheaper for US Steel to do that than to continue on
the course they are now following in the United States itself.
The openings in front of us, the windows on the future look
on to a vista that is virtually unlimited. Let me, Sir, continue a little
with the importance which I see to Australia of these new enterprises.
At the end of last month, my colleague, the Minister for
National Development, issued a set of new projections for the mining
industry. I have mentioned the $ 2000 million of his projections. / 4 
Stack that up against the projections made by the Vernon Committee which
estimated that mineral exports would be valued at about $ 330 million a year
by 1975. That Committee based that figure on known resources and on
expert predictions. There were a few people around who thought this
estimate a little conservative and said it might be a $ 100 million or so more
than that who could tell? And someone had the temerity to mention that
it might be $ 700 or $ 800 million and this was at once dismissed as a
complete flight of fancy, complete nonsense. But it wasn't a flight of fancy.
It was an underestimation by experts of what we had and of what we could do
with what we had and perhaps this underlines again what I have said that
the future is virtually without limit. We don't yet know all we have got, We
don't yet know what it can bring in for us.
There is always difficulty in planning of this kind. I am told
that the two best-planned cities in Australia are Broken Hill and Kalgoorlie
and the reason that they are the two best-planned cities in Australia is that
the roads were designed so that those using them could turn a camel team.
I have got to bring this to the attention of my colleague, the Minister for
the Interior, in Canberra: But whatever the reasons for it may be, this
indicates that sometimes planning has unexpected results and often
planning underestimates what can be achieved.
Now, Sir, I have been speaking only of the mining industry
so far, But what I have been saying tonight means that the change in our
pattern of trade is obvious as a result of ou~ r mineral developments. Last
year, mineral exports exceeded in value our greasy wool exports from
Australia for the first time, and there we get another pointer to the
dimension in our national affairs played by the mineral explosion.
In five years' time, the value of our mineral exports from
Australia should be greater than the total value of our rural exports today.
And since we have grown from an infant nation to our present state, very
largely if not entirely on the value of our rural exports, what a great
punctuation mark in our national history is here heralded. And that is the
export the overseas earnings side of the question. And I have already
said that the future is unlimited.
But we are talking of mining and what mining can bring into
this country, and largely one has been thinking of raw materials. Not
entirely, of course, because there is to be at Kwinana the new refinery
for nickel, there is now for which I take some personal pleasure to be
in Queensland a smelter which might well be the greatest in the world if
you put a four-pot line instead of a three-pot line, as I hope you will. 
But very largely it is the raw materials, the ore and the pellets that are
being exported. But more and more, if we are to make the best use of what
has been discovered, of what has been and is being worked, more and more
I think we should seek to process the materials that are torn from the land
in Australia. I would like to see Australia with a second steel industry. I
am told there is more than one at present, but I don't believe it. I think
there is one which owns some subsidiaries. I would quite like to see a
second steel industry. I want to see aluminium smelters in this country.
I want to see more and more processing of the materials we produce.
And let me illustrate that by giving you some figures. I
have been talking of bauxite. Let's look at what is involved here. One
million tons of bauxite from Weipa or from Gove earns $ 5 million for
export. If it is converted to alumina, the equivalent of its earnings is
some $ 30 million. If that alumina is converted to aluminum, ingot
aluminum, it would be worth $ 120 million, and if, finally, that ingot
aluminum is fabricated into aluminium products then it would be worth
$ 600 million. There really is a premium, gentlemen, on getting $ 600
million or $ 200 million rather than not only a premium in what can
be earned overseas by it, but a premium in the factories that are
Srovided, the smelters that are provided, the jobs that are provided, the
ecentralisation that is provided, if we can more and more get into this
field. I know many companies are already acting along these lines.
The more companies that do this the better it will be for them, and for our
nation. And I believe that the gentlemen in this room would wish to see
that happen and will strive to see it happens.
And if it is to happen, then there is another aspect to which
I think we should all turn our minds. Some of you may have heard or read
that I have a view that the more Australian ownership there is in these
fields the better it is for Australia. Of course we need, and nobody
denies we need, overseas capital in very.* large quantities, both for the
development of the mining section and, more particularly, perhaps, for
the development of the processing section of which I have spoken. And we
cannot but benefit from such an exercise; even if it is 100 per cent
ownership, we cannot but benefit from it. We benefit because we are
virtually 50/ 50 partners since we take some 45 per cent of profits in company
tax. There are some companies who can minimise their profits, of course,
which has some effect on this, but once they really get going and the
opportunity for hiding things is gone, then we take 45 per cent, andso
we are 45 per cent partners in this manner. / 6 
We benefit because of the townships that are built, and
because of the people who are employed, and because of the taxation given
us by those who are employed. We benefit because of the manpower which
comes in and which otherwise we might not get. We benefit because of
access to overseas markets which very big overseas companies have got
sewn up and which we might not be able to enter if we didn't have this
capital here. In all these ways we benefit.
But having said that, and having said that we must not in any
way interfere with this flow, it would be wrong, I think, to say there is
no price that has to be paid for the benefits I have outlined.
There is a price. There is a price to be paid in that the
overseas earnings which companies make are going eventually to be
diminished by the dividends that have to be paid overseas for the fixed
interest loans that have to be paid off. There is a price, perhaps, to be
paid, if there is too great a concentration of overseas ownership, on the
refusal of access to particular markets because of arrangements made
by international cartels. So there is a number of prices to be paid.
Now, Sir, none of these prices is sufficient for us to prevent
the inflow of overseas capital and the benefits which we get from it, but
surely the lower we can keep this price without preventing such inflow,
the better it is for us and for pur country.
And it is for these reasons that my Government has made
it abundantly clear that we look with favour on partnership arrangements,
that we look with favour on overseas companies offering opportunity to
Australian investors to take up equity in those companies. And having
made this known, I am happy to say that significant overseas companies
are taking notice of it and are, more than before, providing these
opportunities. I have no evidence to indicate that having made this known
has in any way inhibited the inflow of capital from abroad. I have plenty
of evidence to indicate that overseas companies are offering more
ownership to Australians if they are prepared to take it up.
And it was for these reasons that we instituted the idea of
convertible notes so that citizens in Australia who have money to invest
but who must have an income to live on from that money, would have the
opportunity to invest it, to receive income from it, and at a later stage,
when a company became profitable, have the opportunity to convert that
into equity. And it was for these reasons that we instituted guidelines for
/ 7 
borrowing in Australia by overseas companies, guidelines which would give'
to overseas companies an incentive to provide equity to Australians because
the greater the equity, the greater the opportunity to borrow in Australia, and
the less interest had to be paid by those who were borrowing.
And now we propose a further step, and that is the setting UP ofC
a corporation to enable Australian companies to compete in overseas fixed
interest borrowing with the gia it companies which now can borrow overseas.
There is no n.-eed to expound upon this to those of you who are in this room'--
because you know it like a book. I have on my right a gentleman whose
company is borrowing large, very large sums of money overseas at quite
high rates of interest to develop Australia, at any rate to smelt in Australia.
The other day, Hamersley had a new float and borrowed large sums of mon--ey
overseas at high rates of interest to further develop Mt Tom Price. Utah
is doing the same. Let us not go any further. We all know that for purposes of
development, companies with complete or partial overseas ownership will
borrow as much inside Australia as they can and the rest outside Australia
or. their business judgment of what will best help to develop their compa.. i-es,
and their business judgment of how they can service the loans they borrow.
And this is made easier to do because on the international markets Alcoa,
General Motors, companies of that calibre can go and establish with no
difficulty their credit worthiness for large loans. What we are seeking to
do by this new step, the latest in the ones we have already taken, is to
establish a corporation in Australia which, by its size, will be able to
be seen by those who have money to lend abroad, to be at least as creditworthy
as General Motors or Alcoa, or other companies of that kind. This
is so that it can, in that way, for Australian comparies who on a business
judgment believe they need it, borrow money at high rates of interest which
they think they can service and thereby be put on the same footing as the
other large companies of which I have spoken. We believe in that way we
will help preserve that Australian equity and reduce the price and we
believe that to reduce the price and to protect as much Australian equity as
possible is a good objective for a government to have.
These steps, I think, will compleme-nt for the benefit of our
nation what you geitlemeri are initiating a-id which is I am sure for the
benefit of our nation.
Sir, both government and industry are, to a great extent
perhaps n-ot to as great an extent as the Council would like but to a
great extent co-operating in the furtherance of the aims of your Cwn:-cil. / S 



WEST AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURE~ S
1970 ANNUAL DINNER
PERTH, W. A. 0 APRIL 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Chairman, Sir David Brand, Distinguished Guests and Gentlemen:
Thank you very much, Sir, for that introduction, and thank you
for the opportunity that you have afforded me to speak tonight to this
very representative gathering of Western Australians.
I don't think there is any point in my detailing to you that which
you all know so well and that is the great and exciting changeO. that are
taking place in this part of Australia. Let us take that virtually for granted
because indeed I suspect you know more about it than I do, though I think
I know a great deal about it, particularly about the iron ore developments
in this State. Yet, we know this, and your menu tonight in capsuled form
shows that one thousand new factories have been opened here in the last
five years and that alone is an indication of what is happening here and all
throughout the Commonwealth of Australia.
And so what situation do we reach? What economic poosition do
we reach as a result of this surge of development in secondary industry,
in minerals not unfortunately in primary production, though the increase
is there but not the return but what do we find now economically as a
result of this? At this stage we see in Australia that we have reached an employment
situation which we have not known since 1965, the situation where we
have absolutely full employment, in my view, and indeed a situation where,
on the statistics, there are more jobs available than there are people to fill
them, a tight labour situation indeed as I do not have to explain to anybody
in this audience. In the field of home construction ( I am going througi' all those
indicators which show the sort of state that an economy finds itself in)
one of the tightest labour situations since 1965, one of the most obvious
booms in housing construction and other construction that Australia has ever
known. Motor registrations rising year by year to an extent not previously
even expected by the motor industry itself. Consumer spending rising
quite high, hire purchase debts increasing, wages rising by some 9 per cent
or so this year.... all of them indicators that in normal times, and in the
past, one would have expected to lead to be indications that there was a need,
if inflation is to be avoided, for demand to be reduced. ./ 2 
And yet we find, looking at the obverse side of the coin that the
cost of living index this year is rising at the rate of about 3 per cent which
is not unbearable as long as the rise does not continue to accelerate; which
is surprisingly low compared with all the other indicators that I have given.
We find that capital inflow having dropped off in the early part ode the year
is increasing again because of conditions overseas. We find our reservesi
not falling but beginning to rise, and we find our overseas trade balances
showing most healthy balances in our favour. And, norm-ally, in the past the
original indicators that I would have shown would have led people to expect
that overseas trade balances would fall instead of rise, and overseas reserves
would fall, and so there is an economic difference here from anything we have
seen before in our national life.
And because of these differences, and because we are going to have
this year what we aimed for, and that is an internal surplus of at least
$ 500 million, and because there have been some measures talcen to reduce
the demand for money by increasing the price that has to be paid for money,
because of these things, I believe it unlikely that the indicators which one
would have thought would lead to inflation, will in fact lead to such inflation
at least during the balance of this financial year.
At that time, when a new Budget is being looked at, then the
situation must be looked at anew; but it does appear that in spite off that
prosperity, in spite of the housing boom, in spite of the tight employment
situation, that so far we are being enabled to avoid an irilation which must
eventually be avoided. And this is due, to some extent, to the changing
pattern of production inside Australia itself.
We have in the past lived on primary produce, on the sheep's
back during all our formative years as a nation, but last year, I am told,
on the figures, rural produ ction was 51 per cent of earnings, minerals
23 per cent and manufactures 18 per cent of our earnings. And last year,
the mineral exports of Australia, for the first time, brought us in more
than the greasy wool crop of Australia, and within the next few years,
Western Australian iron ore production alone will bring in as much as
our entire wool crop. Western Australian iron ore production alone;
leaving other minerals in other States out, is estimated to bring in as much
as that crop on which in the past we have entirely depended.
This is, I think, a dramatic illustration of the change of Australia's
economic orientation, From this growth so far, from this change in pattern,
enormous opportunities are going to open up throughout Australia, given
a Government which is prepared to be unpopular as we would be prepared
to be unpopular if necessary, by ensuring there is no inflation,. given that
kind of stability, then there will be enormous opportunities. / 3 
I want to examine just some of the things which are involved in
the accelerating growth in the future, which I believe that we can expect.
I want to examine it against the background of overseas investment in
Australian industry, in Australian mining, and of Australian participation
in Australian industry and Australian mining.
Let me at the start set out the Government's positior: n regarding
overseas investment. We believe, indeed we know and I am sure you know,
that it is impossible to generate within Australia the amount of capital that
is going to be required if we are to proceed to develop at the rate which
history demands we should. If we are going to increase our industrial
capacity, if we are go-ing to increase the rate of our extractive mining
industries, if we are going to increase the processing of the minerals,
then we cannot within this country generate the capital which is required.
So we welcome and encourage and want overseas capital in enterprises
in Australia. Let us make that quite clear from the start and from the
beginning. Having said that, I still think that we should bear these things
in mind. Our motor vehicle industry in Australia today, important to our
economy as you would agree, is 90 per cent owned and controlled by
overseas capital. Our chemical industry in Australia today is 75 per cent
owned and controlled by overseas capital. Our electrical and
electronic industry which will play an even more important part in all
branches of industry in the future, is over 50 per cent owned and controlled
by overseas capital, and the alumina and aluminium industry based on
deposits of bauxite which perhaps may be the greatest in the world is
almost 100 per cent owned by overseas capital. Let us bear this in mind,
not in the sense that this is bad in itself, not that this does not bring us
benefits because it does in many ways. You and I are 50 per cent partners
in all these enterprises L icause of the company ta-:.*. hat you and I collect.
Not in any sense saying ., hat this is bad, but recog,:.: sing it and putting it
in our minds as a fact of life.
We hear on all sides people saying most of Australian industry
is owned by Australians and controlled and operated by Australians, x per
cent of factories is so owned. And so it is, but that is not the point. The
point is what is the size of those factories, in what fields of enterprise are
they engaged. And again, for background and to keep in our minds, the factories
with under 50 employees are ' 46 per cent, only 26 per cent owned by
overseas capital. Over 50 employees 34 per cent by overseas capital.
Over 100 employees 37 per cent. Over 500 employees 43 per cent.
So the larger enterprises, the larger the factory, the more likely it is that
there will be this control or this ownership from overseas. And perhaps
in more definite terms and perhaps again to put in our minds what in fact
is the case before we draw inferences from it but just what in1 fact is the
case let me trespass on your patience a little by giving some examples
of actual foreign-owned or majority foreign-owned companies in Australia,
some examples only which I have culled from a much longer list and which
I have sought to distribute over various fields of industry. ./ 4 
We find in this list such household words as GMH, Ford, Chrysler,
ICI, Union Carbide, Heinz, Kelloggs, Frigidaire, Hamersley, CRA, Alcoa,
STC, Philips, Vicars, Caterpillar, Massey Harris, Colgate, Portland Cement
and others which I won't go on with because I merely sought to indicate some
pointers on this list. Now, all that has been good.
All right, as some people do, to attack GMH, for example and
say they have a 100 per cent owned company in Australia and they built up
with the profits they made in Australia, but you must look at the obverse
side of the coin, too, and realise all the smaller factories which have
come into being as a result of GMH-, and which are providing GM/ H with the
spare parts or which are providing them with services of various kinds,
and you must take into account the export drive which GMI-has made I
don't say it is better than Ford or Chrysler but I am using it as an example
which they have made to contribute to the Australian economy.
These are not one-sided things I am trying to put. I am not
trying to say this shouldn't have happened or isn't good f'or us. I just want,
as a preliminary to what I propose to say later, to show that these things
are in fact happening. And they may happen to a greater extent in the
future in this era of opportunity that is opening up.
In the last five years, which we can take as an indication of the
next five years, we had $ 18, 000 million invested in industrial enterprises
of all kinds in Australia. That is $ 18, 000 million from all sources, internal
and external. And of that $ 18, 000 million, one-sixth or 000 million
came from abroad. Ten years ago, investment from abroad was $ 388 million.
One year ago, it had risen to $ 967 million. And in ning, particularly, thereis
this pattern being reproduced. Five years ago, overseas investment was
$ 34 million, It has risen on the last figures 1 say, to $ 244 million, which
has been accompanied by a rise in overseas ownership and control of
minerals. Indeed, the control of production, the Australian co: n. trol of
production in minerals has dropped from 63 per cent in 1963 to 47 per cent
in 1967. And this process probably will continue, given the facts I set out
at the start, that if we are to progress as fast as we must, then we can't
generate inside our own community enough savings and enough f-inds to
allow this to happen.
Now I said that this was not bad. I said that on balance this was
good, and I believe it to be so, but surely there must be a requirement to
see, in this situation, that as much of the new development as is possible,
without turning away overseas capital, without impeding its inf-low, that
as much as is possible remains under Australian ownership. The
Government has taken that view, and we have taken various courses to
try and see that it would happen. 0 0 0 
We have first indicated our views, our desires to overseas
companies and to overseas governments-that there should be an opportunity,
as far as possible, for Australian participation, for Australian ownership,
for Australian management and for Australian control not said that we
would force this, not said this would be a legislative matter, not said that
we would bring in regulations, but said this is what the Goveryrinent would
like to see, and it has had a r ' esult from responsible overseas companies
of stature. The result has been that there has been more offering to
Australians of equity in new developments in this country. If we can't take
them up, that's too bad, but the offerings have been made.
We have brought in a system of guideliie s which manyT of you
gentlemen will know about on the borrowing in Australia of fixed interest
by overseas companies, wherin we have laid down that let us use this as
an example, 20 per cent ot total new funds to be put into industrial
development, 20 per cent only can be borrowed in Australia by an overseas
company; but given an incentive to overseas companies by saying " if
there is more than a certain proportion of Australian owinershib in your
company, then you dan borrow more than that 20 per cent on Australian
markets on fixed interest, and this is a real incentive because the
interest rates here have been so much lower than they have beep. abroad.
And we have indicated that we should restore the benefit of allowiing
convertible notes to be issued by companies, so that those Australians
who have money to invest and who must get a return on that mo-ney in
order to live, will be enabled now to invest it in a company krnowing
that they will get interest on it and knowing also that they will have an
opportunity at the end of a fixed period of years to translate that fixed
interest investment into equity in the company in which they invest. All
of these things were done for the purpooe of giving more opportunity, more
incentive, more chance of the greatest possible Australian ownership
and control of Australian industry.
Now, we propose to take another step, and we propose to take
it for the same reasons. We propose to establish an Industry Development
Corporation of which many of you might have heard. I cannot go into
details of this yet because the detailed bill has not been introduced to
Parliament, but I can discuss some of the questions which this proposal
has raised and I can give the reasons behind this decision and what we
hope this decision will lead to. a 9. / 6 
We believe that there are important areas of Australian industrial
activity in which the potential financial requirements in the developing years
ahead are not completely served now and, as we think, may not be able to be
completely served by existing financial institutions. For exam-ple, in the
mineral field alone, which must in the nature of things take a prominent place
in all questions of Australian ownership, experience shows that in the extraction
and the subsequent processing, particularly t he subsequent processing of basic
material resources, there is overwhelming foreign ownership because of
the enormously high capital required in this field.
And leaving that field, coming into secondary industry generally,
we think that new scientific developments, new technological developments,
new knowledge as the frontiers of knowledge are pushed back, are going to
lead to capital needs which industry has not in this country hitherto known.
We think that in many fields of n-anufacture, Australian enterprise must be
much more massive than is the case in much of Australian industry, if there
are to be economies of scale to enable that industry to compete on a world
market and to compete in Australia with overseas industry wit'a a minimum of
tariff protection. In other words, the industry must grow to be comparable with
a massive world industry if it is ultimately to be able to compete and the
capital requirements of this are going to be most significant.
And we believe that it is desirable in these fields which I have
mentioned to aim at such co mpanies, whether they be new processing plants,
whether they be industrial companies which are going to be developed, to
aim at their development, while still retaining as much Australian ownership
as it is possible for us to have. Now, at present the statistical facts show
that this is not happening, and it is not happening for one of two reasons.
Either there is not a will on the part of industry and owners of
industry to retain ownership in Australian hands, and I discount that because
I believe the will is there, either there is not a will or there is an inadequate
opportunity to obtain the capital required and at the same time retain
Australian ownership. Well, at any rate, statistically, either one of these
factors is operating because more and more of our industry is passing into
foreign control. And we haven't had in the past enough policy on this, and a policy
saying that the primary purpose we must have is to enable not the prevention
of the inflow of overseas capital, but the retention of the maximum Australian
ownership. This has not been a policy and it seems to me that Australia
has lagged behind in the past. / 7 
Sir, it is towards filling this very significant gap in our policy
that the Industry Development Corporation is intended to be established.
I think it clear that the phenomenal pace of industrial development in
Australia over the last ten or twenty years has been facilitated by that
huge inflow of capital which has brought with it technical skills and access
to overseas markets of which I have spoken. And let rile reiterate we
recognise this as a government, and we approve it and we want it to
continue. But there is absolutely nothing connected with the iLdustrial
corporation we propose to establish which will in any way inhibit or
firghten off or prevent the inflow of this capital in this way. Vat it will
do, we hope, is as an Industry Development Corporation, be able to
give assistance to Australian industry, a particular Australian industry
when, and only when that assistance is sought, when and ordly when that
assistance is sought to help such an industry to obtain the capital it
needs from overseas without having to take in an overseas partner in order
to get overseas capital. In this way, we will not stop the inflo. of overseas
capital because the object of the IDC is to borrow overseas itself. We will
hope to make available to an industry in Australia which wants -o develop,
the capital to enable it to develop, if it asks for it, if it is a good business
risk; and retain its full ownership in Australian hands.
I think, Sir, that too many Australian industrial enterprises
which are growing and have grown, have run into limitations in the past
on the ability to raise capital. They have had, in order to obtain capital
to borrow, to break in a partner who can borrow abroad, and resolve
the dilemma of being unable to raise the capita) themselves in Australia
or overseas; to resolve that dilemma, they have taken in as partners a
company which can raise that capital, but which is foreign.
I think that hardly a week passes, Sir, when we don't read of
an important and growing enterprise which for one reason or another has
been taken over by an industrial concern from abroad. Now, again let
me make it clear that takeovers and mergers are not necessarily bad.
They can be good in many cases they are good. They are part of a
normal business scene, maybe part of the process of an industry developing,
growing up, becoming more efficient; or it may be that a joint venture
between Australians and foreign firms may be a desirable step in Australian
industry development and the opening up of overseas markets to an
industry. All these things are true. But it is also true that it is frequently
an unfortunate feature in the pattern of such arrangements that when the
Australian partner can't get his share of the capital requirements, whether
equity or loan, he will at best become the minor partner in the new
enterprise that results. We wish, not to stop the new enterprise, but to
enable the Australian partner to be not a minor but an equal partner in it,
by helping him to borrow abroad through the IDC. / 8 
Sir, that there are great resources of capital overseas willing
for investment in Australia, surely nobody has to prove. It is therefore
either equity or fixed term lendings, and the facts of the capital inflow
into Australia themselves prove that this is so; just as the fact that the
high interest rates required for such capital do not prevent it from
being borrowed by such firms, for examiple, as Hamersley because, on
a business judgement, it is possible to pay that for the capital a-nd still
make a profit. I am sure nobody doubts that these firms that are
borrowing it will do this. The capital is there, but is riot available to
small firms. It is available to Hamersley. It might be available to
BHP, to GRA, to Utah, to Comalco, to some world-wide company of
great stature and great standing, but it is not available to a relatively
small company. An industrial corporation established in Australia can have
the stature and the standing of a great international company and can when
approached by an Australian firm a relatively small firm, act for it.
It will act for it under the control of a board of directors, predominantly
drawn frxom private industry, in due course, to retain all the benefits
which that capital has brought irn the ownership of that industry itself.
This must surely be a proper objective. This. must surely be another
step in retaining as much as we can of our ownership and of our control.
This must be a help to the developmeint of Australian firms, and it must
surely be obvious that it cannot in any way interfere with that continuing
flow of overseas capital to overseas-owned firms % h ich we still want to
continue along with this. This is the last step that the Governmrent has
taken, along with indicating its desires, with its borrowing guidelines,
with its convertible notes, this is aiother step along that path.
And I hope, gentlemen, that it will commend itself to the thinking
of most people. It has been attacked by people who do not understand it,
who have been misled by initial press reports about it. But bear these
major points in mind it can only act when it is asked to act; it cannot
interfere with a company; it will be by law prevented from getting an equity
share in a company which will control that company; it will by law be
required to divest itself of any equity it gets in helping an Australian company,
as soon as it is clear that that equity can be disposed of on the Australian
market to Australian buyers; it will only act when asked; it will mobilise
funds which Australian industries of small or medium stature cannot
mobilise for themselves. And it will do it in a way that the Resources
Development Bank and other institutions cannot do, because the
Australian Resources Development Ban.%, important as it has been, has, in
fact, as an institution owned by the trading banks, been mobillsing / 9 
9.
Australian capital to great effect and to great benefit. Some $ 250 million
or more has been mobilised inside Australia from Australian Lsources, almost
nothing has been borrowed from abroad. And, indeed, it is not altogether
surprising because the Australian Resources Development Bar.-, is a bank
and is subject to banking requirements, and what bankcs pay for deposits
is not comparable with what many industries pay for capital, and indeed
not comparable with what Eurodollar market requires to be paid for its
capital. Further, by the very nature of banking, certain risk enterprises
do not commend themselves very much. But whatever the reasons may be,
the pragmatic fact is that there has not been the borrowing by this great
and effective institution, there has not been the borrowing abroad that we
seek to get now. And this, I think, will get capital to the great goo Of
Australian industry, to the ultimate saving of some interest which would
have to be paid overseas, the ultimate saving of dividends that :-ight
otherwise have to be paid overseas, and yet without in any wiay interfering
with the flow of capital we need as well. We are merely seeking to see
that if it is unnecessary to pay a high price for capital from abroad for
development, then we don't have to pay that price and that is the objective
of the IDG. If it works and if the development expands and accelerates in
the future, as I am sure you all believe it will, then in ten yean,* time,
I think we will be able to look at it, and say this has served Australia as
well as that other institution which was attacked in the same way at its
beginning and I refer to EPIC as well as that other institution, EPIC,
has served Australia, and Australian industries and Australia:--manufactures.
I thought I would take this opportunity of speaking to you and
proposing the toast of secondary industry, to set out, necessarily in a
brief form, the approach which the Government has in these Matters not
a chauvinistic approach but a business-like approach, which we have
taken, and the thinking underlying the next step we propose to take.
I hope, gentlemen, in the years to come at gatherings such as
this, when people rise to talk, it will be no longer necessary to speak,
because events will have proved the success of what we are now setting
out to do for industry, and, as we believe, for Australia. 



LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF THE PRIME MNISTER
OF CANADA, MR P. TRUDEAU, AT PARLIAMENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA 19 MAY 1970
Speech ~ Y the Pr~ ime Minister, Mr John Gorton.
Mr Prime Minister, Ladies and Gentlemen
It is my great pleasure on this occasion to propose the
toast of our distinguished guest and I do this for a variety of reasons.
One, Sir, is because we are very glad indeed to welcome you here as
a person, and because we are very glad indeed to welcome you here as
the Prime Minister of Canada.
It is a long time I think 1958 s3ince we last had a visit
from the Prime Minister of Canada, and Sir, this is far too long a time
to intervene before there are reciprocal visits from Prime Ministers of
Australia to Canada and of Canada to Australia.
We have a great deal in common. Your country, Sir, Ithink
became officially at any rate a British country on September 18,
17 39 when the surrender of Quebec to Wolfe on the Plains of Abraham took
place. If it had not been for that little disagreement which was settled
in that way, Australia might not have had to wait so long before out East
Coast was discovered in 1770 because the discoverer of our East Coast
was a Captain Cook who was in the boats which took the soundings to
decide how the army of Wolfe could get to the Plains of Abraham in order
to deal with Q uebec. But at least we have that in common.
Some other things we have not had in common. We have
never been invaded by the hardy colonials who cut their way through the
Maine wilderness in order to invade Canada. But you have repelled on
e very occasion both then and in 1812, the incursions from your neighbour
to your South. We, on the other hand have been delighted to welcome
them when we needed their help in order to remain a country.
But this is not all that we have got. This is only the
beginning. If you take the two countries Canada and Australia the
physical way in which you see them on a map must immediately strike
your imagination. The size is roughly the same... you are bigger, I
know, but the size is roughly the same. Then there are large areas
in both our countries which are underpopulated and which because of
the climatic and other conditions which exist are likely to remain
underpopulated. 
2-
We both have populations which, on a world basis, are
not large but are growing, and we both have a vibrant economy,
we both have a feeling of excitement and development in our countries.
We also have a great number of problems in common.
I think you, Sir, have to deal as a Federal Government
with what are called provinces in Canada and there are some
difficulties about arranging things about taxation and other matters.
We have much the same here except, of course, we are not dealing
with provinces. We are dealing with States. But there is that same
difficulty, that same awkwardness in making a Federal system wor'k
which your country and our country both have.
There is, too, the desire that you have and which you
have expressed and which we have, to try and see that as much of the
ownership as possible of the development inside our countries is
retained by the citizens of those countries. Rumour has it, Sir, that
there will be established in Australia something called an Australian
Industry Development Corporation, and rumour also has it that
there will be established in Canada something calledi a Canadian
Development Corporation both with the same objective in mind. So
there is another instance of the approaches to the problems we
have in common. Who is going to pay for the infrastructure for the mineral
developments in your country and in our country? It is extraordinary
how closely our problems parallel each other. This applies even
when we come to the problem that both of us are growing grains of
various kinds which the world does not wish to buy in the quantities
we wish to grow them at the price which is payable for them to be
grown. All of this indicates that what we decided this morning
that there should be, if possible at intervals of not greater than
two years, consultations between Ministers and officials of our
two countries on these various problems, on how we would compete
with each other in the world, but compete in a way which did not
allow one to be used against the other, of how we would explain to
each other the approaches we took on the problems we had and perhaps
learn from each other; of how in the field of science where we have
a unique opportunity in the Barrier Reef to out up an Institute of
Marine Biology, and you in the Arctic have unique opportunities for
scientific investigation in that field will be of benefit to both our
countries. 3 
-3
But even mine, may I express our very
great delight that Canada, a country which has naturally in the past
been more oriented towards Europe than t cverds the Pacific, should
now under your Leadership be showing increased interest, increased
desire to understand, increased desire to help those countries whom you
have described as countries which live on the rim of the Pacific.
We are delighted that this interest is extending to the Pacific and to
the countries of South-East Asia, because here is another great
opportunity for two countries such as ours to help, to the top of our
bent, in a region which must be of interest to us both. For our own
part, what happens in South-East Asia is cf continuing concern for us
for we live on the perimeter of it. For your part, , ou are now showing
an interest there too, and if I may say so, Sir, I believe that in doing
that you are play: ing the part of a world statesman for what happens in
Asia in the future and what happens to their people in the future could
well decide the future peace and progress of the world as a whole.
For all these reasons, Sir, for the thinge -we have in
common, the problems we have in common, the ways we can help each
other, the interests we are now having in common in this part of the
world, we are delighted to welcome you, we hope you will come back
and I beli eve that this visit will show that during the decade of the
seventies, our two countries will1, in a region of interest to both of
us, help other people, and by doing that, help the world in general.
So you are welcome, Sir. 



PARLIAMENTARY LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF
THE RT. HON. KEITH HOLYQAKE, CH MP
CANBERRA, ACT JUNE 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. J. G. Gorton, MP
Mr Prime Minister, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:
We have welcomed many Heads of Government at Parliamentary
Luncheons, but I think that none has been more welcome than our Guest
of Honour here today. In one way, because we know him so well and
we have had such close associations with him and with New Zealand,
this official function may seem a little peculiar; for after all, Mvr
Holyoake, the P rime Minister has been virtually a commuter to
Australia over the years, constantly coming in and out. But this is
the first occasion on which h_ 3 has paid us an official visit, and we
are delighted that you have done this, Sir, because it gives us the
opportunity to provide an official welcome and to underline the
relationship between our two countries in this way.
You have, Sir, been Prime M. inister of New Zealand for ten
years which have brought new problems to your country as it has to
all others and you are not only the Prime Minister of New Zealand, but
the doye n of all Commonwealth Prime Ministers.
We have, in Australia, a special affection for you and a
special family feeling for New Zealand and for all New Zealanders.
I remember with pleasure that the last occasion you and I were at
a Parliamentary Luncheon was in Wellington when you gave an official
welcome to myself and this is a delightful chance to return that on
behalf of all Australians.
Although Captain Cook, in a way, discovered both of us
two hundred years ago, it was not really until 1944 that our two countries
entered into the first comprehensive bilateral agreement that has been
between us, an agreement for co-operation in defence, for consultation
at Ministerial and other le vels in many other matters. We had formal
trade treaties dating back to 1922, but the Canberra Pact of 1944 was the
first broad, direct agreement, out of which our association and the
relationship between our two countries has grown and strengthened
over the years since then. 
2
Yet we had already fought together in one World War,
and we were fighting in another at that time, and we had together
immortalised the name of ANZAC.
But since that first formal agreement almost thirty
years ago, -e have continued that partnership and sat side by side
in world councils and in regional councils. Together we spoke with
the same voice for the smaller nations at San Francisco when the
United Nations Charter was drawn up. Tugether we joined our Pacific
partner, the United States of America, in the ANZUS Pact. We
are in SEATO and ANZAM together, in the Colombo Plan, in ECAFE,
in ASPAC and in the Asian Bank.
We have both played our part i n the Commonwealth of
Nations. We have been in Korea and Malaysia together, and we are
now together in Vietnam. More recently in Djakarta, our fbreign
Ministers sat together at a conference which, I think for the first time,
indicated the interest of the Asian countries of this region and of ourselves
in seeking to find a political settlement to the problems of Cambodia,
a diplomatic break-through and again, one in which we both shared.
We have had our Free Trade Agreement which has worked
well for both our countries. We have had our discussions on defence
standardisation and have declared our jea diness to share military
commitments in Malaysia and Singapore after the British withdrawal.
There iS ahead of both of us in this decade of the seventies,
as the points of power and pressure around the world shift and change,
and have different effects, a new opportunity for doing things together
for our own national interest, and for the security and advancement
of the region in which we both find ourselves.
It may be possible to make a greater impact with aid to
developing nations in our region if some of it is given jointly by
Australia and New Zealand. This is one matter that you have raised
already, and we look forward to examining it more closely and
s ympathaically. But Australians and New Zealanders, living on the perimeter
of Asia, are becoming more involved in that region as each year goes
by. There are changes taking place there which will shape the whole
course of our future and, as I think, the future of the world. These
changes there, and in the South Pacific, are changes which offer to
your country and to my country, further opportunities of that joint
interest, that joint assistance which we have given over the years just
past. ./ 3 
3
Together we are providing substantial aid already,
but perhaps the contribution we can make can be measured not
just in terms of physical aid but by example, the example of
democracy at work in a stable environment where progress,
material progress is joined to the higher values of the individual
happiness in a society, where the imperatives of youth are
understood and given their proper place alongside but not superseding
the judgment and wisdom of older generations.
I think that our two countries can together be a bridge
between the old civilisations of Europe and the new civilisations
or not new civilisations but the developing countries of our own
region. I am sure we can do more things together than we could do
apart. And, therefore, this visit, as an indication of our
intention to do things together, gives the opportunity to welcome you,
but not only to welcome you, but to welcome the fact that these two
countries, with so much in common, so close together, have the
same outlook, share the same determination to do what we can
for ourselves and our neighbours as we have in the past. This is
another great reason, Sir, why I am delighted to welcome you on
this occasion.
L 



FEDERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF THE
LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA
Canberra, A. C. T. 8 JUNE 1970
õ peech! th_ ePrime Minister, Mr. 14ohngorton
Mr. President, Parliamentary Colleagues and Ladies and Gentlemen:
It will be twenty-one years next December since the
Liberal Country Party coalition assumed the Governme.. of this nation.
They are twenty-one years in which there have been three wars Korea,
the Malayan emergency and now Vietnam; twenty-one years of great
national development and industrial progress. There has been an
increase in the population perhaps greater than any other country has
had, except Asian countries, in that period of time. It has been
a periodd gready a~ pnded trade; a period in which our exports have
been immensely developed; a period of growing involvement with
that area of Asia to which we find ourselves contiguous; a period of
improvement of the living standards generally for our population; a
period of greatly expanded social services; a period a2 greatly
expanded opportunity for the individual.
We have helped to bring this about, because at the time when we
came into office, wa stood for the right of the individual to engage in the
occupation of his choice and to so conduct himself in that occupation as
he believed best. We stood ainstthe concept that the individual
ought to be told by the State that his enterprise could riot be f reely
used in a field of his own choosing because there were ce-rtain areas
in which the state might forbid it.
We stood for the concept that the Government should create
a climate where individual enterprise was encouraged, and where
the planning of enterprise and its expansion was a matter for the
myriad individuals engaged in it. We stood against the concept that
all planning in all fields should be undertaken by a government or
governments and forced upon the citizens of this country.
We stood for a political system where elected representatives
of a party should themselves decide the policies to be followed by that
party. We stood &amp; Insjt a system which made elected representatives
subject to direction and instruction from unelected persons from
outside. And that we were right in all these attitudes ic, I believe,
evident from the results of this past twenty, nearly twenty-one years. / 2 
Since I spoke to you-: ast, s~ e _ j
two years ago, other significant advances havedeen made in many
areas in Australia, and new initiatives have been taken.
We have found ourselves in a situation where our own
defeuce has necessarily had to occupy our attention in a way which
it has never needed to do in the past years of our history. We have found
ourselves in a situation where our involvement with the countries -of Asia, our
political involvement, our economic assistance has necessarily hald to
grow because we have become contiguous to, and in a sense, a part of
this region of the world, this region of Asia in which we live.
I do not need, I think, to explain to you the new initiatives
which my colleague, the Minister for Defence has undertaken in the field
of defence, the new burdens imposed upon this country, n or the new
economic assistance which my colleague, the Minister for External
Affairs has beea instrumental in extending to the countries to our North,
nor the political initiatives which led, just recently, to that Conference
in Djakarta initiated by an Asian nation to which we were asked and to
which we so greatly contributed.
In other areas, we have gone into an overseas shipping
service let me quickly add, Sir in, partnership with private
enterprise. We have given attention to the requirements of the aborigines
in our midst. We have managed, after some attempts which did not
succeed, to redistribute electoral boundaries. We have given attention
to new roads agreements, adding $ 500 million over five years and
breaking the old requirement that 40 per cent of this must be spent in
country areas. We have taken the decision to convert to the metric
system. We have taken the decision to introduce nuclear power. We
have taken many initiatives, one of which I will speak of later, to provide
incentives for, and to help to maximise Australian ownership of
Australian industry. We have greatly increased aid for the performing
arts, established an Australian film and television development
corporation. We have introduced a tapered means test which gives
incentive to people to save and to earn because their pensions are
not automatically cut out if their means as assessed or their earnings
are above a small amount, and in this particular field of social
welfare, increased pension rates, increased unemployment and sickness
benefits, given full health insurance for low-income families and newlyarrived
migrants, are in process of introducing the new health scheme
and embarked on a omprehensive -programme of. homne care for the aged.
Sir, these are only sonio of ihe new things, some of the
new initiatives which have been taken in-. that period of time, and I
believe that they continue the tradition of this Party to care for people
and to bring new thought to new problems as they arise. 
-3-
Sir, we had in -the progranmme which we have followed,
three proposals in particular which have occasioned much debate in
the country and in the Parliament. One is the health scheme promised
at the last election which I very much hope will become law this week;
one is the Act to set up the Industry Development Corporation which has
already become law, and one is the proposal to discover which Government
has the legal responsibility for the seas which lap Australia's coast.
Each of these matters is important. Each of them, I think, is
illustrative of an approach of the Libemal Party, and about each of them
I wish to talk to you briefly.
The medical benefits scheme, or the health scheme, is
designed, as you know, to remove the fear of heavy doctors' bills
from the insured patient. In order to do this it was necessary to
remove that fear from those patients who had to attend special ists
and who therefore became liable for the higher fees which specialists
charge. And in order to achieve that it was necessary that Government
subventions and fund benefits should be greater for such patients than
they were for patients who did not need or receive specialist treatment.
This led to considerable opposition from a section of the
doctors and this opposition was reflected in debates in the Party room
and in the Parliament. It also led to protracted negotiations and
discussions between my colleague, the Minister for Health, the
Australian Medical Association, and organisa tions representing sections
of thc. general practitioners.
The main arguments advanced agains t the proposals
were if specialists received higher bcnefits frorm the funds and the
Government, evc.,-y doctor would seek to become a specialist and
there would be no general : izactitioners. But since specialists now
charge and receive higher fees from their patients, it is, I think,
doubtful if this argument is valid.
The second argument
consult specialists without having to
everyone would consult a specialist.
not believe that this will happen, but
scheme will finally decide this point,
out to be well grounded, then further
to it. was that if patients were able to
pay a monetary penalty, then
For a variety of reasons we do
only time and the operation of the
and if the fears expressed turn
attention will have to be given
But now, or shortly, all those who need medical
attention, even of the most specialised kind, will be able to get it
without incurring a burden of crippling debt. I think this is an advance
which illustrates that care for the individual which is the Liberal
approach and of which the organisation and the Party can be proud. 
-4-
but I must warn you of one thing.
Neither our scheme, nor the scheme of our opponents,
will achieve its desired end unless the majority of doctors charge the
co~ mmon fee and unless that common fee is only altered at reasonably
spaced periods and by reasonable amounts.
Turning now to the Austral ian Industry Development
Corporation, I speak of an Act which was attacked, for reasons
incomprehensible to me, as an Act which somehow violated . Liberal
principles. Let me give you some of the reasons for passing this
Act. Ouir nation is going throtgh a period of industrial
expansion and of great mineral development. We need large and
continuing infusions of capital from overseas in order to sustain this.
In the last five years, one-sixth of all such investment capital came
from oversea-s. And inevitably that infusion of capital tends to bi ing
with it a greater degree of overseas ownership and control of our
la rger industries and our mineral developments and ultimately cf
our processing of our minerals.
As one example of this, overseas investment in mining
five years ago was $ 34 million in the year. It has risen to something
like $ 250 million in the year, while Australian control production
in minerals alone has dropped from 63 per cent in 1963 to 47 per cent
in 1967. At the same time, Australian requirement to service
existing capital by remitting abroad, has risen from 8. 3 per cent
to 10. 5 per cent of our export earnings in the last five years. And
there is a build-up ot commitment s for further remittances in the
future because income earned in Australfia by overseas investors
and ploughed back has more than doubled in five years.
Sir, these are prices we can afford to pay for
development. We can afford to pay, for 4w benefits ' we
get outweigh the costs of which I have spoken, and we couldn'.. develop
as we should without this influx. But though they are prices we can
afford to pay, they are not prices we should pay unless we must.
So we should provide the opportunity to retain as much Australian
ownership and as much Australian control as we can, provided we
do not inhibit growth. To that end, we have brought down guidelire s for
borrowing inside Australia which provide incentives towards
Australian ownership. We have brought down a'takeover code"
and we are proposing to bring down the matter of convertible notes
which again -will provide an opportunity and incentive for Australian 
5.7
ownership. And the Australian Industry ievelopment Corporation is
designed to further these ends.
It is designed to borrow abroad, on behalf of Australian
companies which ask it to do so, which it judges to be viable, and which
might not themselves be able to borrow, and which might '-ereforo
have to surrender equity to an overseas partner.
Its objectives cannot be claimed to be opposed to Liberal
principles, and indeed, I do not think I have heard its objectives so
claimed. Nor, do I believe, can its method of operation. True, it is
provided with capital by the Government, but it will be autonomous.
It ' will be governed by directors drawn from the field of private
enterprise and applying the judgments and standards of private
enterprise to applications to borrow. It will have no power to
interfere with a company or to act financially on behalf of a company,
unless it is by that company asked to act. It will be subject to the
same taxes as other companies engaged in its field. It will compete
on equal terms, and it cannot do any more than compete.
It will indeed offer a choice to a borrower, and the
preservation and expansion of the right of choice has always been a
basic tenet of Liberalism, ever since 1949 when Sir Robert Menzies
pointed out the need to retain the right of choice.
Sir, if this is a departure from Liberal principlae,
a foray into socialism, then I suppose on that test, so is TAA, or
the Commonwealth Trading Bank or the State Savings Banks or the
Australian National Shipping Line, or a myriad other enterprises.
I think that this action will, in the future, be hailed as a service to
Australia. I believe it will help to retain the greatest possible
Australian ownership of growing Australian enterprises without
interfering with that inflow from abroad that we need. Indeed, I think
it will be an adjunct to the growth of Australian private enterprise,
of Australian private enterprise industry and to help it grow as
Australian industry. Surely, Sir, these aims are proper ones for a Liberal
Party. In turning to the proposal, somewhat loosely described
as offshore minerals legislation, we turn to one which has, I think,
been greatly misunderstood. It has been referred to as an attempt
to take the benefits of mineral deposits on the seabed away from the States.
It isn't. It has been described as an attempt to take away States' legal 
-6
rights. It isn't. It is purely and simply an attempt to discover,
by the only means known to me, who is legally responsible for the
cortrol of the seas around Australia, who has legal rights which are
at present in unresolved dispute.
We want, and we believe, that the nation needs a
clear legal definition of this matter which we do not now have. Both
the State Governments and the Commonwealth Government claim this
legal responsibility and both claim it from low water mark to the outer
Continental shelf. The legal claim of the States is not confined to the
area between low water mark and the three-mile limit any more than
the cl aim of the Commonwealth is confined to the area from the threemile
limit to the Continental shelf.
We are the only nation which does not know what the
legal position is and where sovereignty lies, and it can surely not be
claimed to be an act of centralism to seek to discover this. In
Canada, the issue was resolved by stating a hypothetical case to the
High Court or the equivalent of the High Court. It is not possible
to do this here. Here, all that can be done is for an Act asserting
legal responsibility to be passed and for that Act to be challenged in
that High Court which was set up by the Constitution for the purpose
of interpreting the Constitution in cases which are not clear. Nor
will this clarification, when it comes, prevent full Commonwealth,
State co-operation. The petroleum agreement, which specifically does
not resolve the q uestion of legal responsibility, will continue. And
agreements patterned on the same lines can be entered into concerning
all other minerals, and we are prepared to enter into themn.
But as a nation we will know where we stand. We
will know whether the nation's writ runs inside and outside the threemile
limit, whether it runs in part of the area but not the whole, or
indeed whether it runs in any of the areas. And it is hard to see why
this question should remain any longer in doubt, hard to see why this
question should remain in doubt any more than questions relating to
defence or overseas trade or the other sections of our Constitution
where primary responsibility is not in doubt.
It is hard for me to see why there should be
objections to Constitutional methods of clarifying the Constitution, and
it is certain that after clarification, Commonwealth and State co-operation
in the granting of leases for minerals, and Commonwealth, State
agreement s for royalties and fees in administration can be patterned 7 
-7
on that petrolewnm agreement which it is so oftmauggested should be
followed. Those, Sir, were three of the new initiatives, the
new actions taken which, because they have occasioned country-wide
debate, I thought I should speak of to this Conference.
I turn now to another question of debate, of relations
between the Commonwealth and the States.
As far as financial relations are concerned, Sir,
you will know that the previous agreement is shortly to run out and a
new financial agreement requires to be negotiated. At the moment,
discussions are continuing between Com,-monwealth Treasury officials
and State Treasury officials on this matter.
At the Premiers' Conference, it was made clear, I
think by me that there would bejia new agreements to be worked out
between us, more available for State Governments than would have been
the case bad the old agreement continued with its set down yearly
increases. And we were able to meet one of the specific requirements
of the Steering Committee, which was that the area of State debt should
be reduced and gradually taken over by t. he Commonwealth, and the
charges on it revoked, and that there should be, each year in the
future, a sum of money which previously would have been provided
as Loan money on which interest wac charged but which, for the future
would be provided as a share of revenue for the States to spend as
revenue rather than as Loan funds.
For the rest, the matters of betterment factor and
things of that kind, this is still the subject of negotiation between us.
Last time I spoke to you on this general matter, I
said this: ,' In my view, Sir, it would be unthinkable for an
Australian Government not to have the overriding power
over the maintenance of the Australian economy as a whole".
And this, I am glad to see, has been endorsed by the report of the
Steering Committee. I also said
" If there is a requirement for cheap power in, for
example, Gladstone in Queensland, in order to be able to
bring about industrial development which vtill benefit the
nation; if there is a need for a pipeline or some other work
in South Australia to carry natural gas, which in turn will
benefit the nation, and if these things cannot be achieved without 
-8
' hssistance from a national governmnent, then a
national government needs the right and capacity
to assist in these things.
I imagine there would be few here who Wo uld dispute that approach,
and particularly in view of the Steering Committee's recommendation
that provision for the needs and problems of the less populous States
be maintained. Last time I spoke to you, I suggested that there was
a need to see that the facilities for the education of a child were
roughly comparable no matter in what part of. Australia that child
was educated. And I suggested there wEas a need to ensure that
facilities for the care of the ill in Australia were roughly the same,
no matter in what part of Australia that citizen becaine ill.
I said then I did not think it right or proper to
describe such suggestions as those of a centralist. And I repeat
that I do not think they indicate a centralist way of thinking. But there
are always those who seek to over-simpl ify everything and to apply
labels. There are always those who seek not to have the kind of
discussions I called on us all to have and which we have had with
benefit, but rather to make prejudgment and to use these labels.
In his address today, the President referred to
the word " centralism" and " centrali&amp; e. I am not entirely sure what
these words mean for they are rarely defined by those who use them.
But if they mean a system or person who wants all power, all policymaking,
all administrative decisions concentrated in one place, then
there are none of us here who could possibly be described as centralist.
And I believe that all of us here could properly be described as
opponents of centralism, if that is what it means.
Similarly, if a federalist is one who believes that
a national government should have no responsibility and no voice in
such matters of nation-wide importance as education or health or
national development or agriculture or in any other fields, that there
is no room there for co-operation between a national government and
a state government, then I do not think that such a person is a true
federalist or serves the nation well.
Indeed, Sir, these words, these labels, unless they
are defined in depth, have no real meaning, but the danger is that
they are labels which can be used as a substitute for thinking. A
proposal may be advaoced or a practice may develop which is new
or different and I speak not only of proposals advanced for po-wers
to come to Canberra or practices which develop, I speak of the
living thing of federalism where, in either direction, proposals can / 9 
9-
be advanced. And in such a case, always if such a thing happens,
there should be analysis and examination in depth to see whether what
is proposed is advantageous to the nation as a whole, to each of the
citizens who make up the nation, just as they make up the various
States, and whether it is adva~ ntageous to a State or States or to the
citizens who make up the State or States.
There should in such circumstances always, in an
ad hoc matter, be debate of a friendly and constructive kind, not
debate designed as an advocacy of previously-determined positions,
but debate designed to discover argument and to discover where
the true balance of advantage lies, whether the goals sought are
proper goals and whether they might perhaps be better attained in
some other way; to discover whether the proposal fits properly inlto
the co-operative federalism which we seek to retain. Too often,
this exercise in thinking can be avoided and sometimes is by the
initial use of a label and the condemnation of a proposal on the basis
of that label. Let us always, Sir, examine these things on the
basis of a close analysis, close examination, looking at the merits
or demerits of any proposal and looking at the continuance we all
desire of an evolving but not static Liberal federalism in Australia.
I think that those who do not wish to do that perhaps will do both
Australia and the Liberal Party a disservice, for we cannot remain
static, and we do wish to preserve a federal system which our
opponents, should they have the chance, would undoubtedly destroy
completet. y as they have made more than evident over the last -year.
Sir, we believe in a federal system but not a static
one. Our opponents don't believe in a federal system at all, and this
is a great and continuing difference between us.
We were told this morning, Sir, in your speech,
that we must discover what the Australian people hope far and that
we should seek to govern as a government and seek to Zdvise as an
organisation in such a way that we can best attain those hopes and
wishes, and indeed we must.
Many of these hopes and wishes must already be
knownqjqeAd the wish of young people to be able to obtain adeposit for a
block and to build a house on it without facing a lifetime of heavy
debt, the hope for continuing improvement in education opportunity
and let us not be apologetic on this, for education opportunity under
the various State Governments and with some assistance from the
Commonwealth has improved immensely over the last decade. But
there is always room for further improvement. 
There is the hope otbeing-able. to-retire in
modest comfort and of being cared for when ill without crippling
bills; the opportunity for personal development, personal development
of talent and personal atisfaction in life by engaging in an occupation
which gives satisfaction to the individual.
Then there is the wish for reasonable stability
in prices and the cost of living, the desire to cleanse the environment
in which many now live, the sense of bel tonging to and contributing
to a nation growing in material wealth, . In personal opportunityy , in
Christian concern for the unfortunate. And, of course, the desire
and the wish that all this should be done with, if possible, no taxation
at all: Many of these new hopes and asplxations are good.
But they have sprung from the prosperity created in the climate we
have provided in the last twenty years A-which has taken the more
pressing problems which used to intrude away. Well they cannot
all at once be met. But the way which will meet them best is the
Liberal way, the way of creating a climate where individual enterprise
and the right of choice to the individual will be continued, the way
where competition is fostered but laissez-faire is not allowed to run
wilId, the way that has stood the test of time and which has made
Australia not a perfect state for it is very far indeed from that
but a country which offers its citizens be cause of their exertions, and
because of the wise husbandry of the results of their exertions, a
fuller life, a life of more opportunity than perhaps of any other country
I know. We will go into the future as a. Party with heavier
burdens for our defence than we have ever known before because of
changing world situations, with greater involvement with the-nations
who our neighbours, with these new problems I have sketched to you
before us needing to be overcome, but with the firm and unshakeable
belief that the way to overcome them is not by all-embracing state
planning, is not by abolition of a federal system but by that general
approach which we -have followed for over twenty years and which,
projected into the future, and changing slightly to meet changing times
and changing problems after debate, will best meet those problems
for the good of this nation and all those citizens who live in it. 



THIRD NATIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE
INSTITUTE OF DIRECTORS
SYDNEY. N. S. WX. .11JUNE J. 970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Thank you, Mr. President, for your introduction. I cannot
remember the long list which you gave of those to whomn I shouild address
my remarks. May I confine it to the Prime Minister of New Zealand,
Mir. Holyoake and the other distinguished persons who are present.
Gentlemen, you have had a long day and you have listened, I
think, to seven speakers from the four corners of the earth, all of them
men with an international reputation, all of them men~ with something of
significance to say to you. And I think that their presence on this occasion
has been a mark of the status which this Institute has reached.
Mr. President, may I congratulate you and your Institute on
becoming an Institute in its own right today and no long-qer just a division of
its founding father, the British Institute of Directors. 1 think that this has
come about with the encouragement and the support of the British Institute.
It is the kind of process which has been going on in many fields ever since
Australian colonies became States, and the States became a Federation, and
the Federation became a nation, and this Institute becamne an Institute in its
own right. I wish you well, Sir, you and your Institute as you set course
on your own, as an Institute on your own. And may I congratulate you, Sir,
on the part your personal leadership has played in the very rapid growth
of this Institute. I know that you are a successful helmsman, both in business
and in public affairs and on " Balandra", although I do seem to recall that
in a recent Sydney to Hobart yacht race you were outpointed by a politician:
In any case, Sir I thank you for giving me a forum where I
can talk to so many key members of our commercial, -financial and industrial
world face to face without having to talk to them throughi the sometimes
somewhat dubious media of third parties who interpret what one says through
various public media. ./ 2 
I have been provided tonight because I really have, over the
last week or ten days had scarcely one minute to myself I have been provided
tonight with a speech that was written for me by the Treasury. As one
would expect, it is a very careful speech. It is one which seeks to cover
every eventuality. kt is one which, as far as possible, seeks to say nothing
which can be held up against it in the future. And consequently, except
in parts, I don't propose to give it. I will from time to time be ad libbing
and speaking " off the cuff".
But some of it I will give because I thfiL it might be of
advantage if I went back a little to look at the recent history of this nation
to see what has been achieved in that period of time, to see where we stand
today and put to you what I believe to be the pressing problems for this
future decade. Ten years ago, in this country and in thle world outside it,
there was much doubt as to where Australia was going and as to what the
future of Australia would be. At that time when some of us m. any of you
in this room, I think began to glimpse the posibilities of the future,
there were others who said Australia would never become a great
industrial country, Australia could never sustain a great population,
Australia should remain a hewer of wood and a drawer of water and a
grower of wool for the rest of the world.
Yet three years later in 1963 an economic survey put
out by the Treasury said this
" Over the past ten years, and especially over the past three
years, Australia has achieved -its greatest breakthrough in
point of resources since the crossing ofZ the Blue Mcuntains
a hundred and fifty years ago. That earlier event opened
the first doorway to the pastoral and agricultural wealth
of the continent on which our growth has since been built.
But until not very long ago it was commonly held that
Australia would not be a great industrial1 nation and therefore
could not support a great population. The quick succession
of rich mineral discoveries, bauxite, copper, iron ore and
now oil, go far to dispel this view. We do not yet have in
adequate quantities all the essentials for well-rounded
development, arid in the background lies our deficiency of
water, likely perhaps to prove the costliest and most stubborn
of barriers to large-scale expansion. Yet, taken with the
resources already known, these new riches beyond doubt lift
the horizons of Australian growth quite incalculably. 
This was written seven years ago not by me but in a Treasury
Bulletin, and I am bound to say that it has raised my eotimation of the
Treasury greatly to read it.
That was a confident statement at that time, and some thought
over-confident, but the years have shown that it was true if anything,
understated. All the resources listed in it have been chown to exist, many
of them in quantities at that time unthought of, and many new resources have
been added to the list.
The problem of water in the development of Australia remains
water for industry, water for creating a pleasant environment for those
Australians who must live in the towns and cities that miust grow in our
North; water for protection against fire and drought and famine in our
rural areas. Yet even this is not as intransigent a p~ roblem as it appeared
seven years ago, for now atomic power, desalination, new water resources
proposals and programmes offer a hope that even this barrier will be removed.
I think, Sir, that today only a chronic and cofirmed peosimist would say
we lack the foundation for really large-scale industrial development in
Australia. In short, the debunkers and the knockers ten years ago have
been shown to be completely wrong.
But might there not be another problem before us? Having
shown these things to be wrong by a certain amount of luck and a considerable
amount of effort, there still could be a risk of another mood entering into
Australian thought, potentially as dangerous as that mood which said years
ago we never would grow great. I am referring to a disposition to believe that
most of our underlying problems have been solved because of the progress
we have made, because of the opportunities that have opened before us; a
disposition to believe that the progress we expect, the progress these new
resources have made possible, will come more or less of its own accord
and without the brains and effort and hard work-and sweat which ultimately
are the only bases on which progress can be made.
There has been a spreading of affluence amongst our society,
and some of those to whom it has spread not tClose who took part in the
real development, but those who indirectly profited from it must perhaps
think it came rather easily and that it will continue to come easily.
This is a mood which, if Australia is to grow as quickly
as it can, we must eschew. You must see that this mocod does not enter
into the Australian consciousness, because I am talking to an audience of
men who direct companies, who know that when one problem is solved,
another problem arises; who'. know that nothing is easily done, who in 
4.
their everyday lives must say " Right, we have got over that hurdle, there
is another one in front of us. It will not be easy to get over it. We must
continue with the effort that we have put in. ThiB is done, and I think
the leadership for it can come in great part from you. Then the possible
mood of complacency into which Australia could fall will not become the
danger which it otherwise might be.
I said that many of our problems had been overcome and they
have, but there are still many before us. May I enumerate to you those
problems as I see them, and Derhaps take this opportunity to explain to
you why the Government has done some of the things it has done to try
and overcome these problems.
We, in Australia, must have vast and increasing amounts of
overseas capital if we are to develop. Yet we must also try to see that as
much as possible of Australian industrial development is in the hands of
Australians, remains in the hands of Australians and grows in the hands
of Australians. Our nation is going through a period o! industrial expansion,
of great mineral development. We need large and coatinuing infusions of
capital from overseas in order to sustain this, and in the last five years,
one-sixth of all such capital investment in Australia has come from
overseas. And, Sir, inevitably that infusion of capital in our larger
industries brings with it a greater degree of overseas ownership and control,
both of our mineral developments and ultimately of the processing of our
minerals, which is a highly capital intensive enterprise.
And if I may give you some examples o! what has been
happening, overseas investment in mining five years ago . was $ 34 million
in the year. It has risen to somr-ething like $ 250 million and Australians'
control of production in minerals alone has dropped i-n that time from
63 percent to 47 percent. At the same ti-me, Australian requirement to
service existing capital by remitting abroad has risen from 8. 3 percent
to 10. 5 percent of our export earnings. This has happiened in the last
five years. And there is a build-up of commitments 1or the future because
inccm= earned in Australia by overseas investment Cand ploughed back into
AusL* alia has more than doubled in five years.
I do not mention these facts in order to complain about them.
We are glad about them because these are prices we can afford to pay for
the development we must have in the time scale in which, in this world,
we need that development. We can afford to pay it, because the benefits
which come to us from it as fifty percent shareholders in every enterprise
because of taxation and other benefits, do come to us, and we could not
develop as we should without this influx of capital. So 1 don't complain.
But though they are prices we can afford to pay, they are not in their
entirety prices we should pay unless we must. And so, as a government,
we have tried to provide the opportunity to retain as much Australian 
ownership and as much Australian control as we can, provided we don't
iiuaibit the inflow of capital, and provided we don't inhibit growth.
And to that end we have adopted a number of policies. We
have adopted a " takeover code". We have adopted a guidelines policy for
borrowings in Australia. We will be laying on the table of the House of
Representatives this week for discussion by you, and all those interested,
proposals for convertible notes, so that those Australians who have money
to invest and who must get an income from it, will have an opportunity to
invest it in notes, get an income from it, and have an opportunity to convert
it to equity at some later stage.
And we have introduced now into law what appears to have
been a rather controversial proposal for an Australian Industry Development
Corporation. Sir, this Corporation is designed to borrow abroad on behalf
of Australian companies which ask it to do so and only on behalf of
Australian companies which ask it to do so; and cornmanies which it judges
to be viable and which might not themselves be able to borrow and which,
because they were unable to borrow, might have to surrender equity to an
overseas partner. Its objectives are simply those, and I do not think that
those objectives could be attacked by anyone with an interest in Australian
development and Australian ownership of development.
After all, although the interest rates may from time to time
be high in the Eurodollar market or the United States, if Hamersley can
borrow at 10 or 11 percent on these markets and makie a profit from it,
then why shouldn't an Australian company be able to do the same if it can
find a corporation of the stature to act for it? And this is what the Australian
Industry Corporation is all about.
It will have no power to interfere with a company or to act
financially on its behalf unless it is asked. It will be subject to the same taxes
as other companies engaged in its field. It will compete on equal terms
and it can't do any more than compete. It cannot dominate. In fact, Sir, it
will offer a choice to a borrower and, after all, the right of choice, as
everybody in this room would agree, is one of the essentials of a freely
growing economy, whether it is a choice of the bank from whom one can
borrow, the company with whom one will go into partnership or the lines of
action one will take as directors of a company.
And I believe, Sir, that this Corporation, under the control
as it will be of directors drawn from private enterprie, will help to
retain the greatest possible Australian ownership of growing Australian
enterprises. It won't interfere with the inflow of capital from abroad that we
need and must have, and indeed, I think it will be an adjunct to the growth
of Australian private enterprise and will help it grow as Australian
private enterprise. That is the way in which the Government has approached
one of the problems we see before us now which is, having reached this stage of
our development, more and more capital is required, more and more
capital we will take; but we want to see as much of it as possible retained
in Australian hands for economic or, if you like, for nationalist reasons. 
What are some of the other problems that now face us that
will nct be easily overcome?, I, without putting them in their proper order,
would say that the problems of rural industries now and in the future are
perhaps the most significant. I do not see how we can possibly go on
growing more and more or indeed as much, of the commodities which the
world either does not want or is not prepared to pay for at a rate which
will cover the cost of pr-oduction. And with the very possible entry of the
United Kingdom into the European Economic Community, this problemn
looms before us with even greater urgency.
Subsidies can be a palliative, but only a palliative, not an
answer, and this problem will niot go away because of' industrial development,
because of mineral development, because of the application of the minds of
you gentlemen to your own businesses. This is a problem I merely flag
at this stage as one of great significance to the future. I can't do more
than flag it at this stage, because we are talking about it very deeply in
Cabinet itself, and I wouldn't want to say anything wihich was in advance
of what Cabinet might say. But it is one of enormous significance.
We have in this country and this affects business too
the problems inherent in a federal nation. You will all have heard various
epithets applied to me, one a! which is " centralist". The other day I said
I didn't quite know what it meant and I don't know now-, in spite of the
" Sydney Morning Herald" endeavouring to tell me in one of its editorials.
But there is in a federal systemn, which I think is the best system under
which to live, always inherent difficulties between governments, and those
difficulties often wash over on to the companies who have to carry out their
enterprises in Australia. If somebody wants to export iron ore in Western
Australia and they can deal with one government to do that, then they have
to decide at what price they will be allowed to export it, and they have to
deal with another government to do that. And so it goes.
But these problems themselves will be worked out, I think,
within this framework that we cannot and must not and will not have
six separate nations in the boundaries of this continenl-t. We will have
one nation, but we will decentralise the running of that nation as f ar as
it is humanly possible to do so. This is the bes-t way to bring not only
the people but the leaders of industry such as you into the operation of
the economy of this country.
Can I give an illustration I hope I dor't try your patience
an illustration of the approach that I have to this matter, by referring to
something you might have read about in the papers from time to time,
quite wrongly, quite loosely called offshore minerals legislation. Because
I think that does illustrate the approach which I and my Government have
to this affair. / 7 
It has been claimed that we as a central government want to
take away mineral rights from the States. That is quite wrong. It has
been claimed that we want to get control of all minerals, but that is quite
wrong. But there exists a situation in. this nation now where nobody knows
who controls, who is responsible for, the seas which lap the coasts of
Australia. Nobody knows who is responsible for the resources of the
seabed not only minerals but other resources. Nobody knows who is
responsible for the conservation of fisheries. Nobody knows whose law
runs either between the low water mark and the three-mile limit, or
between the three-mile limit and the outer continental shelf. it is unknown.
It is in dispute. And we believe that we should not be the only federal nation
in the world that doesn't know who is responsible for these matters, and so
we believe that there should be a legal decision on these matters by the
High Court which has been set up for the very purpose of interpreting
constitutional matters which are in doubt.
Once that is done and I hope it will be I don't know what
the results will be. I don't know whether it will turn out that the States
own and are responsible for the seabed and for the sea above it from the
low water mark to the three mile limit or from the low water mark to the
outer continental shelf, or whether we are responsible for it I don't know.
But I think we should know. And once that has been decided, then
irrespective of the decision, we want to move into an area of co-operative
federalism by saying " No matter who has got the legal responsibility, if
we have got it, then let us co-operate in a federal way. You administer it.
You take 60 percent of the royalties of minerals. You deal with the
overseas companies who want leases. You come to us for a final
decision. This is the approach to federalism which we have and which
has led, 1 think unjustly, to centralism being put upon us.
But if this is not done, then nobody will ever know who is
responsible for what. If a tanker runs aground, ( as it did in Queensland)
two miles offshore, no-one will know what government has the responsibility
to see that that tanker is pumped out so that there vwill not be pollution of
the area around it. No-one will know who has the right to arrest fishing
vessels who are outside or inside the three-mile limit. No-one will know
who controls the continental shelf which runs between us and Indonesia
whether we do or whether Western Australia does. No-one will know,
when New Guinea becomes independent, who is able to decide where the
median line should be on the continental shelf between us and New Guinea
whether the Australian Government does or Queensland does. No-one
will know how to go about closing the Gulf of Carpentaria to fishing, because
no-one will know who has the legal responsibility to do it. And these are
matters which in the future could be of great significance to Australia.
Perhaps they are not problems which directly concern you, gentlemen,
but you will forgive me if I take the opportunity to expound to you some
of the problems which beset me. / 8 
Well, what do I see for this country in this next decade?
Nhat are my aspirations? What are my hopes'?
I would hope to see a country in which industrial development
continues at the same rate as it has. I would hope to see a country in
which we process more and more of the minerals in raw state which we
take from the earth. I would hope to see a country in which we clean
up the environment in which we live. I would hope to see a country
and indeed I must see a country, which devotes more and more of its
resources and efforts to the sterile but necessary requirements of defence.
I would hope to see a country which provides more and more opportunity
for its citizens, enabling them to express themselves, to engage in
occupations which give them satisfaction. I would hope to see us gradually
moving towards satisfying the aspirations of Australians for better
education, for better health, for better social services, for better roads,
for all the requirements which are made on the public sector. This is
what I would hope for.
But I would know that government cannot do that by itself.
I would know that it is the people in this room and others like them who alone
could do it because I would know that the provision of these matters for the'
public sector could only come out of what was produced in the private
sector. I would believe that it was the task of a government to see
that a climate was created in which those in the private sector were given
the fullest possible opportunity to make their judgments, to reap their
profits, to sustain their losses, because by this interplay in the market
place, as I believe experience has shown, will come the greatest possible
contribution of wealth to the country and from thiO grctest contribution of wealth
to the cod~ rtrygovernment cnrtake'that which I havr-e ; d I woul. d like to see provided
from the public sector.
Sir, as long as I am in this position, or my successors, what
we would seek to foster is not laissez-faire it is rot laissez-faire. What
I would seek to foster is true competition, true private enterprise, true
opportunity for individual judgments as to where a company should go and
what it should do, because I believe that in that way a government and a
people of a nation best benefit. We must see that as prosperity grows you
are given this opportunity, and if you take it, the fruits of it are shared
amongst the whole nation. This is essential.... shared in the ways of which
I have spoken by a government providing health, social services, education.
And in doing that, must keep a careful balance and judgement to see that
that which is taken to provide these things from the government sector is
not so much that it removes incentive from the private sector to retain
that which it has earned.
And if this careful balance can be sustained, and if we can
look to each individual, each company director to acceot responsibility
for his decisions, and to try to make those decisions not necessarily on
the basis of'what is best for GMH is best for America", but " what is best
for Australia is best for my company", as I think we can look to you, then / 9 
I tahink we will in this nationattain the kind of goals I have set before you.
. ut I am sure when we have attained them there will be new problems rearing
their head, and-what-a dull and uninspiring world it would be if that were not
so. It is because I think this kind of partnership the kind of
work that you do, this kind of management which we do for well or for
ill is of such significance, it is because of this that I finish as I began
by thanking you, Sir, for the opportunity to speak to such a representative
gathering, a gathering of people who have contributed so much to the
growth of this nation and who have so much more to contribute. 



REVIEW OF FINAN4CIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS
ARRANGEMENTS
MR. GORTON I shall read a statement which has
been prepared for me and which I believe is to be circulated.
The main purpose of this meeting is to further discuss the new
general revenue grants arrangements between the Commonwealth
and the States to apply from the beginning of 1970-71. These
arrangements embrace both the method of determining the annual
general revenue assistance to each State, and the forms of
such assistance, and they are therefore of very great
importance in determining the future pattern of Commonwealth-
State financial relationships.
Dealing with the particular question of general
revenue grants, at our meeting in February I expressed a
willingness on behalf of the Commonwealth Government to discuss
matters relating to the financial assistance grants and to look,
as you had suggested, at the base total and to look, as you also
suggested, at such aspects as the betterment factor. I also
expressed a willingness to discuss and seek to ameliorate one
of the problems of the States which has been frequently put
forward; that is, the difficulty which you have seen arising
as a result of some of the loan money which the States secure
being provided, in fact, from revenue gathered by the Commonwealth
rather than by money borrowed from lenders in the normal way.
In the intervening months we have had discussions between our
Treasury officials, that is of the Commonwealth and the various
States, and I think these discussions have been helpful to both
of us. 
2.
Today it is my purpose and my responsibility on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government to put before you proposals for the ensuing five
years commencing on 1st July next. In offering assistance specifically
directed at helping the States to meet interest and sinking fund charges on
the State debt we have had in mind the concern which Premiers have
expressed at the annual growth of State debt and particularly at the rate this
debt has been growing in relation to the rate of growth of Commonwealth
debt. We have also taken into account our undertaking to bear in mind,
during our present review, the question of offsetting any additional financial
burden on the States which might arise from the Commonwealth's
decision in 1968 to remove the income tax rebate on Commonwealth loan
interest. In the Commonwealth's consideration of these proposals, we
have aimed at providing an average annual rate of increase in total
Commonwealth revenue assistance to the States substantially above the
increases that would have been produced if the present grants arrangements
continued unaltered. For example, if on the basis of past trends in
increases in average wages and population the present grants formula
would have resulted in the grants growing at an average of 9. 9% each year
over the next five years, we have calculated that the overall effect of the
Commonwealth's new proposals would be to increase that average rate of
growth to at least 12. 5% per year. 
I turn now to outline in broad terms what we have in mind
for each of the four sections of the Commonwealth proposals. Later I
shall circulate proposals setting out their es6ential features. On the
question of taking over State debt and of interest-free capital grants, we
propose that the capital grant begin at $ 200m in 1970-71 this is the sum
of money which we propose to make available as a grant rather than, as
has happened in the past, as a loan and that it should thereafter increase
at the same rate as the total works and housing programmes. The States'
formal Loan Council borrowing programmes will be lower each year by
an amount equal to the capital grant, of course, and the payment of the
grant by the Commonwealth will be conditional on agreement being reached
on the size of the total borrowing programme. As the primary purpose of
the grant will be to relieve the burden of debt charges on non-revenue
producing capital expenditure, it will be designed to help finance expenditure
on capital works and services from which debt charges are not recouped,
such as schools, police buildings and the like. However, while we would
appreciate from you an informal assurance that the funds will be used in
this way that is, for non-recoupable purposes there will be no specific
or legal conditions attached to the expenditure of the grant. 
As the grant will not form part of the States'
borrowing programmes, its distribution between the States
will not be a matter for legal determination by the Loan
Council. While it will therefore probably devolve on the
Commonwealth to accept final responsibility for determining
the distribution of the total grant each year between the
States, we are hoping that it will be possible to agree to
the distribution with you beforehand and in a co-operative
way. It is not possible to estimate precisely the
deb. t charges savings to the States that will result from this
proposal in the year each grant is made, although in future
years the saving will obviously be a full year's interest
and sinking fund. The savings in the first year will
depend on the timing of loan raisings during the year, and
the overall savings will depend, among other things, on the
size of the States' borrowing programmes in the future,
on trends in interest rates and so on. However, on the
basis of recent trends in increases in loan programmes and of
present interest rate patterns, we estimate that over the
years 1970-71 to 1974-75 the total debt charges savings to
the States from this annual grant will be of the order of
$ 148m, which is additional to some sall saving in 1970-71
which we have not included in the tables which will be
circulated subsequently. In other words, we are saying that
there will be a saving to the States from this in the first
year but it is difficult to estimate how much that saving will be. 
It may only be as much as $ 1 million. We are therefore discounting
it, not counting it in as assistance-to the States, and saying that it
is in the second year of this programme that the States will receive
the full benefit of this $ 200 million, because they will not be
paying interest and sinking fund on $ 200 which they would
otherwise be paying interest and sinking fund on, and that will
be the basis of our calculations on this.
On the question of the taking over of existing State debt,
I understand that officers have agreed that for a number of reasons
it would be impracticable for State debt to be taken over by the
Commonwealth before June 1975 except in a notional sense. That
doesnot matter because it is proposed that from 1970-71 to 1974-
the Commonwealth will reimburse the States by way of section
96 grants for the interest and sinki g fund charges on a progressively
increasing amount of State debt. So that although the debts are
not actually taken over, the cost of the debts to the States is taken
over. Specifically, we propose that $ 200 million of State debt be
taken over, in the sense just explained at the beginning of each of the ,. ext
years so that by the commencement of 1974-75 the Commonwealth will
be meeting the debt charges on a full $ 1,000 of State debt. The
arrangements for the formal transfer of the debt from the States
to the Commonwealth in June 1975 will be a matter to be settled
later. 
I understand that Commonwealth and State officials agreed an appropriate
parcel of $ 1,000m of State debt that is after going through the various debts
which were outstanding the officers agreed that a debt maturing at such and
such a date and at such and such an interest rate, and then another debt,
would make up the parcel which would be taken over. They agreed on a
parcel of $ 1,000m of State debt carrying an average interest rate of 5.
which is significantly higher than the average interest rate of around 5% on
all existing State debt. I do not propose to go through the precise
arrangements here, but the Commonwealth accepts the conclusions reached
by the committee of officials appointed to examine possible procedures and,
with the additional arrangements I have a! hi.. q .) utlined, we propose to
proceed along the lines recommended by the officials. The arrangements
are summarised in the document shall be circulating to you.
The grants, which will cover the average interest charges of
5% together with the annual sinking fund contributions of 25% on the debt
taken over, will be $ 11. 5m in 1970-71, $ 23m in 1971-72, $ 34. 5m in 1972-73
and so on, giving a total 5m available to the States over the next
five years. I point out that there has been some discussion as to the
method of taking ove; this $ 200m of debt. It had been suggested that
perhaps in the first year we would take over half of it, say, in September
and the other half in March, and only from those debts would we reimburse
the States for the interest and 
sinking fund the Commonwealth had to pay. But after discussion, we
believe that when we as a Commonwealth said we would take over $ 200M of
State debts each year it would be accepted by the States that we would take
over that $ 200M at the beginning of the year and pay the interest and sinking
fund at that date for that year, and this is what we propose to do.
It is the Commonwealth's view that the distribution between the
States of the debt notionally taken over ( and hence the distribution of the grants
to meet the debt charges) shouldbe in proportion to total outstanding debt under
the Financial Agreement as at 30 June 1970.
As I have mentioned, the two proposals on debt should substantially
reduce the rate of growth of debt charges over the next 5 years. The actual
saving in debt charges as a result of the two debt proposals that means the
actual additional resources available to the States as a result of the two debt
proposals, is estimated as follows: $ 11.5 M in 1970-71, $ 37M in 1971-72,
$ 63. 3M in 1972-73, $ 90. 4M in 1973-74 and $ 118. 3M in 1974-75, giving a total
of $ 320. 5M over the quinquennium. This is the amount that these two
proposals will add to the resources of the States, subtract from the resources
of the Commonwealth and inject into the spending capacity of the economy.
In addition to this substantial assistance for debt charges, we propose a decided
improvement in both the amount and the rate of growth of the financial
assistance grants themselves. We suggest 
that for 1970-71 the formula grants paid to each State will be determined
by applying the present formula to the formula grants paid to each State
in 1969-70, that is by applying the present betterment factor to the grants
received by each State in 1969-70, which I believe would add $ 100m to the
amount available to the States this year, with the continuing addition in
the case of Queensland of $ 2m to the 1969-70 base but, of course, not
including any special assistance approved last February or other adjustments
made since then. In addition, a further amount will be distributed between
the States in the same proportions as their new 1970-71 formula grants,
and this amount will then be included in the base for determining the formula
grants for 1971-72.
For purposes of determining the formula grants after 1970-71 we
are proposing to improve the grants formula by improving the betterment
factor from its present 1. 2% per annum to 1. 8% per annum, an increase of
in the size of this element of the grants formula.
Taken together we envisage these improvements, excluding the
debt assistance and grants in lieu of loan which I have already mentioned, on
the basis of present estimates of increases in average wages and population
will mean that the total financial assistance grants excluding the ones I
have mentioned should be some $ 384m higher in this forthcoming quinquennium
than they would have been under the existing formula.
We have given very careful consideration to the position of
Queensland and have come to the conclusion that in spite of the considerable
improvement that has been effected in its share of the grants over the last
years, the grants being received by that State are still too low relative to the
other States. 
We therefore propose to continue the arrangements existing during
the present quinquennium of adding $ 2m each year to the base on
which Queensland's grant is calculated.
Other States have also requested an improvement in
their share of the grants, mainly based on arguments about per
capita relativities. We have not been sufficiently persuaded
by such comparisons and we are not prepared at the present time
to suggest any special action to adjust the shares of States
other than Queensland, except for what I shall now say about
Western Australia. An additional grant of $ 15.5m was paid to Western
Australia in 1968-69 and 1969-70 in lieu of the grant it
had previously been receiving on the recommendation of the
Commonwealth Grants Commission. When the State withdrew from
the Commonwealth Grants Commission in 1968, it was agreed
around this table that the sum of the State's 1969-70
financial assistance grant and the $ 15.5m would form the
base of consideration for purpcses of he present review.
Since 1968-69 Western Australia has been receiving increases
in its base grant and they have been escalated, but the
$ 15.5m has not been incorporated in the base grant and has
not been subject to escalation but has been merely paid from
the Commonwealth revenue in lieu of the Commonwealth payout
through the Grants Commission. 
I am sure that it will be appreciated that there
could be no prior commitment by the Commonwealth to continue
to pay any particular amount to a State. We have noted that
since 1967-68 there appears to have been a significant
improvement in the relative capacity of Western Australia
to finance its Budget expenditure at a standard at least
comparable with that of other States. This means that, if
the State continued to receive its present share of the
revenue grants, including the special amount of $ 15.5m,
the situation would become increasingly unfair to the other
States and could result in a significant distortion in the
allocation of governmental funds between the States.
We are aware, of course, that the rapid rate of
population growth and economic development in Western
Australia has brought considerable problems, particularly
on the capital side, and we are therefore prepared to give
sympathetic consideration to that matter. The question
of any special increase in shares of the Loan Council
borrowing programmes is, of course, a matter for the Loan
Council to decide. I make it clear, however, that the
Commonwealth, subject to agreement on other matters,
will support in the Loan Council a special increase of
$ 3m in the State's 1970-71 borrowing programme for larger
authorities. It is not possible to estimate accurately the
effect that the proposals I have outlined will have on 
the total revenue assistance provided to the States over the next 5 years.
The actual amounts and rates of increase in total revenue assistance
each year will depend, amongst other things, on the rate of increase in
average wages and in population. However, on the assumption that these
are much the same over the next 5 years as they have been over the 5 years
of the present grants arrangements, total revenue assistance will be
approximately $ 54m more in 1970-71 and over $ 700m more over the next
years, than if the present grants arrangements had continued unaltered.
These are, of course, very substantial additions indeed. Let me point
out that when one says $ 54m more one means $ 54m more than the $ loo100m
more that the existing formula will provide.
As is well known, the distribution of the financial assistance
grants is weighted in favour of the 4 less populous States in that their grants,
in per capita terms, are higher than those of New South Wales and Victoria.
In addition, Tasmania receives an annual special grant on the
recommendation of the Commonwealth Grants Commission while Western
Australia has recently been receiving an additional grant in lieu of the
special grant which it previously had.
The general principle underlying the distribution of the
general revenue grants is that each State should be enabled to provide
government service s of a standard broadly comparable with those of each
other State without imposing higher taxation or other charges. However, 
12.
the principle is rather easier to state in general terms than it is to apply in
practice and there are many problems both of a practical and conceptual nature
which arise in attempting to determine the correct distribution of the grants.
While we believe that the present distribution of the grants is a fair one, we
do not believe that it is necessarily correct in precise terms. With the
grants being so large an element in the State's finances, we think that it is
of considerable importance that the distribution should come as close as
possible to achieving the general objective I have just stated.
But there are many difficulties in attempting to determine the
correct distribution. These difficulties, if anything, have become more
significant as a result of the very rapid changes recently occurring in the
finances of some States. We encountered some of these difficulties in the
course of the present arrangements when we examined the requests made to
us by individual States. I strongly feel that it would be desirable to have
independent investigation and advice on this question for the purposes of
the next review of the arrangements. I believe that if the Premiers
were disposed to accept this the best approach might be for the Commonwealth
Grants Commission to be given this task.
As the Piemiers know, the Commission has in the past been
responsible for recommending annual grants to the three less populous States,
but only Tasmania now 
remains a claimant State. Whether it continues to do so or not will be a
matter for it to decide. But in any ': ase the Commission c-: uld be given the
task of recommending on the distribution of the grants between all the States,
not necessarily annually but mainly for the purposes of the regular reviews
of the revenue grants arrangements But the success of any scheme along
these lines would obviously depend on full co-operatihn bc-. given by the
States. I therefore ask the Premiers to consider that suggestion and at
a later stage to let us have their opinions.
We would also be prepared to consider the possibility of
giv: . g the Commission the task of examining the share of the grants
paid to a particular State between reviews of the grants arrangements.
For example. Western Australia may wish to put a case before the
Commission as to the appropriate. -ss of its proposed share ef the grants.
If we were to implement these proposals there would of co.,, rse, be a
number of matters to decide as to the way the Commission would work
and we would obviously have to give ' lose thought to them As I say,
I wuld welcome the views of the Premiers on this whole quLstion.
I think that the proposals cutlined constitute a significant contribution
towards an improvement in Commonwealth-State financial relationships. It
will be said, no doubt, that they will not solve all th-financial problems with
which the States are faced. We, for our part, well apprcci-'.-e the continuing
pressure on governments to improve the standard and rang.; f services
provided by governments. But we have got to have regard tc: the limitations
imp. sed L; the supply of real resotr es. In recent !-ears expenditure at 
all levels of government has been in reasing at a signifian. n ly faster rate than
gross national product, a: cd ihe oYf oCtaolm monwealth reven.; e assistance proposed
should ensure the States of a source revenue that will grew significantly faster
than the gross national product, H. wever, progress si: n. cessarily be
achieved in stages and we must havc regard to the ne'ed t" provide scope for the
growth of the private sector of the economy. If we are to pr-' ide such a
substantial increase in revenue assistance and in res'-urces available to the
States it should be on the basis that there are no signifi: an' -hanges in the
financial relationships between the Commonwealth and th. ates during the
peri'd cf th-agreement. In parti-Llar. we would expect rh3. the States and
their authorities will continue to pay pay roll tax and that the distribution of tax
res.-'-Irces between the Commonweal.. h and the States will remain unchanged
W' are aware, of course that it has been one -f " he States' main
arguments that they should share in the natural growth of r venue on income tax
and while I do not accept that there should be any fixed rela-ionship between
inc-. me tax collections and the reve-nue grants any fixed relationship between the
growth of income tax revenue and the growth of revenue grants I would mention that
we -xpect the growth of revenue assistance under the prop-sals outlined to be close
to, if not in excess of the rate of grcwth in the total -f incc. me tax collections from
individuals and companies at the presently prescribed rates
Well, gentlemen, those are the matters which I s-: e as our having to
discuss: First, a taking over of $ 200m of State debt each , e: r at the beginning
of th year and the paying of interest and sinking fund on it, secondly, the provision
each year of $ 200m of grant which would otherwise haive been loan; thirdly, the
question of what additions should made to the bas-grants for 1970-71, and what new
betterment factor should be used to escalate this over the 5 Jears coming. 
I hope that some tables on these matters have been circulated to the Premiers.
It is possible that the Premiers may wish now to examine them during an
adjournment. MR ASKIN Yes, that is the situation as far as I am concerned
and I think the other Premiers feel as I do. As you know we submitted
our case in writing last February and I still think that what we suggested then
is the best way to preserve the federal system. You put up alternative
proposals and they are quite involved. I would like to say quite a lot about
the adequacy of some of the amounts under the different sub-headings or
rather, as I see it, the lack of adequacy. However, I think that should wait
until we have had a talk amongst ourselves. Most Premiers would probably
want to have a talk with their advisers first and then we will get together as
a team to discuss what is involved and the implications of the proposals
you have just put. It may be some time before we are ready to meet again,
because there is quite a lot of meat in these various proposals. At this
stage I can only say that I hope we will be able to prevail upon you to do
a bit better than you have already set out, but to do that I know we must come
back with some cogent arguments. I am sure you will understand that I have
just made a few brief remarks and that I will want to speak at length on
the base grant, betterment factor and so on. I do not think that this is the
appropriate moment to do that and, subject to the concurrence of my
colleagues, I suggest we adjourn so that we may talk separately first and then
together. 
SIR HENRY BOLTE Should we go into Loan
Council now? MR. GORTON It is up to the meeting. I thought
the Premiers might like to examine these proposals first
in Premiers Conference, come back and make a few more
comments on them before we go into Loan Council. The
Premiers will have to move out of this room to study the
proposals. MR. ASKIN I think Loan Council to some extent
depends on a study of the first proposals. I would like
to get these cleared up one way or the other. I recognise
the importance of Sir Henry's suggestion, but Loan Council
will depend closely on matters decided here. I think we
should try to dispose of these matters first. Would it
be possible for us to have a copy of your statement?
MR. GORTON I would hope so. This time it was
written out beforehand. It will get to you as soon as
possible. Mr. Bjelke-Petersen, do you agree?
MR. BJELKE-PETERSEN Yes. I think we ought
to get together ourselves first. This is fairly involved
Mr. Gorton. MR. GORTON That is what we will do, and I
will be at your command when you are ready. Could I just say 
1i7.
that I understand what the Premier of New South Wales has
said about adequacy. However, on two of the matters that are
before us I thought there was virtually complete agreement. The
first of those is the taking over of $ 200M of State debt. I thought
the officers had agreed on that. I thought you would be pleased
that we had decided to take over the interest and sinking fund charges
as from the beginning of the year. I thought we had agreed on the
$ 200M a year grant, which otherwise would be a special loan.
I do not know how the Premiers feel, but I do not anticipate much
discussion on those two points.
MR ASKIN I think the main discussion will centre on
the first two items of the 5-point proposal you made last February
that is, the base grant and the improvement, which you said at the
time would be adequately improved, and the betterment factor.
MR GORTON That is what I thought, too.
MR ASKIN These will occupy most of our time.
SIR HENRY BOLTE Except that there could be a
formula used to decide how to apply these other proposals.
MR GORTON There will be discussion clearly
on whether the distribution should be as we have suggested
it is only a suggestion on the question of taking over State
debt and whether that will be distributed in proportion to the
total debt of the States. 
SIR HENRY BOLTE Or would be in proportion
to the recoup percentage of the States?
MR GORTON That I am sure will be the subject of
discussion amongst the Premiers, but the total amount is
agreed. The payment of interest and sinking fund charges is
agreed. I shall listen with great interest to how various
Premiers think it should be distributed, but the total will be
the same. Then we shall adjourn now until the ringing of the
bells. The Conference adjourned 



OPENING OF TULLAMARINE AIRPBORT
MELBOURNE, Vic. 1LJULY 1970
Spe c byj the Prime Minister,. Mr. ohn Gorton-
Mr. Premier, My Lord Mayor, Parliamentary Colleagues and Ladies and
Gentlemen: just about six years ago, on a very dank and drizzling and miserable
September day, in my capacity as Minister for Works, I drove the bulldozer which
turned the first sod for the construction of this air-port.
And very glad indeed I was to do it for two reasons. One was that it
began construction of an airport sooner than it had been thought construction woulld
begin. And the other was that I had escaped the conisequen~ ces of taking a rather
risky gamble. You see, what happens when edifices of this k,, inrd are constructed by the
Government is that after the basic decision, the Department of Works prepares
general plans and then those general plans are submitted to the Parliamentary
Committee on Public Works. And only after the Parliamentary Committee on
Public Works has agreed to the general plans are the detailed plans proceeded with.
This is a very good and a very proper way of going on. But in this particular case
I felt it would add an inordinate time to the date on which construction should begin,
so I instructed the Department of Works to assume that tihe ? arliamentary Public
Works Committee would agree to the general plans and to go right ahead with the
detailed plans. This was a very reprehensible thing to do and I hope it will never
be repeated by any Minister for Works. But the end result was, because the
Committee did agree with the general plans, that we were able to start much sooner,
and I was able tu avoid the embarrassment which would have uccurred if the
Committee had not agreed to what we had put forward. Those were the two reasons
why I was glad to be able on that day to begin this construction.
And I remember then that the whole 5, 000 acres of farmland which was
to become this airport gave the impression of being nothing but a sea of mud and
a rather bleak and a rather repellent cold rural scene. But now today, Tulla marine...
I like the name " Tulla marine.... I'll have more to say about that later, but now
today Tullamarine and that farmland has been transformed into Melbourne airport.
It has become a significant addition to the aviation maps oZ the world, an international
airport international because those who planned it were progressive and
imaginative in their thinking international in siz-e and its sophistication, and
international because it will provide truly internatio-nal services.
So today Tullamarine phases Victoria the international airline
circuit and offers facilities to travellers as a port of arrival and of departure equal
to any facilities offered anywhere in the world. Cne more window on the world for
Australia, one more window through which the world car. look at Australia, and
for that reason, I think, a big day for us. 
This, as you were told by Senator Cotton, has been a record year for
Australian civil aviation.... two international terminals completed in our largest
cities within weeks of each other and record numbers of passengers carried. And
this year we celebrate fifty years of civil aviation and the fiftieth birthday of Qantas
Quee11sland and Northern Territory Air Service which, you may remember, began
with these old machines looking as if they were tied together with wire, in
Queensland and in the Northern Territory, and which today gives its name to our
international service. We have come a long way in half a century to rank as we do amongst
the first six nations of the world, and we can take pride in that. But in taking
pride in it, let us look back a little, let urp look back to past exa~ mples of services
to aviation, because looking back to past examples may sustain a vision for the
future. Let us remember men like Hudson Fysh, Kingsford Smith, Bert Hinkler
and a host of other Australians, and let us never forget that they were the first to
cross the great oceans of the world, except the North Atlantic, andi even there
Harry Hawker almost made it. These were the men who blazed the trails across
hitherto untravelled skies.
So this airport stands today as a monument, as I see it, to the men
of the past and it stands as a promise for what we can do in the future. There are
no limits to the distance we can go if we plan well, if we build well as I think we
have done here and if we are inspired to venture in the years to come, as the
pioneers of aviation of whom I have spoken were inspired to venture in their time.
Sir, before 1 declare this airport open, there are two things I would
like to say. When I declare it open, I am going to call it Melbourne Airport, and
that is what It will officially be. But I hope and I believe and this is a personal
hope and belief that that lovely liquid name " Tullamarine" will not disappear
from our vocabulary, and that around the world Tullamarine Melbourne Airport
in brackets, or if you like: Melbourne Airport Tullamarine In brackets, will be
known by names such as La Guardia or Heathrow or whatever it may be.
So when I do declare it open, I do it in the hope that it will be known
not only as Melbourne Airport bout as Tullamarine and that as Tullamarine, it will
be an airport able to operate for seven days a week and for twenty-four hours a
day. And I hope and believe this will be so if for no other reason than when there
is an investment of this size then the more use that it got from it the better it is
for everybody. And there is no need for an airport not to operate, provided those
living around it are not harassed by the noise of such operation. Those living
around Tullamarine now, 1 believe, would not be so harassed, and it is our
intention as a government that this airport should so operate, subject in the future
to just this one qualification that the State authorities concerned see that there is
not built up around the perimeter of this airport hcusing settlements which, in the
future, might lead to great noise discomfort to those living in them.
Having the airport, let us have a buffer zone around it, and it then
will operate as an international airport should.
Ladies and gentlement, 1 declare Melbourne Airport open and unveil
the plaque which records the event. 



Premiers' Conference
Opening Statement by Prime Minister
It is only a little more than two months since we
last met in Premiers' Conference to discuss the budgetary
situation then facing you in 1970-71o For myself, I carried
away from that meeting a feeling of genuine achievement.
The Commonwealth had, I felt, by its offer to provide special
revenue assistance of some $ 43 million, gone a long way
towards meeting the residual problem with which the States,
even after the efforts they had made in the preceding month
or so, were still faced.
So indeed it has proved. Information about your
expected financial outcome for 1970-71 ( and for 1971-72,
which I shall come to later) has been supplied to us by you
and your Treasury officers and I would like to digress for
a moment to express the Commonwealth's real appreciation
for the ready co-operation you and they have displayed. I
know that the Treasurer would join me in that expression of
thanks, The information for 1970-71 which you have supplied
indicates that, compared with the situation prior to the
April Conference, there has been an improvement of over
million in the States' revenue and loan accounts. The
special revenue assistance which we provided accounted, of
course, for the larger part of that, some $ 43 million. In 
addition, the financial assistance grants payable to the States
under the formula have turned out to be some $ 13.2 million
higher than they had been estimated to be at that time a
fact of which, I understand, you were advised last week.
Finally, the estimates for all but one State show some
improvement, quite apart from these two factors, over the
estimates supplied last Aprilo Overall, whereas last April
the States as a whole had appeared to be facing deficits on
revenue and loan accounts combined of over $ 70 million, on
the present estimates the combined result, taking the States
as a whole, will be a virtual balance
All in all, Gentlemen, I think that is not a
bad outcome from what has obviously been a situation fraught
with difficulty for all parties, both the States and the
Commonwealth. When I recall that in bringing down their own
budgets the States actually budgeted for a deficit of nearly
$ 33 million on combined revenue and loan accounts; and when
I recall also that the effects on State finances of postbudget
wage awards in 1970-71 have been of the order of $ 100
million, I think the outcome that has actually been achieved
is striking. Now I hasten to add that I am well aware that this
outcome has not been achieved without cost. In part it has
been achieved at the cost of the Commonwealth, with
consequences for our own budget and the economy that I shall
come to later. In part, however indeed, in somewhat larger
part it has been achieved at the cost of sharp cut-backs in 
one field or another of State expenditures or, to a much
lesser degree, of increases in State taxation. Those are
the measures, one might say, of the wage inflation that has
been imposed upon State Governments in 1970-71 by circumstances
largely beyond their control. We would all recognise that the
outcome is not, in that sense, a happy one.
So much for the 1970-71 position. Since the
April Conference, however, the States have re-examined their
prospects for 1971-72 and the figures submitted to us in
that regard show a rather depressing picture. In short,
the " full year" effects of the extraordinary wage awards
made this year will mean that the States will face in 1971-72
no less than $ 170 million of additional expenditures on that
score alone, over and above the very large increase already
suffered from that factor in 1970-71. This clearly means that
the States must inevitably face a very difficult year.
In passing, Iwantto underline one point. It relates
particularly to the field of the State budgets, but also to a
very large extent to our own Commonwealth budget.
1970-71 has been a year characterized by increased
wage awards of a startling kind. It is not too much to say
that this factor alone has served to unhinge the budgets
of public authorities throughout Australia at all levels of
government. It will continue to do so through its " full year"
effects in 1971-72. I cannot too strongly stress the
gravity with which the Commonwealth contemplates that situation.
To return to the situation facing the States in
1971-72, no doubt the figures that you have supplied to us
could be debated here and there at the margin; but broadly 
speaking I can say that we accept them as constituting, to all
intents and purposes, a good indication of the order of
magnitude of the problems you are all facing. No doubt you
will all have something more to say about that when we come
to hear you on the positions of your own States.
We are, believe me, very conscious of the
problems you are facing. It is true that, with luck, 1971-72
may prove to be a passing phenomenon for the States indeed
it would be hard to contemplate another such year in 1972-73.
If so, that may provide a basis for lifting our eyes a
little beyond 1971-72 itself, and regarding the problems of
that year as somewhat more manageable, viewed from that
wider perspective, than perhaps they might appear if we
concentrate upon them alone. That, however, is as may be
the States' financial problems in 1971-72 will be difficult
viewed from any standpoint, and you should know that we
acknoiledge that fact fully.
That, very naturally, is the problem as the States
see it. We in the Commonwealth see it too, but see also
an over-riding economic problem. I refer in particular to
our own budgetary position, and the serious situation
confronting us in the field of general management of the
economy. As to our own budget, not only shall we finish
this present financial year with expenditures sharply up,
and our overall position appreciably worse, by comparison with
what we had budgeted for last August, but also the outlook 
for 1971-72 is, to say the least, grim. In large part
because of the sharp increase in our payments to the States,
associated in particular with the compensation for cessation
of receipts duty revenue and with the special revenue
assistance we have provided, our expenditures in 1970-71
seem likely to be of the order of $ 1,000 million up on
1969-70. Revenues will be up also; but not commensurately,
and our overall position will, as I say, show a marked
deterioration from what we had provided for last August.
As to 1971-72, it is of course too early to be
able to gain a fully considered picture of our own budget
outlook. At this point of time we are still in process of
considering the expenditure " bids" submitted by Departments,
based as those purport to be solely on existing policies.
The Treasurer will have his pruning knife out with respect
even to those figures; but, without entering upon the detail
of them at this time, I can say that the prospective position
they reveal with respect to the likely growth in Commonwealth
expenditure in 1971-72 even in the absence of any of the new
spending policies which are being pressed upon us from all sides
( including, I have no doubt, the policy of assistance to
yourselves which you will be pressing upon us) is nothing short
of alarming. So far from reining in the increase in our
expenditures, which is and must be the central objective of
our budgetary policy at this time, it is clear that we shall
have to exercise the most extreme restraint if we are to hold
the increase below that which has occurred in 1970-71. 
Such an increase in Commonwealth expenditures
would, in my mind, give rise to sharp questioning at any time.
It would be doubly open to question in the context of our
present economic situation and prospect. In brief compass,
that situation is that inflationary pressures have not abated.
Overall demand is increasing strongly with continuing strong
escalation of costs and prices, and the public sector is
contributing more than proportionately to that position.
Such a situation, if allowed to continue, and particularly given
the possibility that increased demand from other quarters
could also eventuate, would be fraught with consequences for
the economy of the gravest possible kind. You will therefore
readily see why I say that, in this context, the prospective
increases which are being foreshadowed in our own expenditures
are nothing short of alarming. As to these questions of the
budgetary and economic situations, you may want to hear
further from the Treasurer. All I will say further at this
time is that, in these circumstances, we conceive it to be
the first and foremost duty of the Commonwealth to provide
leadership in contesting this obviously disturbing state of
affairs. It has necessarily been against this background of
our own budgetary difficulties and our continuing concern
with the overall economic situation, that we have been looking
at the whole question of a growth tax for the States which
would assist you in meeting your own difficulties. I say at
the outset that we see a lot of advantage in the States having 
access to a new and broadly based tax field. We have,
consequently, made a wide-ranging study of the whole field
of possibilities. One point to emerge quite early in such a study
is, of course, that there are various constraints upon the
possibilities. For example, and in some ways most
importantly, the constitutional position clearly debars the
States from imposing virtually any form of sales tax
( including, so far as we can see, a value added tax). The
unhappy history of the receipts duty is a salutary lesson.
Nor would such a tax imposed by the Commonwealth on behalf
of the States ( which would have to be imposed at a uniform
rate throughout the Commonwealth) offer a satisfactory
alternative to the States. Indeed we have always regarded
any State growth tax, to be at all satisfactory, as necessarily
offering the possibility of variations in their own rates by
individual States that wish to do so.
That narrows the field considerably. We have, as
I say, looked in detail at the remainder of the field but,
for one reason or another we find ourselves forced to the
conclusion that there are in fact only two areas which offer
scope for any move of this kind. The first is personal income
tax and the second is the pay-roll tax.
As to the first, that is income tax, we have given
close study to the possibilities, as indeed we have on several
earlier occasions, and have come to the view that it would
not be advisable to re-open the field of personal income tax to 
the States. I doubt if much useful purpose will be served by
going in detail into the pros and the cons as we see them.
Our decision is, of course, based upon general grounds; I add,
however, that it has particular pertinence in the economic and
financial circumstances which we find confronting us at present.
The Commonwealth has therefore closely examined
what appears to be the sole remaining possibility, namely
that of giving the States access to the field of pay-roll tax.
We recognise that, from some viewpoints, this may not in
itself be regarded as an ideal tax although we also believe
that a good many of the arguments commonly brought against it
are not well-founded. In particular, the argument that it
adds to costs can, broadly speaking, be applied to all taxes.
However, it is broadly based, grows almost directly in line
with the economy, would be relatively simple to administer I,
( partly because employers already draw up returns on a State
basis) and certainly offers some prospect for raising
additional revenue should States wish to use it for that
purpose. We have therefore, after full and thorough
examination, decided that if the States would like to have
access to this additional taxation field, the Commonwealth
would be prepared to withdraw from the field completely ( apart
from levying a similar tax within our own Territories). In
doing so, arrangements would be made to ensure, at the
Commonwealth's expense, continuation of the export incentive
scheme based on the present pay-roll tax rate of 2' per cent. 
In withdrawing from the field of pay-roll tax, the
Commcnwealth could not of course contemplate the loss of
revenue involved and we would therefore propose to offset
that loss, subject to some qualifications which I shall come
to in a moment, by commensurate reductions in the financial
assistance grants.
In considering the amount of those reductions, we
would be prepared to take into account three points:
The additional cost to the States in
administering the new tax, which would, of
course, be minor.
The fact that, since revenues from pay-roll
tax at constant rates would probably grow
slightly more slowly than the financial
assistance grants the States would be losing
would have done, the reduction in the grants
" base" for 1972-73 and subsequent years would
need to be adjusted accordingly. ( There would
be no effect of this kind in 1971-72 and the
grants arrangements as a vrhole are, of course,
subject to review in four years' time.); and
Having in mind the state of the finances of
some local authorities, the States might well
feel that, once the pay-roll tax became a State
tax, they would find it difficult to continue
levying it upon the non-business activities of
local authorities. If so, there would of course 
be some loss of revenue involved, and in that
case the Commonwealth would regard it as doing
the fair thing if it were to share as to half
in that loss.
On this approach what the Commonwealth would, in
effect, be doing is to hand over to the States the pay-roll
tax on the basis that, while levying the tax at the present
rate, they would be unaffected financially by the transfer except
in so far of course as they join us in relieving local
authorities from payment of the tax in respect of their
non-business activities. The States would of course stand to
benefit from the scope for raising additional revenue that the
new tax, once in their own hands, would give them.
That, Gentlemen, is at this stage the sum and
substance of the Commonwealth's offer in this matter. The
question to which I think we need an answer is whether the
States would wish to take advantage of this offer. In order
to assist you and your officers in your consideration of
that question, we are now circulating a document in which
fuller details of a scheme along the lines I have suggested
are set out. 



OPEN4ING OF NORVJICH UNION HO[ USE
SYDNEY N. S. W. 2 JULY 1970
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Ramsay, Distinguished Guests from Overseas, Ladies and Gv-, ntlemen:
I am glad to be here this afternoon to croak out a blessing on this
new building. It is particularly appropriate, I think, considering the way I feel this
afternoon, because if I feel the same way tomorrow afternoon, Sir, you are likely
to get a new policy-holder. They call it Asian flu. I think it is probably a bit of a
reflection on Asia. But whatever it is, you have had it and I have got it.
As you say, Sir, I do seem to be having quite a run of Openings this
week. Tullamarine airport one day I hope you will continue to call it Tullamarine,
and today one new building pointing to the skies and adding significantly to what
is already an exciting skyline in Sydney.
I think that both these occasions remind us of the expansion going on all
around us in Australia today which will, I am sure, continue unabated through the
decade that lies ahead of us.
Now, it is quite right, Mr. Ramsay, that in Melbourne one indicated
that the enterprise one was opening would continue to work for twenty-four hours
a day. And I am not going to take your advice as to Norwich Union employees,
because unless i miss my guess they are so widespread throughout the Mo rld that there
is not one hour of the day whenr some Norwich Union employee is not working
somewhere to write some policy for t: ae betterment Gf hurnariity in general.
Sir, this Company has had an active association with Australia, going
back for more thar. one hundred years and I am happy in the presence of your
London Principals, to acknowledge your company's established place in our highly
competitive insurance industry, to acknowledge its service to its policy-holders,
and to acknowledge its contribution through investment to our national development.
It is a mutual society. It is a society where the profits do not get siphoned off,
but whev~ e those who are policy-holders share in the growth of the enterprise, and
where the country in which it is established shares in the growth of the enterprise,
because as I am sure youi know, Sir, some thirty per cent of investments of funds
made by insurance companies are required by law which some people think is
wrong, but I think is at least convenient, to invest thirty per cenPt of their funds
in what I will call developmental activities so that it can help the building of schools
and roads and hospitals and all the other matters which both State and Commonwealth
Governments seek to bring to the people of this country. ./ 2 
So it is not just something which is a busineas, although of course it is
a business, but is something which helps the community in wA~ i. Jch it is established
and &amp; tiSti, r , is saying something of some magnitude because the rapid expansion
of the insurance business in Australia is a very clear reflection of the health and
growth of Australia and is of no small magnitude. I understa:-A that life insurance
investment in Australia now exceeds 000 million arid is increasing at more than
per cent a year and we are delighted that this should be so, we are delighted
that you should be building up your own enterprise in this way, not seeking as
happened some time ago, to take over an Australian life company in the process. I
quote those figures because of the importance which I do attach, and which we do
attach, to insurance funds in Australia because of what I have already spoken of
as the great contributionit makes to investment, to Australia's progress.
Now I do have some statistics here which -may be interesting because I
am told that we are cane of the world's most insurance-minded countries, and that
taking the ratio of premiums to national income as a guide, we rank second with
Canada in all the countries of the world, with America being the leader, and if you
take dollars per head spent on premiums, then we rank, fourth after America, Canada
and Switzerland. For tho) se who are interested in precise figures, which I imagine,
Sir, insurance people are, the exact figures in United States dollars spent per head
are: United States $ 277, Canada $ 150, Switzerland $ 134 and Australia $ 115. As
we grow, as we will in the decade in front of us, I have no doubt that we will be
rated second and that will be good for you and for your policy holders and for us.
I think that the establishment of this building by the Norwich Union shows
the confidence that company has in the future of this nation of Australia. I am certain
that confidence is not misplaced. I am positive that in the decade ahead we will grow,
and grow more rapidly with each passing year. That we will have our problems, as
we do now have our problems, is obvious. We have our problems with our rural
industries caught in a cost-price squeeze, the price being uii-ab: le to be decided by the
producer or by this government. We have diff iculties which are inherent in the
growth of big cities, the rapid growth of great cities, and we have a requirement to
give our young people going out to marry a capacity to buy laild and houses not
without effort because these things have always required effort and always should, but
at least without undue effort, and this is also a problem that is with us now.
But there has never been a country at any stage in the woxk which has
not had problems. We have got them. But the opportunities we have got so far
outweigh them that we will, I believe, in the next decade, be almost a transformed
nation and will., have fully justified Norwich Union's own faith in our future as
exemplified by this building which I now take pleasure in officially declaring open. 



NEW GUINEA TOUR 1970
NEW STEPS TOWARDS SELF -GOVERNrMENTr IN PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
peech y the Prime Minister, Mr John Gorton
at Papua Hotel, Port Moresby
S6 JULY 1970
"~ 4fYo onour, Members of the Administrator's Executive Council,
Distinguishd guests, Ladies and Gentlemen.
I think that the Territory of Papua and New Guinea and the other islan 1i
which at the moment make up the whole, faces a most difficult period in its evolution
towards: self-government in the future and towards independence. We have reacael
a stage of political development inside the Territory at which there are vocal dem'nds
for progress, or at least demands for changes in various fields. But such changes
are probably more difficult in this Territory than in . ay other area of which I can
think. We have here in Papua and New Guinea and then across areas of sea
other islands which, as I said, at the moment make ui a whole, We have ' 7erritory
composed of what are virtually different races, with different languages, with
different district loyalties and we have aTerritory in which some areas are
clamouring for quicker advancement towards self-government and ind-ependence and
other areas are fearful that the advance is already too swift. And we have a
Territory, and I look to the future, which of its very nature is liable to be suoLwct
to the dangers of fragmentation.
Those dangers stem partly from different languages, partly from different
outlook, partly from different stages of development. They can be reinforced by
fallacious argument that if some part of Territory is fortunate enough to discover,
for example, a copper mine then it would be better off by itself. And if this
fallacious argument, and I believe it is a fallacious argument, is accepted thien at
some stage there would be that fragmentation. If oil were discovered in Pap la
there could be a danger of fragmentation there, and so it would go on ultimately,
I am sure, to the detriment of all the people of the Territory which we would like
to see advance as a unit towards nationhood. Talking of advancing as a unit
towards nationhood there have been, sir, as you have said I think, great advances
made economically and politically in the Territory since the Second World War.
I think the time has come for further advances to be made alona tr at
road. I do not speak of self-government in 1972 or in any calendar year that you
may care to mention, because you are on a road towards sell-government. You
have started on it. There will necessarily be progress along it step by step and
anyone who seeks to say that at a given month at a given year a period will have
been reached when that can be achieved is, I think, dangerously simplifying the
problem and is acting to the detriment of the people for the future. / 2 
But there are further steps now short of self-government but towards
self-government which I feel should be made and these I wish to outline to you
tonight. We believe that the time has come when less should be referred to
Canberra for decision and more should be retained for decision by the Administrator's
Executive Council and by the Ministerial Members who for the most part make up
that Council. What we suggest is this that there should be negotiated between the
Australian Government and the Government here, a sum of money for recurrent
expenses and for minor works inside the Territory. And, speaking for the Australian
Government, we would expect that there would be more effort on the part of the
local peoples to raise revenue inside this Territory, as years go by for the purpose
of this recurrent expenditure and these minor works. But once this sum of money
had been negotiated, made up partly by local revenue, partly by what we will call a
grant-in-aid for these purposes from the Commonwealth, then that sum of money,
we believe, should be divided by the Administrator's Executive Council among the
various Ministries up here which will put in claims in the way Ministers put in
claims to the Cabinet in Canberra.
So there will be a claim from the Minister of Education, there will be a
claim from the Minister of Health, there will be a claim from the Minister of
Public Works, and the Administrator's Executive Coun~ cil within the sum of money
available to it will apportion to these various Ministers the Sums that they can
spend. When that has been done, when a Minister, let us say, of Education, has
received a sum within the total limits then we believe that he should have authority
as to how that money should be spenit in the Territory, should be able to make
decisions here which now require reference to Canberra before they can be made.
If h&amp; has a new programme, he will need to get the agreement of the
Administrator's Executive Council. If, as is not unknown inpuclitical circles in
Canberra, he wishes to get more money in the course of the year for his own
portfolio at the expense of somebody else's portfolio and that is the only way he
will get it, he won't get -i* t by additional grant from Australia then the
Administrator s &amp; ecutive Council car, listen to the pleas of th-e two Ministers
concerned and, as a council, can decide what should be done.
This, I think, will be a great transference, not so much of power, but
of administrative power to the elected Members who are Ministerial ! rnzbers in
this Teiritory and to the Administrator's Executive Council. As there is to be this
transference of power and in future, no doubt, other transf,-erences of power, so
concomitant with it will there need to be an assumption of res-ponsib ility by the
Ministerial Members and the House of Assembly in Papua and New Guinea. If
there is a requirement for more money to be provided than has been provided by
the existing level of local taxes, and vwhat the Australian Government is prepared
to provide by a grant-in-aid, then that's fine. It can be provided if the House of
Assembly up here is prepared to impose the taxes required to raise it in the same
way as the Government of Australia has to impose the taxes required to provide
what it wants to do. I hope you won't read into what I have just said any suggestion
that Australian aid will cease for Papua and New Guinea. Of course it won't,
but I hope you will read into it a realisation that as power is transferred so also
must responsibility be transferred and these two things go hand in hand.
That is the first proposition we will make. We will have in the
Australian B udget a negotiated a mount of money for the Territory called a / 3 
" tgrant-in-aid" added to the sum of money raised by the decision of the local House
in tL~ e number of taxes they propose to impose, and the rate off taxes they propose
to impose, and that will be left to division among the Ministries by the Administrator's
Executive Council and for spending by the Ministerial Members concerned.
We will have also in the Australian Budget a development grant. That
development grant for the general development of Papua and New Guinea Territories
will remain with, and be negotited, of course, by the Australian Government and
the Government up here, but its expenditure, since it will be provided entirely by
the Australian taxpayer, virtually entirely, will remain the responsibility of the
Australian Government. In other words, we will want to see that a general
development grant is expended on those projects for which it is voted, and we
will want to overseee that it is properly expended on those projects.
We propose, this is just a mater I suppose of presentation too, that
in future we would have on our Australian Budget an item which is to pay all the
overseas allowances of expatriate and overseas officers so that everyone can see
that this comes from the Australian taxpayer and from what Is provided inside
Australia, and not from what is provided in the Territory. The base rates of
jiublic oervants from the Territory and from Australia can of course be the same,
but I think it is essential that people should know that the additional allowances paid
do come from the Australian taxpayer, are shown in the Australian Budget and
are paid to expatriate officers.
We have had it brought to our attention that there Is fear in the
Territory amongst responsible people that key public servants may be lost to the
future service of this Territory because, if they are expatriate officers, they have
an insecurity of tenure. A man of 40 or 45 may reach a point where he has a
family to educate, responsibilities to take on, and where he says to himself
" Should I remain in the Service of the Territory, either as a Member of the
New Guiuea/ Papua service or as a contract oficer? Should I continue in this or
should 1, because I do not know what the future holds for me in case self-government
or independence comes, should I at this stage begin to carve some new career for
myself". And it has been put to us that a number of key public servants, I mean
d istrict officers, professional officers, sub-professional oYfficers and technical
officers, either have resigned or may in the future resign because they do not
know what would happen to them when self-government or independence comes.
It has been put to us that this poses a danger to the future development
of Papua and New Guinea. because these people and their accumulated experience
are going to be required when self-government comes or independence comes.
And so we have decided to do this. In order to encourage selected key overseas
officers to remain in the service of Papua and New Guinea for the present and
future good of the Territory, we propose that those who are permanent officers
of the Papua and New Guinea Public Service, some of those who are permanent
officers of the Papua and New Guinea Public Service, and some of those who are
contract officers, will be offered enlistment in a new Australian-based service.
Offers of engagements in this new service ( and it will be a selective serv ice),
offers of engagement now and in the future will be made to the selected key
Administrative officers of whom I have spoken, but acceptance of such an offer
will be entirely woluntary on the part of any such officers and offers of selection
will be decided by the Administration. 4 / 4 
4.
At the moment we believe the ceiling of this new Commonwealth based
service should be approximately 1, 000. It will be additional to the existing
arrange~ aents under which officers serve in the permanent service here or in
which they serve as contract officers. That is to say permanent officers who
are riot appointed to the new service will continue as they are at present, losing
nothing of what they have achieved. Contract officers who are not offered
appointment will continue on their existing contracts. But appointments to the
new Service will carry a guarantee by the Australian Government that a memier
appointed will be assured of continued employment in the Public Service of Papua
and New Guinea or in the event that he is transferred from that, or displaced from
that, in the future, there will be a guarantee that the Commonwealth Government
will place him in permanent employment in a like field on a comparable salary.
This, we hope, will enable many officers to resolve the dilemmna in which perhaps
they are at present placed, and will enable them to decide to make their accumulated
experience available to the Government of the Territory of Papua and New Guinea
while at the same time retaining full confidence in their ownM future and in their
own future employment. Before the details of this approach are settled, overseas
officers themselves will be consulted throughout the Territory, as will the Public
Service Association. But that is another step which we propose to make which we
think will be of assistance to the development of this country i the future and
which so many people in this Territory have urged us in one way or another to do.
We propose that the Administrator's Executive Council, as a result
of the new responsibilities which it assumes, will have a spokesman for that
Council appointed in the House of Assembly to answer questions as to what the
Administrator's Executive Council has done and why it has done it. And we also
propose that the Parliament of Australia will not exercise its veto power in
relation to ordinances if those ordinances affect the actual res-, onsibilities handed
over to Ministerial Members,
Now let me indicate to you the kinds of areas in which we feel
responsibility shotild be taken by Ministerial Members here and the kinds of areas
in which we feel the Commonwealth of Australia should continue to exercise its
present authority. There will be delivered later by my colleague, the Minister
for Eaernal Territories, in more detail but for the moment the subjects on which
we thin-k that authority to take decisions should reside in the Ministerial Members
or the Administrator's Executive Council are educatio; r. l primary, secondary,
technical, but not tertiary public health, tourism, co-operatives, business
advisory services, workers' compensation, industrial training, posts and
telegraphs, Territory revenue including taxation ( for inherent in what I have
said is the need foc the House of Assembly to take greater responsibility in the
levying of revenue in this Territory), price control, coastal shipping, civil defence,
corrective institutions ( that's prisons in case anybody's wondering), registration
of customary land, land use, leasing of land and town planning and urban
development. The areas in which we wish and must at this stage retain final authority
are the judiciary, the enfor cement of law and order, internal security, external
affairs, external trade and large scale development projects in agriculture, in
transport, forestry, in those things in the five-year development plan which we
are now some half-way through and which will for the most part be financed by the
Australian taxpayer and therefore overseen by the representatives of the Australian
taxpayer rather than the representatives of the Territory. 
I may say that other matters such as civil aviation and defence will,
as they are at present, be paid forand controlled directly by the Commonwealth
Departments concerned.
In the Adiitao's Executive Council, when, decision~ s are being
arrived at as to proposals put forward by Ministerial Members for authority to
spend on this or that, the official Members will sit in the Administrator's Council,
as they sit at present, and they will offer advice to that Council and they will offer
their experience to that Council. They will not take part in any vote that Council
may have as to what it finally does. I suggest that these are very significant steps
fo ' rward along the road to transferring power to the representative Members of the
Territory and to transferring responsibility to the representative Members of
the Territory. But I emphasise again that the total sum available fIor recurrent and
minor works will be a total sum, only able to be added to, if thre House of Assembly
wishes. to find some new avenue of expenditure, by imposing taxation to raise the
revenue for that new expenditure because as a Territory progress es towards the
ability to exercise greater power, so it must accept the greater responsibility for
financing the decisions which it make..
Even when in the future self-government comes or independence comes,
there will be continuing Australian assistance for this Territory, but the amount of
recurrent assistance provided will, to a great extent, depend on the amount of
self-help which the Territory is prepared to impose upon itself. The developmental
sums made available for development here will continue., but if, as I hope, the
Territory develops and has an increased taxabla~ capacity because of such things as
the Bougainville copper mining or oil, which may be found in Papua or elsewhere,
the industrial development if that happens, then we would expect greater responsibility
still to be accepted by the people of Papua and New Guinea, because when you boil
it all down I believe that this is the position as far as the Australian people are
concerned. We feel we have an obligation and a responsibility. I don't talk about a
technical obligation at the moment under the trusteeship council feel we have an
obligation and responsibility to help the development of this country to a stage where
it could not only govern itself politically but govern itself economically, and we
will accept that responsibility and this may go on for years.
But I don't think we would want to accept the position where in years to
come people from the Territory came to us and said " These are our needs, these
are our requirements, we don't want to accept the responsibility for taxing to meet
them you tax, you provide them'". At some stage the Australians would say:
" Sorry"'. But if we continue to provide the assistance we are providing and intend
to provide in the future, then at some stage there would be no need for the people
of the Territory to come to us because, by a joint efi~ ort, we would have been able
to raise the economic capacity of this country to a stage where the companies that
have come in would be taxed, where wealth that flows to individuals would be taxed,
where developments that have already taken place would lead to developments still
in the future, and where the Territory of Papua and New Guinea could probably
look after itself. / 6 
6.
But for the present and in the foreseeable future vie intend to provide
that assistance at least which we provide now. And for the present we propose
tais new step forward towards self-government and responsibility, which I know
in Fome areas of the Territory will be thought to be going too far, which I know
in other areas of the Territory will be thought to be going not far enough, but which
looked at from either end are, I think, necessary steps towards a future which must,
at some time, hold full internal self-government and full inde-pendence.
This is as far as we feel we should now go, arnd I finish as I began by
saying that I believe it against all logic and all sense to put a timetable on this.
We don't want to remain in the Territory one week against the wishes cf the
majority of its people. We don't think we ought to get out of the Territory against
the wish of the majority of its people. We don't want to rule any peoples without
their consent. We don't think it proper to move out and possibly help a vocal
minority rule a majority without that majority's consent, and one can't put a
timetable on this but one..: can say these are steps towards the time when this
Territory; will be self-governing and when its people will express their views.
And we will take account of those views instead of imposing our views on them as
to a date for self-government and independence.
Your Honour and Members of the Administrator'S. Executive Council,
I hope you will agree that these are significant steps and I hope with all my heart
that the people of the Territory and the Members of the House of Assembly and
the Members of the Administrator's Executive Council will make the fullest
possible use of the opportunities now~ offered for the advancement of this
Territory and the assumption of the responsibilities which must go with them.
Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW GUINEA 1970
LAE LOCAL GOVERNMENT COUNCILS
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton 9 JULY 1970
Opening remarks not recorded....... and one part of the Territory can
help another. As roads go inland from a town like Lae, the town is helped by that
road and the country opened up by that road is also helped. It is mutual assistance.
So I hope the Territory will progress as a unit the coastal areas, the highlands
and the islands. Clearly this Territory is on the road to self-government and at the end
of the road which it is now travelling, self-government will be attained. Thereis
no turning back on this road. It must be progressed step by step, but at the same
time it is not for the Australian Government to dictate to the people of the
Territory the speed at which they must travel along that road,
So I think it quite wrong to say that at a given year 1972 or 3 or 4 or
any given year, the Australian Government will impose on the people of the Territory
self-government whether they want it or whether they don't. And as long as I am
Prime Minister, we will not seek to impose our will on the people of the Territory
in that way. But at the same time, if and when the time comes, as ultimately it will,
when the people of the Territory themselves, the majority of the people say they
wish complete ' nternal self-government, then at that time they will get it because
we do not wish to help to administer and govern a country against the wishes of
the majority of its people. And we wouldn't do it, ary more than we would get
out and stop helping to govern a country against the wishes of the majority of the
people in it. Having said that, I now want to refer to the new steps which have been
taken along the road which I have described steps which were announced in
Port Moresby a few days ago. There is going to be a transfer of power for decisionmaking
from Canberra to the Administrator's Executive Council and with this
transfer, the House of Assembly will achieve powers additional to those it now has.
In future, money for the recurrent expenses of the services in the Territory and
money for minor works will be negotited as to amounts between the Australian
Government and the Administ ration in the Territory So there will be available
for these purposes, the sums raised inside the Territory fo: which the House of
Assembly will decide the taxation rates, the amounts raised inside the Territory
together with that amount negotiated as a recurrent grant from Australia. It will
then be for the Administrator's Executive Council to apportion between the
Departments the sums of money to be spent for those purposes. And in carrying
out this work, in carrying out this apportionment, the official members of the
Administrator's Council will be present, will give their advice, will give the
benefit of their experience, but will not vote on the decisions made by the rest of
the Administrator's Executive Council.
And in those fields which are handed over to this area of decision by
Ministerial Members, the Australian Government will not exercise its power of
veto over ordinances passed by the House of Assembly provided they fall
within this area. / 2 
I think this represents a quite significant transfer of authority to the
Ministerial Members and to the House of Assembly, and I believe it is essential
that the House of Assembly, the Ministerial Members and the people of the
Territory fully realise that as authority is transferred, so is responsibility
transferred, and as authority is increased so does the need for self help and
provision to carry out programmes from internal sources.
This does not mean that there will be a cessation in any way of Australian
aid. I believe that in the future of this Territory for a long time ahead, there is
going to be a need for that Australian advice, that Australian experience, that
AustraLian help which has brought the Territory so far in the last twenty years.
There will also be a need for Australian capital which will enable the Territory
to develop as it has in that time.
And so to finish because I would like to give some time for questions
and for discussion to sum it up the Territory is the road to selfgovernment.
It will be best for all parts of the Territory if that road were travelled
as a unit. Australian help in that travelling will continue, bt there will be from
time to time additional authority provided for the people of the Territory, yet noone
can say at what particular date complete self-goverrnment should come, because
it should only come if the majority of the people in the Territory wish it.
There is very much to do for the future of this country and I express the
strong hope that that will be done by a partnership of the coastal people, of the
highlanders and the people from the islands, of people whether they come from
New Guinea or Papua or from Australia, and that working in harmony to build and
to achieve, we will be able to give this country the economic base which must be
there for full political stability and that we can avoid any divisions which will
hamper the task which together can be so well done.
That is all except for a wish I have to congratulate the Members of the
Local Councils upon the work which they are doing which is so significant to the
people of this Territory and to wish them well in the future. Thank you.
In answer to a question about investment, Mr. Gorton said:-
We think the Papua/ New Guinea Territory r-eeds investment for development
just as Australia needs investment for development. WVe would like to see as
much of the equity in the new development held by the local people, if it is possible.
At this stage it seems quite unlikely that a significant amount of such
investment could be bought from the savings of the local people and that is one of
the reasons why we are setting up a-n investment corporat:. io which can buy equity
in new enterprises or expanding enterprises and retain that equity for the good of
the people of the Territory until the time comes when it can be sold to the
individual people of the Territory.
So we believe investment is needed. We believe the Australian Government
should retain control over the size and form of overseas investment because the
country can be subjugated economically if we don't, but we impose it under that
control and we would wish to see as much of it as possible either immediately,
which is unlikely, or in future retained for ownership of the New Guinea people, the
Territory people. I think that is about all I have to say on that subject but, as you
know, 20 per cent of the new development in Bougainville was bought by the
Administration for the good of the New Guinea people. 



1 SV30ISJIUTL 1970TO NEW GUINEA 1.970
~ a~ aY RABAUL ( AIRPORT ARRWAL)
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
in r ely to Mi. John Kauti 9 JULY 1970
Tolai, I come before you today at a time which should make us all sad and
sorrowful for in this country, on this Peninsula, Tolai is divided against Tolai and
brother's hand is raised against brother. And so people have been hurting each other
instead o' sitting down together to try and reach agreement with each other by discussion,
to try and find out what it is that most of the people want. Surely it would be better
for all the Tolai if that were done rather than that people should be spoken badly of and
should hurt each other. Would not that be better.... as it was?
For myself, I can say this. And, Tolai, do you not want to hear.... For
myself and for my Government I can say this. There has been disagreement on the
question of a Multi-Racial Council. All we wish to do is to discover what it is that
most of the Tolai want, and if most of the Tolai do not want a Multi-Racial Council,
then there will not be one. But if most of the Tolai do want a Multi-Racial Council,
then in the name of that democracy of which Mr. Kaputin spoke, there ought to be a
Multi-Racial Council. I have said in Canberra, I have offered to Mr. Kaputin when
he came to see me in Canberra..... " Let us discover what the people want. Let us
have a referendum so we can see what their will is, and we will then follow their will
as so expressed." Would it not be better for the Tolai to decide peacefully and amongst
themselves, in a democratic way, what sort of council they want so that can be the sort
of council they can have.
The other thing which has been spoken of is self-government now, selfgovernment
for New Britain, because the Tolai are not the only people on New Britain,
self-government for the Tolai if most of the Tolai don't wan. t it is that what is
suggested? Would it not be well for each man to sit down in his own home and think
what it is he really wants and what advantages he can get from being a part of the
Territory which just recently has moved a great way toward self-government.
I am sure that the people of the Gazelle Peninsula would wish to share in the
wealth coming from other parts of the Territory, would wish to get the benefits from
the copper being discovered in Bougainville, would wish to get the benefits should oil
be discovered in Papua, would wish to have the added economic advantage which being
part of a unit means and which, as Mr. Kaputin said, is the essential basis for real
political advancement. I believe the Tolai would want that. I ask each individual
Tolai to sit down in his house and think whether that is not better for him.
I know that these are problems which are worrying many Tolai. I know that
there are land problems too which are worrying Tolai. I have asked the leaders of
the Mataungan Association to meet me today and ta discuss these problems but they
have refused to do so. Why? / 2 
2.
So that there can be continued economic progress, continued political
advancement, I ask the Tolai members of the Mataungan Association to ask their
leaders to discuss these things with us, so that the Tolai themselves can resolve
their problems and so that the problems between the Tolai and the rest of the
Territory can also be solved peacefully by discussion and with Australia's
blessing. Thank you. 



VISIT TO NEW GUINEA 1970
RABAUL QUEEN ELIZABETH PARK
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton 9 JULY 1970
There is division amongst the Tolai people.... brother's hand is raised
against brother, and instead of people sitting down to try and reach friendly agreement
by discussion, people are hurting and beating those who disagree with them.
Peace is better than that kind of fighting, agreement by discussion is better
than name-calling and hurting each other, and yet this happens today inthe Peninsula.
And why? There has been some disagreement over whether there should or should not
be a Multi-Racial Council or a Local Council. We have said and I have said on behalf
of the Australian Government that we wish to discover what it is that most of the people
in this Peninsula want by way of a Council.
If most of the Tolai people on the Peninsula wish not to have a Multi-Racial
Council, then we would be prepared not to have a Multi-Racial Council. If most of the
Tolai people on the Peninsula want a Multi-Racial Council, then we would be prepared
to have that. But we need to know what it is that most of the people want.
I said that some months ago to one of the leaders of the Mataungan
Association, Mr. Kaputin. I said " Let us have a referendum. Let the people vote.
Let them say what they want." And I repeat that offer to all the people of this
Peninsula today. But such a vcte would need to be a secret one because when people already
are beating each other some may be frightened to come out openly and say what they
think for fear of being hurt. So the best way is a secret vote, and is this not handing
over to the Tolai people the solution of this problem? I think it is.
So I would speak not only to the people gathered here but to all those through
the length and breadth of this Peninsula. And I would say to each one of them: Sit
down in your own house, talk to your neighbours quietly. Ask yourself Would it not
be better to have unity than division? Would it not be better to have discussion than
fighting? Would ic not be better to find out what most want and then agree with what
most want?" I ask all those living here to do that.
I have been told by some I think a minority-but by some, that what is wanted
here is self-government now, but self-government for what? For New Britain? Because
New Britain has many other races than the Tolai. And if not for New Britain, then for
what? For the Gazelle Peninsula only? Is that asked for?
If it means self-government for the Gazelle Peninsula, what will the results
be for the people who live here? They will have left the Territory. They will no
longer be one unit of what is to be a nation. They will not have the right to share
in riches discovered in copper in Bougainville, or riches which may be discovered 
in oil in Papua or in the industrial development of all the rest of the Territory. They
would have no right because they would be gone. Do they want that?
Is it not true that there ar.-many Tolai ncin who go to Papua, or to New
Guine-a or to other parts of the Territory and who wiork to high positions in the
Administration or in the Police Force or in industry. Surely Tolais would want
that opportunity to continue, would not want to break off from) what should be a
united nation. There have already. beens very great steps towards transferring more
power to the people of the Territory, announced less than a week ago, and ultimately
there will undoubtedly be self-government for all. But those who tell you that
the Gazelle Peninsula or the Tolai people would be better se-parate are telling you
untruly and would damage your opportunity for work and would damage your
opportunity to shai-e in the wealth of the whole natior.
And I would like all the people in the Peninsula quietly, in their own
houses, talking to their relatives and their friends, again to consider on this
matter whether what I tell you is riot true. And if you come to the conclusion
that it is true, that it is to your advantage and] to the in.-teres-, t of all the Tolai
people, then let that voice be known by casting votes for those who agree with
you in the House of Assembly, by letting the wishes oZ the people be known to
Councillors and tD others who will be influenced by what you say.
So I have spoken to you of the Multi-Racial Council, I have spoken
of why I think it would be bad for the people here to have self-government now,
if indeed that meant anything for an area of this size, and I know that these are
problems and that there are other problems to do with land tenure in the
Peninsula. I have asked the leaders ol the Mataungan Society to come to see me, to
talk about these problems, to try to solve them, to see if we can reach agreement.
But they have refused to do this. They have refused to exchange ideas. I would
like those Tolai who live on this Peninsula to let it be known that most of the people
want these things to be discussed in a friendly way, want them to be resolved,
want there to be a stop to beatings, to hurtful na me-call ings, to spitefulness and
to divisions. Do not think that there would be any support from Australia fox those who
have caused divisions in this country. I know another politician came here some
time ago and indicated that there might be such support. This is the Leader of
the Opposition. He is not in the Government he can do nothing. And this
should be known to all the people in this Territory.
And for the last things I Shall say to you, I say this. We must, while
we are here, see that the law is observed for the protection of all people here.
/ 3 
3.
We want to stay and help in the Administration and the Government and the
provision of funds to the Territory including the Gazelle Peninsula, for as long as
we are wante... and we will do that. When most people wish us to go, which I
think would not be until we have helped to build up the inductries, to build up the
economic capacity of this Peninsula and of all tne rest of the Territory, if people
then wish us to go, we would be haT; pp: y to go. For we have no wish to administer
or govern one minute after most of the people in the Territory want us to leave.
And for the rest, I hope and I believe that the people here and in the
rest of the Territory will for the years ahead want that kind of partnership Vhich
has Shvwn such progress in twenty years, will want to have more and more say in
the running of their government, as they will. And that when the Tolai can heal
the division within themselves, then we c~ an all shak&amp;% e bands as brothers and
tackle the task of construction instead of destruction which lies in front of us and
which we want to do together.
Thank you for listening, both townspeople who are here and the Tolai
who are here. I1h ope that my words, and my suggestions and requests for
peaceful co-operation, will be heard far beyond the confines of this meeting and
will help for the future prosperity o! the Gazelle Peninsula if the majority of people
here agree that what I have said is the best path for us all to follow.
Thank you. 



JUL 1970 VJSIT TO NEW GUINEA 1970
KIETA, BOUGAINVILLE LOCAL GCVERNMENT COUNCILS
Speech by the Prime Minister, I/ r. J ohn Gorton JULY 1970
I would like to thank the Me mber, Mr. Paul Lapun, for the kind things
which he has said about what Australia has done in general and about the small part
which I was able to play in the time of the troubles, so that between us we were able
to overcome those troubles.
I really cannot give an answer on whether a road to a particular locality
will be built yes or no I cannot do that at this stage. All .1 can say is if the
suggestions for this road, and possibly for otherroads, isputtorheAdministration-ard
I am sure you would be the man to put them to the A--ministration then they can
be fully considered along with other development proposals which would have to be
decided on the basis of economics a.-d developing priorities.
On the second question which you raised, that of trying to see that local
businessmen would have their own businesses in the town of Arawa, I understand
that it has already been agreed by the Administration that the Development Bank
will make loans to local people for businesses in that town subject only to a decision
as to whether they are likely to be a good businessman. That, of course, applies
to whoever loans are made, but we want to see as many local businessmen as
possible with their own businesses in this new town which is being properly planned
and properly built.
Also we want to ensure that the greatest possible equity is held by local
people in developments at Arawa. I have seen a list of a number of projects in
which the Administration want to see at least 49 per cent equity owned by the local
people, whether it is a garage, an hotel a variety of businesses of that kind
where we will certainly offer and seek to provide at least a 49 per cent equity.
I know that there are some people how many I don't know but there are
sume people who wish to secede from the Territory of Papua and New Guinea. I
think that it would be bad for the people of Bougainville if this should now happen.
I think that as a part of a much bigger unit, the future of the people of Bougainville
will be oetter. There will be bigger markets for the produce of Bougainville, there
will be the advantages that the people of Bougainville can go to other parts of the
Territory and get work there, join the Administration there, There are all the
advantages which a large unit gives to the people as distinct from a smaller unit.
Also as the industry of the other part of the Territory grovw and develops, as
perhaps oil is discovered on the mainland, then while Bougainville remains in the
Territory, she will share in all those advantages. And that means her individual
people will share in those advantages.
Australia itself is a Federation of six different states, and Australia
is strong and each state is the stronger because it is a part cf that Federation.
If the State were out by itself, it would be weak in all ways, or weaker in all ways, / 2
L 
and it would be to the detriment of the people of that state in Australia. And I think
the people of Bougainville should think of this and see whether it does not apply to
the people of Bougainville as well.
In any case, I suggest that it is much too early to try and reach any
decision on this subject now. I think there should be much more thought given to it
by the people of Bougainville, much more discussion, meditation on the advantages
of secession, recognition of the disadvantages of secession, talk amongst the older
men and the younger people. And that should go on for some long time. Time
enough to make significant decisions on something of this kind when thetime of
independence of the Territory comes. In the meantime, let there be proper
discusbion among the people of Bougainville.
Meanwhile, Members elected to the House of Assembly from Bougainville
will now have much more opportunity to influence decisions, and the Ministerial
Members and Assistant Ministerial Members will have much more ooportunity to
influence decisions. And they can get up when they are elected by their people here,
they can get up in the House of Assembly and speak for the people here and they
can say " We want this road" or " We want that harbour" or " We want that wharf",
and they can put the views of their people in the same way as Members of Parliament
from the different States do in Australia.
That does not mean, of course, that every time one of these requests
is raised, it will be met. But it does mean that the wishes of the people of
Bougainville will be able to be known all throughout the Territory. I know the
Members you have elected and they are pretty good Members and they speak out
strongly for the people of Bougainville.
So I think it is too soon yet to talk about referendums for secession.
I think, as I said before, there should be much more time for discussion amongst
the people here. And I say this and you know it is true. It is nothing to me if
Bougainville is independent. It is nothing to Australia if Bougainville is independent.
I don't say what I say because it is of some advantage to me or to Australia but
because I believe it is of advantage to the people of Bougainville, and I want them to
have a lot more time to make up their own minds about it.
I think that is all I have to say on those subjects except to express
the hope that now that much more authority has been given to Ministerial Members,
the Administrator's Executive Council and to the House of Assembly, and decisions
that were formerly made in Canberra will now be made in the Territory, that this
will help to develop the capacity for running the Territory amongst all the peoples
of the Territory and that they will all go forward together, helping each other, and
with Australia giving help as long as it's wanted, to build up a better life, a
better economic life for all the people. 



VISIT TO PAPUA / NEW GUINEA-: FAREWELL BROADCAST
The Prime Minister, Mr._ John2Gorton_
s peaking over ABC Radio, Port Moretsby XLLY1970
Today I leave the Territory. My visit has, of necessity, been all too
short. But it has included major announcements of new policy, and I have seen
many different places, talked to many different people, and been able to come to
some cc.. nclusions. The major policy changes announced are, of course, that there would be
a significant transfer of power, power to make decisions, from Canberra to elected
representatives of Territory people.
The Administrator's Executive Council will n.-ow have authority to
allocate nioney for recurrent expenses in many fields aiA for minor works and the
House of Assembly will have to be asked to appropriate such monies in the way
recommended. These proposals, which were announced in some detail last Monday, are
significant steps along the road to ultimate self-government.
I also re-emphasised that the Australian Government bdieves the
Territory is on the road which leads to full self-government. There can be no
turning back from that road. It must be travelled to the end. Buz it is not for the
Australian Government to dictate the speed at which the ultimate goal is reached.
It is not for us to set an arbitrary date and say that on that date we will
force full self-government on the people of the Territory whether they want it or not.
Instead our attitude is that the majority of the people of the Territory should decide
when they wish full self-government and when they do this they will get what they
want. In the meantime the possibility of different regional responsibilities for
regions at different ievels of development could well be examined.
It will come as no surprise to the people of the Territory that I found
the Highland people, almost to a man, violently opposed to self-government in
1972 or on any fixed date. They do not want this before they feel they are ready
for it and of course, the Highlanders make up the majority of the whole population.
In the coastal areas, Wewak, Lae, Madang, opinion was more
divided but there was a strong majority opinion expressed at all the meetings
which I attended, that the people did not want full self -government until a time of
their own choosing. And in these areas there was for the most part, tolerance
ar~ d a working together to build a strong edifice zan the economic foundations which
have been so well laid. // 2 
In Bougainville where there has been talk in some quarters of a desire
to secede from the Territory I formed the strong impression that the people Nvished
for much more time and thought and discussion on that suggestion before they came
to any conclusion. In the Gazelle Peninsula the sadly divided state of the people was evident.
I asked for discussion between the two groups for a cessation of the violence used
by the Mautaungans, and for an attempt to arrive at solutions of problems by
majority opinion with discussion and without hate and anger. I renewed the offer of
a referendum on the multi-racial council and asked the Mautaungans to discuss their
problems with me but they refused. I can only hope that the call for reasonable
discussion will bear fruit but, in the meantime, the law must be enforced.
[ t is impossible for example, to permit land, which has been bought by
the Administration for distribution to Tolais, to be illegally occupied by squatters.
This illegal squatting is taking place at the very time when the Land Board is
considering, from Tolai and Bainings people, applications for the 350 blocks
available. If permitted to continue it will retard the chances of orderly economic
development in the Gazelle Peninsula, and, indeed, if squatting is permitted on
Administration Land bought for distribution to Tolai, what will prevent squatting
on land already held by Tolai. This matter is too important to be left
undetermined, Illegal occupation of land must and will be stopped.
The future of the Territory as a whole is, at this stage, certain in sorre
way, uncertain in others. It is certain that it will eventually attain self-government
and independence. I hope it will remain unfragmented and that different parts of it
will not secede. For if it is fragmented then each separate part will be economically
and politically less strong than the whole.
And I believe the people in every part, if secession were to take place,
would be worse off. But this question is one that will, no doubt, be settled by the
local people themselves, perhaps at the time of independence, and the answer to
this is not certain. In the meantime as new roads are built from the Highlands to the Coast,
as new districts are opened up, as more schools are built and staffed, as better
agriculture is taught and new crops are tested, as mineral wealth is exploited and
as industries arise, I think the Territory will, at an accellerated pace, go forward
to that strong independent economic position, which alo. ie can ensure continued
economic progress and continued political stability.
There must and will be more local participation in, and ownership of,
businesses and industries and there should be a continuing partnership between those
who live in the Territory and Australians.
I leave with great hope for the future of all the people of this land, and I
leave with a feeling that we all owe a great debt of gratitude to those Australians who
have selflessly taught in the missions, have selflessly brought law and order and
honest administration to what was but yesterday a primitive country and I think we
all owe, too, an equal debt of gratitude to those local people in all regions who have
helped in this task are still helping in it and are taking more and more
responsibility to continue it, for in them lies the hope of the future of the Territory. 



WORLD CONFERENCE OF ORGANISATIONS OF
THE TEACHING PRC?' ESSCN
SYDNEY 4 AUGUST 1970
speech by the 2rime Minister, Mr. Joohi Gorton
Mr. President, Distinguished Guests and Ladies and Gentlemen:
By way of a preface to what I have to say to you, may I say two things.
One is that I have learnt by experience that I am always so pleased to have the ordeal
of making a speech over that I almost always forget to open whatever it is the speech
is designed to open. And therefore in case this should happen tonight and to be on
the safe side I want at the beginning to make it quite clear that this is the opening
of thi, conference, even if I forget to zcy so at the end'
The other thing which struck me was something you referred to, Sir, in
your speech about a remark made by my colleague, the Commonwealth Minister for
Education, that nobody visits Australia by accident. I always agree with my colleagues,
and I am sure that in the present day, this is en-tirely correct. And yet in this
Bicentenary Year, my mind goes back to a gentleman who probably didn't visit
Australia entirely by design. His name was Captai-n-Cook:
Sir, this is the first international conference of teachers' organisations
ever held in Australia, and it falls in the year designated by the United Nations General
Assembly as " International Education Year". And on behalf of the Australian
Government and people, I welcome you to our country a-: d assure you we are glad
to have you with us as individuals and that we are proud indeed to be the host country
for this international conference.
The conference theme of course is " The Cualities of a Teacher" a
discussion I take it of what qualities are needed to male a good teacher and by
selecting this as the theme, I believe that the organisers of the conference have gone
right to the heart and soul of any education system for physical requirements for
education -buildings, classrooms, libraries, language laboratories and so on, and the
external aids to education such as radio, television, the projector necessary as
they are are no substitute for a good teacher. A3 aids to a good teacher they are
admirable but as a substitute for a good teacher they are abominable. So I add
congratulations to the conference on its choice of a theme,
Now I spend a good deal of my time being told by teachers what to do, and
what not to do and I expect that this will continue ( and I hope it does), so I propose
to seize this opportunity, with all the apprehension proer when a layman speaks
to experts, to put this layman's view of what the aims cf education ought to be, of
how we may best achieve these aims, and of the qualities a teacher needs to play his
full part in this achievement. 
Well, what should the aims of education be? It is no good talking of those
aims in phrases such as " modern education for a modern world" or " education geared
to the social needs of the modern community", because I am afraid that on examination
such phrases too often turn out to be only plausible lullabies designed as lullabies to
put the enquiring mind to sleep.
I would suggest that the proper, and primary, and overriding goal of
education is the creation of a community of human beings who are as nearly perfect as
human nature, and the individual variations of talent and personality will allow. This,
you will agree, is quite a goal. Yet I believe it is the ultimate goal and that it is
better for education to fail in the attempt to make a perfect human being than to
succeed in making only a fully competent technician. It is better to try to develop
perfect himan beings through education than to confine ourselves to the subsidiary
goal easier and perhaps more practicable though that may be of trying to turn
our only good scientists, or good engineers, or lawyers, or technicians or teachers.
In the words of Sir Richard Livingstone:-
" May not the desire to make first rate human beings and a
first rate society be a master whom all would serve. To see the vision of
excellence as far as our limitations allow; to get at least a glimpse of
the unchanging values of the eternal and good an: d to ma: e our infinitesimal
contributions towards a society which will embody these values is not that,
in itself, a sufficient motive for life.
I think it is and that is more than you can say for studies confined to electricity,
or the workings of computers, or medicine. Not that these studies are not good and
necessary for they are but they are subsidiary and not an end in themselves.
The good teacher indeed has many such subsidiary tasks widening the
mind and enlarging its interest, training the intelligence, teaching the multitudinous
techniques on which our civilisation is somewhat precariously based but I believe
we could successfully carry through all these subsidiary tasks and still never attain
the true goal of education as I have defined it.
For what raises man above the savage is not his inventions or his science,
his economies or his technology it is the practice of goodness and kindness towards
other men, it is the appreciation of the love of beauty a:. d truth and the application of
reason. And so whatever a child is going to be, whatever speciality he may wish
to study, or need to study in order to make a living, and: however well he may be
taught that speciality, failure to inculcate those qualities means, I suggest that
education has failed to achieve its true goal.
Well, what part do the schools of various kinds play in helping this
achievement and the teachers in those schools for I suggest that each type of school
has its definite function in achieving this aim. / 3 
I suggest that it is the primary and overriding responsibility of the
primary school to teach reading, writing, elementary mathematics, and english
grammar, for those are the tools with which knowledge is mined and unless the child
is adequately provided with such tools, the secondary school and tertiary education
can do little. Nor, I believe, can such skills be taught in an " easy" way. They should
be taught in such a way that in learning them the child automatically learns to sit down
and concentrate, to gain the habit of work, and above all, to develop, as he will under
a good teacher, the faculty of reasoning for himself. All other activities of the
primary school are secondary to these. Good spelling is useful but not essential, as
Shakespeare dramatically showed. The development cf creative work is important
but can t-ke place cut of school as well as in it. The amount of history which can be
taught to a child before the age of eleven is usually meaningless, and almost always
inaccurate and so on.
I do not say the primary school should ignore these activities. Not at all,
but I do say that the good primary school teacher will keep them in their proper
perspective and that is subordinate to the tas: k of turn_. g our a child who can write
legibly, express simple thoughts clearly and unambiguously by the use of good grammar,
read with ease, solve simple mathematical problems and reason out from data which
he knows to be true, why something else which he does not know must in fact be
true. And so what qualities does a primary school teacher need to do this? It
is claimed that one essential is a university degree and additional years of teacher
training. With some trepidation I challenge this. Such qualifications, of course, are
useful and helpful, but I doubt whether they are essential, in the sense that no one
can be a good primary school teacher without them, and I am sure that such qualifications
in themselves or of themselves, and them alone do not automatically make a good
teacher. The qualities needed for a really good primary school teacher are
dedication the feeling that one is following a calling, a vocation, which alone can
give full satisfaction in work; a genuine love of children which accepts the undoubted
fact that they can on occasion be absolute little horrors; a warm feeling of achievement
and adventure when at last, after many attempts to explain something which has not
been understood, the light of understanding suddenly lights the eye of the child being
taught. Such teachers must have the capacity to take each child and break the new
and puzzling situat ion which it is facing into simpler bits. They must discover what
the child does know, as a starting point, and lead its mind in the right order from one
bit to the next until finally the whole is understood. But what those simpler bits are,
and what is the right order, varies with each child and no-one can know it ahead of
time. That is why teaching is an art. / 4 
There are, I think, other requisites for a good primary school teacher.
Firstly, I think he should not be swayed by the tides of fashion in educational theory,
for fashions in educational theory change more slowly but just as surely as do fashions
in skirts. So he should never be swayed to the belief that, even in primary schools,
discipline and hard, repetitive, monotonous work is no longer necessary. It is
necessary where it is essential and it is very often essential.
In any branch of study some facts must be : ingrained on the mind so they
can be brought out at a second's notice and some techniques have to be followed
smoothly, quickly and automatically without conscious thought. So the teacher should
explain why such hard, monotonous work is necessary, He should tell the child the
purpose of learning some particular, repetitive, task so that even if the child doesn't
fully understand that purpose he does at least know that there is one and therefore the
task itself becomes that much less meaningless and arbitrary.
But there are occasions when what I shall call good, old fashioned drill
is necessary and a good teacher should not excuse the pupil from it, for after all,
the task of the teacher is not so much to make learning easy, as to make it an
understandable, a reasonable, a logical and an exciting thing to do.
Secondly, such a teacher should not be so carried away by his belief that
all children should be equal in ability as to shut his eyes to the demonstrable fact
that they are not.
Ruskin wrote
" Two children go to school hand in hand and spell for
half an hour o'er the same page. Through all their
lives never shall they spell from the same page more
one is presently a page ahead.... two pages.... ten
pages and evermore though each toils equally, the
interval enlarges".
The good teacher must accept that. He must encourage that ability not
fight against it, for he cannot destroy ability even in the name of equality but he can
cramp it or maim it. And he will do this just as surely by preventing a child from
developing at his natural pace as he will by trying to force it to develop faster than
it naturally would. I have so far spoken of the qualities necessary for the primary school
teacher. The secondary school teacher of quality needs all these and a greater
specialised knowledge for it is in the secondary school that the mining of knowledge
really begins. It is here that the tools provided by the primary schools are tested.
It is here that the process of specialization starts. All I shall say of this is that
whatever specialization is selected, the centre of studies should be as I said
at the beginning the study of human striving, and hurna:: greatness in action in the
past, and the study of various human ideas of how to build that ideal society, which
gives the greatest possible freedom to each individual, and avoids the licence which
follows if that individual interferes with others' rights. 
And also each pupil ought to study at least one subject on the curriculum
so thoroughly, and in such depth, that he begins to know what true knowledge really
is and how much industry, thoroughness, precision, and persistence it requires if
he is to have even a distant sight of it. And so the teacher here needs not only the
qualities of being able to impart knowledge, of being able to make learning an exciting
experience, but also, a much greater knowledge of that subject or subjects which
he teaches. The numbers receiving education in Australia are growing so dramatically,
the numbers of pupils remaining at school to the final year of secondary education
are increasing so greatly, that I doubt if there are enough young Australians possessed
of what I have described as the qualities needed by an ideal teacher.
But it is no bad thing to set out an ideal even if it cannot at once be
attained. And indeed I think that is the object of the thene chosen by this conference.
Sir, I have shown temerity tonight as a layman in speaking to experts,
and I have, I expect, been slightly pompous I hope only slightly, but may I in
conclusion close by saying something on my own behalf which demonstrates that
I have more than a passing interest in this subject.
I was placed in charge of Commonwealth Government activities in
education some seven years ago, and was the first Comrnmonwealth Minister of
Education. At that time the Commonwealth Governmen-t was spending $ 67.5 million
a year. Today it is spending $ 312 million a year some five times as much. I
put into operation a scheme of supplying science laboratories, properly planned and
equipped, to all secondary schools in Australia. I had adopted a scheme to provide
libraries not just repositories for books but modern libraries complete with
teaching aids, in all secondary schools in Australia. I inaugurated a scheme designed
to revolutionise and re-equip all secondary technical schools in Australia. I brought
in a scheme to provide eight now ten million dollars a year for building
teachers colleges. I inaugurated a scheme for providing colleges of advanced
education as alternatives to universities in tertiary education.
I rejected the previous concept that the state should penalise children
whose parents send them to non-government schools by refusing such schools any
assistance from the taxpayers' funds, even though the ; parents of such children
contributed to those funds. I still reject that concept and I am proud to do so, for it
is educationally illiterate and economically absurd.
I put into operation a scheme for providing scholarships for the last two
years of secondary school, and in technical schools.
Sir, I have been interested. And if the ideal physical requirements for
education have not been attained and of course they have not at least we have taken
steps towards such attainment, as you are seeking to tak e steps towards the attainment
of an ideal teacher. Because of that interest that is one reason I have been
emboldened to speak to you tonight. Another is because you all bear such responsibility
for moulding the citizens of the world of tomorrow, and yet another is because you
asked me. I thank you for it and I have done, and this conference is open. 



N. S. W. CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES ANNUAL Dli'INER
SYDNEY, NSW -AUGUST 1970
õ ! ech by the Prime Minister, Mr. 12ohn Gorton
Mr. President and Gentlemen:
Sir, the Budget will be presented in less than two wee.' s, and so I think it
would be as well for me to start this address with a disclaimer. Because anything a
Minister or a Prime Minister says at such a time is liable to analysis and dissection
and distortion by the gentlemen of the Press: I wish to make it clear right now that
this will not be a profitable exercise because anything I say to you tonight in general
terms is not to be translated into specifics by way of guessing at what the Budget might
contain. And those gentlemen whose speculation is sometimes inclined to be high, wide
and handsome, would do better to wait patiently a few more days when they can have the
satisfaction of commenting on facts instead of on suppositions. And that is the disclaimer
I want to make right at the start.
It is a difficult thing to talk to you tonight so close to the Budget because it IS
so close to the Budget.
Sir, having said that, I thank you tor your welcome here tonight, and I am
glad to be here because it gives me the opportunity to express my respect and I do
have that respect for the manufacturing industry which employs some 28% of the
Australian work force directly and a further 20% 7 of the Australian work force indirectly
in servicing the needs of manufacturing industry. Those industriec which have raised
the value of the output from factories in Australia from about 030 million just
before the Second World War, to $ 17, 000 million today a very signif icant increase
as you will agree. Industries which have raised their contribution to our export income from
$ 198 million or 11% of total exports ten years ago to $ 782 million or 19. 7% of total
exports today again a very significant contribution, showing that manufacturing
industry along with minerals and rural industry has become one of the big three
contributing to Australia's growth and wealth. This is something, I think, of which
you can all, looking back on the sixties, looking back on the plans you have made,
now looking at the fruition of those plans, be proud. But that is in the past.
As we look ahead, what do we see? We see great problems to be overcome
in our rural industries, many of which are beset by falling world prices and harassed
at the moment by the ravages of drought, yet industries which ha ve managed in the
year just past to increase export earnings by some $ 200 million over the year before.
But on other fronts, we see great opportunities for new growth and for
greater economic strength. Our overseas balances are healthy and they should become
even healthier as the output of minerals increases, as it undoubtedly will, and as the
value of that output for export is further increased by the processing within Australia
which will take place so that we will be exporting ingots instead o! earth. 
And our balances will im prove further as import replacement grows, as it
will, for example, in oil ( which I was delighted to see the " Financial Review" agreed
was going to be sold in Australia at a price at least as good as it could be bought from
abroad and possibly better. Now this again will increase our surplus of exports
over imports. Other contributions will be the application of new and vigorous management
techniques which is up to you gentlemen in secondary industry, by the extension
of the amount industry spends on research, which is up to you gentlemen in secondary
industry, because the Government in Australia provides a greater proportion of the
amount spent on research in industry than does the government inI any other country;
by the increased use of automation these will all increase the value of output per
man hour. Added to that the measures already taken by the Government will, I believe,
retain in Australian ownership a greater proportion of that expanding industry and
therefore retain inside Australia a greater degree of the profits ofL that expanding
industry. So the barometer of future progress and of future economic growth stands
really at " set fair"', subject to what I now have to say. Because wihat I have said only
means that great growth and great progress can be made,, it does riot necessarily
mean it will be made. It can be slowed, or even halted should we find inflation growin g
faster than that of the countries with which we trade and to which we must sell at
world prices. And in particular the significant growth and contribuition of secondary
industry to cur exports could be badly affected if this happened.
Sir, in Australia governments can take action on thiS front, but in Australia
decisions of the Arbitration Court have an enormous effect on the economny generally,
no matter what a government does. If wages are increased without regard to increased
overall production, then there will be benefit for none, and ultimately detriment for all.
We could be priced out of the export markets we have won. The demands of the
community for more sclools, more hospitals, more roads, more defence and more
public development may not be met. And the increased wages to the individual will
not in the end buy more to take home. They will indeed be fool's gold.
And as a by-product, the rural industries and the fixed income-earners will
be the greatest sufferers in the community, and the threat of that happening is the
only zhreat which I can see to our achieving that growth and that progress of which I spoke
and which is within our grasp.
Now if we are to achieve the destiny which is ours to attain, there is a heavy
responsibility not only on government, but also on trade union leaders and on the
Arbitration Court to see that industry is not called upon to pay in wages sums which
represent more than the value of what industry can produce. AnLd, conversely, if the
overall growth of industries, which is possible, occurs, if the value of production per
man-hour increases, as it can under good management, there will be a corresponding
responsibility then on trade union leaders, on the Arbitration Court, and on
employers to see that that overall increase results in increased rewards for the labour
force in Australia. / 3 
We are, as a government, aware of both these facts, and because we are
aware of th-em, we propose to intervene in the oil industry case shortly to come before
the Arbitration Court. And there we propose to argue that it would be disastrous for
Australia if the principles previously accepted were reversed, and if it was thQught
that an tndustry which was profitable or a company which was profitable should, because
it was profitable, be called upon to pay more than industry generally could pay to
those who worked for it.
For if this were to be accepted in the case of those industries which are,
for one reason or another, fully profitable, then what would happen to those industries
such as the railways, the electricity supplies, the industries run by governments which
almost by definition are not profitable, or the industries run by some sections of
private enterprise which are sometimes not as profitable'
There would be no incentive for labour to serve in theSe industries, and
either they would be starved of labour or the community as a whole would have to make
up to an unprofitable industry wage standards which a proffitable industry alone could
meet and that in turn would lead to the inflation which is the only threat I see to the
progress of this country.
Sir, if we can achieve in this nation, with good faith and with commonsense
on all sides, an agreement that only when productivity increases can wages be increased,
then there is a real prospect of increasing prosperity for the individual and for
manufacturing industry. And there will be an increasing capacity for governments to
provide those public services and amenities which the nation requires and which
governments can only supply if industry provides the wealth for governments to tax
in order to supply those services:
I am sure that this can best be attained by and through the arbitration
and conciliation system as we have it today. I believe we should reject 1 0se talk of
finding something better than that system which we have had for so long, of going into
collective bargaining, of picking off one industry after another, or one section of
industry after another by industrial blackmail. And I believe, too, that nothing in the
long run would be more damaging to the cause of organised labour and to the stability
of industry and commerce in Australia than to reject or replace an arbitration system
which, if it Is to be fully effective, must have the ultimate capacity to apply teeth in its
judgments. An Arbitration Court, acting impartially, seen to be independent in its
judgments, seen to be uninfluenced by either trade union leaders or: employers'
representatives, and acting only on what it sees to be the merits of a case after that
case has been presented in the Court, is niot perfect, but it is the bast method of
ensuring fairness that has yet been devised. And provided it act.-on all those criteria
I have set out, it is the best method of attaining the confidence both of employers and
of labour. Sir, by the end of this year, the Liberal,/ Country Party Coalition will have
beet, in office twenty-one years, and in any other audience but this, at that stage there
would have been a call of " too long": They have been years of solid progress in / 4 
government, in government enter i-rises and in private enterprises, and much of what I
said at the beginning of this speech of the achievements of industry in Australia, has
been made possible by the climate created in that time by those governments.
Our population in that time has passed from 8 million to 13 million.. Our
labour force is fully employed. Our economic base has been broadening tremendously.
Our export trade is expanding. Our living standards, including our care for the aged,
the ill and the needy, have been improved. We. grow stronger in defence, and we have
honoured our international obligations in three conflicts KLorea, Malaya and Vietnam.
We have a new understanding of our regional involvement through our M4ole Australian
community. We see our destiny as being shaped by the course of events in South-East
Asia and the Pacific, and we are actively sharing in many activities kh ich will determine
how straight and true that course will be and where it will lead us as an ultimate goal.
All this you have achieved we have achieved. And in all this we are still
concerned, as jointly we make our way through these exciting 1970' s, and all this in
a sense depends on government action. But in turn that governme-nt action depends on
the wealth pi1oduced by all the enterprises in Australia. The main elements of growth,
the numbers in the work force and what they produce are strong, thianks to immigration
and to improving technology and other factors. And this has giver:. us, in the non-farm
factor, and average growth in the area in, which you are concerned, gentlemen, an
average growth of more than 6 per cent at constant prices in recent years.
I think our immigration programme has been a great success. I think
without it we would be a poorer country, very hard pressed for labour, limited in our
expansion and inhibited in our planning. We have to reme-mber that while that programme
is costly arid initially inflationary because the new immigrant calls for more from the
community, narticularly if he has a family, than he can initially -provide to the
community, yet that increasing work force is made up of people who have not been reared
and educated at our expense, but at the expense of the countries from which they come.
And that is an off setting value to us of millions of dollars for a start.
We have recently decided, as you know, to have a comprehensive review
made of all aspects of our immigration programme to see how best it will fit our
changing needs in terms of economic growth and social and cultural diversification. But
I want to say to you tonight that is not in any way to question the n~ eed for continuing
immigration. We must continue to have a high intake in the seventies, no matter what
bank brings out a statement querying the value of it.
But I think it is sensible to take a loo~ k in depth at the progress and the
results of the scheme since it began soon after the end of World V'a r 11, to learn
whether and how we can improve the contribution which migrants make, to learn
whether and how vie can retain in this country a greater number of the migrants who
come here, and to learn whether and how we can reduce the initial inflationary costs
as the migrants come. And this is the sole objective of this examination. 0 
In the years ahead, we face great changes, arid some them indeed will be
of considerable magnitude to this nation if Britain, for example, goes into the Common
Market. But we can take up a continuing challenge to become increasingly strong
industrially, to extend the extraction of the raw wealth from our coil into integrated
industries which embrace processing and manufacturing, and to reconstruct some of
those industries on an econompic basis which, at the moment may riot be fully economically
viable. We must manufacture more of the things we now imrn. t. We must export
more of the things we now make in Australia. I do appeal to you not to rest upon your
laurels, not to say because in the last year we have increased our exports of manufactured
products so much, not to say because we are now contributing nearly 20 per cent of
exports, tb-erefore we should do no more. Thbis is not so. For every individual in this
room, there is an opportunity to improve and increase the exports from manufacturing
industries we now have. To do it either directly, or by joint ventures in other countries,
so that raw materials go from Australia, manufacturing is done abroad, but Australians
are part of the manufacturing done abroad and draw their profits from it, for that is
export too. This is something you must do in this decade of the seventies, and I believe
you are headed that way, but I believe that this and progress inside our own country
can only occur if we keep the free enterprise system Intact and if vie maim am the climate
that has led to the growth in the last twenty years. For the upward trend is twenty years
old, and the concept of government working with industry, of the -public sector and the
private sector living together, and of one not trying to destroy the other has, I think,
been the foundation of the progress we have made and cari be the orly foundation if we
are to makL-e progress in the future.
There are a r~ umber of pitfalls about one I mentioned. But another is the
concept described as socialism. What is socialism? It is. not social action by a government
because if it were, then it would be wrong for a government to provide toads or
dams or irrigation services or electricity services or any of the multitudinous things
governments provide without question. It is not governmental partnership with private
enteiprise because if it was then it would be wrong for the governnlent to have provided
the millions of dollars that it has provided to help private enterprise develop and
secondary industry develop.
But what it is and where it is wrong is when it seeks to say, as it did years
ago to some people " You must not engage in banking. You must not engage in some
field of enterprise because the Government will not allow you to do so. That is
clearly wrong. It is wrong, I think, when it seeks to place limitations on proper
rewards for hard work or new inventions or the proper running of an industry, and price
control that great panacea of socialism is in fact, when you boil it down, seeking to
provide profit control no matter whether the person making the profits is making a
cheaper good and selling it cheaper, but making profits as a result of it. That is wrong. / 6 
And its intrusion into planning is also wrong.
Treasury Bulletin called " The Australian Economy 1970",
in this paper says this. It speaks of the chances we have,
some of the difficulties we face, and it says I have here before me a
and the very last sentence
the opportunities we have,
" This is a problem for Government policy, but within
the framework of such policy, the outcome will be
determined by judgments formed, decisions made and
initiatives taken at innumerable points throughout
the economy."
And that is private enterprise, and that is what we must retain the chance for
judgments to be made, for decisions to be made, for initiatives to be taken Mi thout
instructions or control from governments on those who have to take those decisions.
That is a definition of private enterprise. That we propose to defend. I believe that by
defending it you will have the greatest opportunities to advance the interests of this
nation and I am sure that you will take advantage of those opportunities and of the
climate we propose to provide in the future as you have in the past.
That is why I propose the toast
Australian Industry. 



QUEENSLAND YOUNG* LIBERALS
YOUTH DIDNN3MR
Brisbane, QId 6 AUGUST 1970
õ pqef~ bythePrime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. President, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Mention has been made of a generation gap, and that is a subject to which
I have been devoting some thought because we hear so much about it. And I find that
I have come to the conclusion that it doesn't exist. You would know better than i,
whether it does or not. I can only say that I don't feel that it exists.
Of course there are occasiorally difficulties in communication between an
older man and a younger one, but there are equally difficulties in communication
between an older man and another older one and a young man and a young one. It
is n~ t a -matter, 1. suggest, of age, but a matter of whether one talks the same language,
thinks the same way and can carry on a dialogue. And I think that in Australia today,
as far as I have experienced it, I have been able to carry on dialogues, discussions
with young people, including my own sons, who disagree with almost everything I dc-'
But that doesn't prevent a reasonable exchange of ideas which sometimes ends in
agreement to differ, and sometimes in agreement to concur.
I have some doubt as to whether the generation gap of which we hear so
much really does exist, but as I say, you would know better that 1.
We hear of a generation of dissent, and I doubt whether that is true Of
course, now as alwa'ys in the past, young peoplc question the values that have been
handed on to them, question the customs which have been handed on to them.. They
always have. I can remember, and I am sure that I am the same as everybody else,
at one stage thinking that my own father just simply didn't understand anything about
what was going on at all. But as I got a little older, I realised he had learnt a lot in
the last few years.
But this is natural questioning, proper questioning of young people when they
find themselves inheriting a world and responsibility for trying to see that it becomes
a better one. So I doubt whether what we hear about so much is as widespread as it
is claimed to be.
Vl1hat vias said about the effect of the media in spreading these views again
is, I think, true, and true because news s news. A dog bites a man, that's natural.
If a man bites a dog, it's news because it is unusual and abnormal. And if that is so,
then the concentration of media and television on people invading university rooms,
of people sitting down in roadways.. the very fact that that is concentrated on
indicates that it is unusual and that it is abnormal, and I believethat it is. ./ 2 
I believe that at any university, for exanmle, to which you may go, 90-95 percent Of
the students there are interested in their work, in their studies, in their sport, in
parties, in the normal things that make u-. p the life of young people.
And, of course, what goes on arid what is not recorded are the contributions
that youth makes to the community, the oositive contribution and I have taken
out some facts showing what the young people i n Queensland have done, which have
never made headlines, which have never been reported and which I think are more
typical of the young people of Australia than the things that do get before you.
Students of the Queensland University raised 000 for charity during their
commemoration week earlier this year. Students of the Queensland University raised
000 foi the aid of earthquake victim,--during World University Service week. Law
students at the u-niversity are providing a free legal aid scheme in co-operation with
a church's " life-line" activities. Studenits at this school, the Church of England Grammar
have raised $ 5,013 from their pocket-money this year to aid charity projects, and have
taken part in such activities as cleaniing up,: the beaches in Queensland. All these
things, I believe, are more typical of thle appro. ach of the youth of Australia than are
the things to which greater attention terifds to be given by the media.
But it is right and proper that questioning by youth should occur, questioning
of the world which has been handed on to them. And what sort of a world is it? dow
does youth see it' I naturally, do not k--now the answer to this, but I do know that the
world that is handed on to you is a much better one to live in than it used to be a
generation ago.
It is not so very long in Australia since there was immense industrial
injustice, so that people if they wished to earn their living on the wharves, would have
to go and stand in a bull ring and be Dicked out and hired for a day; perhaps chosen by
favouritism or chosen by a foremarn if they were prepared to pay part of the wages they
earned to that foreman. It is not so very long ago since that happened.
It is not so very long ago sice people feared unemployment and depression
and when a man would never know whether he could maintain his famii3: from one year,
to the next because unemployment and the fear of it hung over his head. And that, too,
led to industrial and economic injustice. it is not so very long ago sin ce the poverty
in this country vias so widespread that it is almost impossible for you, I think, to envisage
what it was like. And so there has beer: iimprovement in the world compared with what
it used to be. There have been great advances in combating poverty. There have been great
advai~ ces in giving economic security to mankind. There have been great advances in
the elimination injustice. And 3o, hovaever this present world may appear today
through the eyes of youth, it is much better than it was. And my generation can take
some credit, I t hink, for having built it into what it is today. / 3 
3.
But now or very soon the results of your present questioning have got to
come to fruition. Your thoughts and asp-Irations will have to be put into practice, How
then would you want to improve the world as it is today?
This is the first question youth should ask itself, I think. How they wish to
improve the world, because until they know how and where they want to go, until they
know the kind a! improvements they wiant to make, they have very little chance indeed
of affecting any improvements because they don't know the paths they wish to follow.
Perhaps you would say, " We wiould like to build a world where there is no
poverty at all as there is undoubtedly too much now. We would like to build a world
where we had more feeling of involvement and of fulfilment in our lives. Where sheer
material benefits were not held in as great esteem as they are now, but rather a
comrnunit,, to which we could contribute and fromr which and in w~ hich we could develop
our own personality and feel a satisfaction in living". Perhaps these are the things
that you would seek as improvements. I hope they are because they are the kind of
improvements that I feel we can -make and should make in the years ahead.
. Lh ere will be difficulties in the way. Firstly, it will be necessary,
essential, to maintain that political freedom under which we operate at present. There
has been no threat to it in the lifetime of moost of you, but there have been threats of
that political freedom being overthrown in the past and there may be dangers of it
being attached from outside in the future.
But perhaps more significantly that freedom could be lost inside without
invasion. We see now tolerance carried to too great a length because although tolerance
is one of the essentials for a proper commrunity, yet there are some things which
cannot be tolerated. For example, you cannot safely tolerate intolerance, and we see
examples of intolerance in the name of dissent and in the name of civic rights. And
it will be necessary for young peo. ple to make their minds up as to where the line is drawn
when tolerance cannot be extended any further, and at what point it is necessary to
defend the civic rights of the vast majority against attack in the name of civic rights of
a minority. These will, I think, be difficulties, not great difficulties, not great but
nevertheless onies which will exist and do exist i this country.
But it will not be enough mnerely to maintain political freedom. It is essential
that it be properly used, I mean. by that that it is essential that if people are to
contribute to a country, then the contrasting and conflicting ideas whicn are advanced
by political parties ought to be critically examined by each individual, ought to be
analysed by each individual. And if faith is to be kept with those who have fought
for political freedom, then not by slogants, but by applied intelligence, should each
individual decide what ideas they wish to accept. 6 / 4 
4.
Side by side with that political freedom, I hope that you will be able to
advance still further towards the economic freedom which some time ago we did not have
at all, which now we have in large measure, but which we can have in even greater
measure if we take the opportunity that this Australia gives us today.
This won't be easy. It won't be easy to abolish poverty unless enough wealth
is produced to enable that to happen. There is no easy way to run a country or to live
in it. It is essential in every sphere of life that there should be hard work, that there
should be the application of intelligence, that there should be a training of the mind,
that there should be a willingness to contribute to the community.
I think the youth of Australia today have those qualities in greater measure
than did we. I have the utmost hope for the future of this country because of that belief.
At any rcLe, the whole thing shortly will be in your hands. The fact that you are here
tonight irdicates a willingness to participate, a desire to participate, and if that is true,
then you have another weapon we did not have you have greater opportunities for
education to enable that cont ribution to be the better applied.
There are some eternal values, and those I think are these. We must have in
a proper community, kindness the one towards the other; tolerance within the limits of
which I have spo: en; sacrifice and work. Because I think you have these qualities and
because I know the opportunities for their use are in Australia more than they are in
any other country in the world, then I feel that you will meet the challenges before you.
I hope that at some time in twenty, or thirty years, one of you perhaps will stand where
I am standing today and talk to those who then will be young and you won't be because
youth is the stuff that does not endure and that vou will be able to say to the young to
whom you talk and my generation i:. herited a world that was not bad but by our
efforts we have made it so much better." ( And the young to whom you are talking will
probably look at you and think, " VWell you haven't done much about it, really, and it is
up to us to make it better still in the future. But if you can stand here and say that
and know that you are speaking the truth, then I think you will have contributed to the
building of a great nation, to the building of a great society and 1: 0o the development of
your own individual capacity which is quite possibly the most important thing of all.
And that I think is all I have to say to you. I did not want to talk on politics
tonight. I did riot want to talk orn issues of the hour, for they are ephemeral, they go,
but the results of applying one's mind and heart and spirit to trying to better the
society in which one is living are not ephemeral...... and this is an c, bjective I hope
will remain with you for the whole of your lives. Indeed, I think it will because I
finish as I began by saying I do not thirnk this is a generation of dissent or disenchantment.
I believe that for the vast majority of youth it is a generation which offers opportunities
unknown before and that the vast majority of youth are prepared to accept and use those
opportunities, and I hope I am right in that. But I am putting before you things as an
older man sees them. You will make up your own mind whether what I have said is
true or not. 



SWEDISH GIFT TO MARK BI-CENTENARY YEAR
Presentation by His Excellency, Mr Per Anger,
the Swedish Ambassador, at Parliament House,
Canberra, A. C. T. 21 AUGUST 1970
~ pech~ y hePrime Minister. Mr john Gorton
Your Excellency, Parliamentary Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen:
Tis with pleasure that I accept, on behalf of the
Australian Gove:: -nment, this gift from Sweden, and I would ask
you, Sir, to convey . xur appreciation and thanks to your Government
and people. We are delighted that a nation which had associations
with our beginninigs 200 years ago should be honouring our Bi-Centenary
in this way. Today's ceremony is well timed. It is 200 years
ago tomorrow 22 August 1770 that Captain Cook landed on
Possession Island and made claim to what was later called New
South Wales. The engravings on this crystal plinth remind us
of the botanical and zoological discoveries of that great Swedish
botanist, Daniel Solander, who was with Cook on his historical
voyage of discovery along Australia's Eastern coastline.
Even at that time, of course, Sweden was already
a highly civilised country and had laid the foundations for that
craftsmanship for which it is renowned,
Most Members ind Senators are familiar with the
Orrefors vase which was presented to this Parliament by the
Swedish Chamber of Commerce to commemorate the opening of
Parliament Hou!: 2 in 1927. This plinth makes a splendid companion
piece. / 2
tN r 
-2-
And it is a mark of our developing interest, Sir,
that in a week or two an Australian Trade Fair will open in
Stockholm, you: x capital city. I hope this Fair will help to
stimulate Sweden's interest in Australia, just as this ceremony
today will help : o stimulate our interest in Sweden.
We are glad that you are sharing our history
with us in this way and with such an elegant gift. We thank you,
Sir, and we tharnk your Government. 



TENTH F. A. O. REGIONAL CONFERENCE
FOR ASIA AND THE FAR EAST
Canberra, ACT 27 AUGUST 1970
Speech b the Prime Ministers Mr John Gorton
Mr. Wells, Mr. Anthony, Ministerial Colleagues, Federal and State,
Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is not my function today to open this Conference, because that is the
role of my colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry. But it is my function to
welcome you all here. It is my function and my pleasure to do so in the name of
the Australian Government and the Australian nation.
I think we are privileged to have you here in our national capital for
this Tenth Regional Conference which is the first such Regional Corfere-. ce to be
held in Australia but not I hope, and I am sure the last. And from nherever
you have travelled to be here today, you and we have one objective in common, one
thing in mind which we hope we may advance towards as a result of thic Conference,
and that is the eventual elimination of hunger amongst mankind, and therefore the
improvement of the health and the wellbeing of mankind throughout the world.
My own country is proud to be associated with the work of the Food and
Agriculture Organisation and it gives me today an opportunity to pay tribute to the
contribution made by the FAO over the past quarter of a century. I know you
already have a planned programme covering the next fifteen years and we wish
you well in this vital and humane task.
It is a matter of some pride with us, if you will forgive a little national
sentiment on an international occasion, that one of our earlier Prime Ministers,
the late Lord Bruce, in other capacities, was closely associated with the foundation
days of FAO. Way back in the " Hungry Thirties", at the old League of Nations in
Geneva, in 1935, Lord Bruce made the plea: " Let the nations of the world
collaborate to provide sufficient food to avoid hunger". That was the challenge
which, at a later date, and in another forum, was taken up, and so FAG was born
with Lord Bruce as the first Chairman of its Advisory Committee the World
Food Council. That same continuing challenge brings us all here today and my nation
today has that same approach as Lord Bruce had when he was our Prime Minister
so long ago. I believe that communication, partnership and participation amongst
nations are the key factors in trying to meet this very great challenge. We have
got to communicate across the distances that separate us. There is no room for
isolationism of thinking in this field in the world today or, indeed, in any field. / 2 
2.
And so we must share our knowledge and learn from each other's experiences, and
learn from each other's adv nces and learn from each other's mistakes. And
how better can we do it than by constant contact between officials of our Governments
and by meetings such as this today.
For our part, partnership is a first principle in many fields bilaterally,
within regional and special bodies like ECAFE and FAO, and globally through the
United Nations community Pi. d many trading, commodity and other arrangements
of one kind or another.
And in the Asian region which is still predominantly agricultural,
we in Australia see ourselves as joined with you in a partnership which will be
directly involved with the rest of the world in the forthcoming Second Development
Deca: e promoted by the United Nations. What we have already tried to do in this
region, what we are now trying to do despite the difficulties which hamper us and
you and they are considerable may, I hope, offer lessons for other regions
and for the world at large, for co-operation as the decade unfolds, to attack the
great problems which face mankind.
But we have to remember that in this region we have the most diverse
assembly of peoples, cultures, resources and standards of living in the world,
the most diverse. And the world itself is caught up with a population explosion
cf gigantic proportions. There is much to be done. There is a daunting task
facing this conference and those of us who are interested. The gap between the
hungry and the satisfied is still very wide and that, Mr. President, brings me
to participation. This, of course, is what gives meaning to a partnership. Ln simple
terms, it means to use an Australian colloquialism " let's be in it", and the
fact that we are all here today is evidence enough, I think, that we are all'In it".
Perhaps, I might mention indeed most of you would know that just
before this conference we had here in Canberra the Third Far East Regional
Conference of the Freedom From Hunger Campaign. This campaign gets
eno mous support in Australia because everybody can be in it. Australians as
individuals give generously in this extra effort to tackle the world's food
problems. And I like to feel that we here have some direct understanding of the
problems of the developing countries in our region because of our own responsibilities
not only in tl he. gion, not specifically to developing countries in the region who are
away from us, but particularly because of our close partnership with the
Territories of Papua and New Guinea. / 3 
I like to feel that here, too, in that area we are communicating with
the people, under difficulties there are always difficulties when peoples seek
to communicate but we are communicating, we are trying to be in partnership
and participating in the development of their nationhood and of their capacity to
help in this great task of providing food for the hungry millions of the world.
Now, Sir, I feel that the time has come for me to finish, but in doing
so, I would just like to add this. There is taking place in Asia now what we all
know as a " green revolution". The earth is yielding more for its people in
response to planned programmes and applied skills but success has also brought
its problems. The world prices of basic foods are falling. Export markets
are shrinking. There are new exportable surpluses in some countries and there
is ar unsatisfied demand for fertilisers and for other assistance to growing food
and this while millions still go hungry. And so we have surpluses of rice stored
in Japan enough for perhaps two years' consumption for its people; surpluses
of wheat being raised in Australia, surpluses in other countries, while so many
still go hungry. So the task is to secure a proper balance for our agricultural
economies in the region. I think we should perhaps place more emphasi" on
industrial crops, on the development of forest products, for example, and to
encourage industries linked to agriculture to provide work for the people and
new products to export. This, I think, would go hand in hand, perhaps, with
the correction of the imbalance between export surpluses of food and the lack of
capacity of so many people to have food.
Aid side by side with this, there must be that participation, that
partnership, that sharing of knowledge of which I have already spoken.
If this can come about and I believe it can not without e-ffort, not
without thought, not without time, not without difficulty, but if it can come about,
then the world will be a happier and a richer place for us all. And those who give
their time and effort to this task and to discussions with their colleagues -such
as take place here today, will have played a real part in making the world a
happier and richer place for us all.
So I repeat my welcome A very warm welcome to you all, and I
wish you in which I include us every success in our deliberations. 



L I TRAINING SEMINAi. ON DRUGS
CANB: RRA, A. C. T 7 SEPTEMBER 1970
-Seec by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Mr. Minister, Your Excellencies, Commonwealth and , tate Ministers,
Officers of the Crown, Federal and State, and our Vi itors from Overseas:
Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the introduction. This Seminar, in one
way, is a function that one can scarcely be pleased to oa-en, because it is not
pleasing that there should be a need for a Seminar to . revent the abuse of drugs.
Yet, in another way, because there is that need, and because it is paramount, it
is pleasing indeed to see the effort that is being made, of which this Seminar
is a part, to combat one of the greatest menaces of our time.
I welcome experts from the United Statec3 Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs who will assist with the technical lectures, and I welcome the
representatives of the Overseas Narcotics Bureau in South East Asia. To that
I add a very warm welcome to the students on the course that is the drug
enforcement officers from within and from without Australia.
The task before us all is a truly international one. Our object is to impede
and, where we can, to eliminate illicit drug traffic and drug abuse. I believe
this Seminar will be a major cortribution to that end. It is the first centralised
course of its kind in Australia and it is being presented by the Commonwealth
Bureau of Narcotics in conjunction with the Training Centre of the Department
of Customs and Excise.
In a very real sense, the task before all of you here is the task of
protection of protecting individual citizens from the madness and death which
they can inflict upon themselves by drug abuse, and of -protecting the community
against the crimes to which such addicts can be driven, should the supply of
their narcotics be cut off.
It is distressing to find that in Australia, where we have so much going for
us, the habit of drug-taking is increasing, as it is increasing amongst our
neighbours in South-East Asia. And it is distressing to find that the sources of
supply are so numerous.
It would be easy for us to say " This is a problem for the countries where
the drugs are produced. Let us stop the menace at its source." But it isn't
as simple as that. For one things, we don't control the activities of the
countries which are the sources of these narcotics. And though destruction at
the source of supply is the ideal and absolute way of killing this vice, if we
cannot do it, there are at least two other points at which successful attacks
can be launched. / 2 
There are the supply routes, which are world wide, and there are the
markets at the end of those supply routes, of which Australia is one. Because
the supply routes are spread throughout the world and more than one country
the markets at the end of those supply routes, it is because of that that this is
such an international problem and that is why this Seminar is so international
in character. How well you succeed in the objects you have that this Seminar is
designed to further will be, I believe, a factor i-n the standard of our societies
for generations to come. And what is happening in our own country, Australia,
today? The truth is that drug abuse is increasing. The smugglers are getting
more numerous and more cunning. There are more pushers at work and they are
fir. Jing more customers among our young people. This must be stopped and we
must marshal all the skills we have to stop it.
The warnings from other countries Wh ich have suffered the problem longer
are quite loud and clear. The drug trail is the downhill trail to crime, to despair,
to poverty, to madness and to death.
Not many years ago the worst drug evil we had in Australia was a bit of
opium-smoking and a few opium dens in the back streets of our big cities, and
this was a problem of quite manageable proportions. But now it's hashish,
marijuana, LSD harder narcotics and more and more young people are
" taking trips" and getting " hooked" and more and more " pads" are to be found in
areas of our cities. The doctors, the hospitals, the psychiatrists and the social
workers, all know what tne Customs and the police and the couts know that
this illicit traffic and these dangerous habits are gettingw orse, and that one of
the greatest tasks before us is to stop it all as soon and as completely as we can.
It isn't easy to quote actual figures on the grovwth of drug abuse, but in the
last eighteen months, seizures of illegal drugs have increased by 300 per cent
and in the last three months drugs to the value of a quarter of a million dollars
have been intercepted. They came from half a dozen countries in Asia, from the
United States and from South Africa.
In 1968, 152 young people between 14 a-id 19 years of age were charged
with drug offences and a further 139 between the ages of 20 and 34. Well, you
may say that isn't many, but there are many who do not get caught and there is
the unhappy fact that the numbers are growing with frightening speed.
For in 1969, not 152 but 284 youngsters between 14 and 19 were charged,
and not 139 between the ages of 20 and 34 were charged but 424 in that age
group, which is a two and a half fold increase in one year. / 3 
The drugs are coming through all sorts of channels from external sources;
some are smuggled into Australia in false compartments of suitcases and bags,
some in household appliances such as food mixers and ctereo speakers and bongo
drums and so on. But you know this better than I do. And yet others come by
mail or are thrown overboard from ships in our ports.
Well, we are developing our own responses to these practices and our
counter-measures are having some success. The strength cf our Narcotics
Squad has been trebled since it was first formed and it is proposed to increase the
numbers again in the near future.
But perhaps I can sum up our task by giving you five points to which the
Australian public should direct their minds.
First the drug traffic and drug abuse in Australia have grown at an alarming
rate of geometric progression in the past few years.
Second, there has been an alarming increase in the number of new addicts
in the younger age groups.
Third, there are about 5, 000 recorded narcotic offenders in Australia.
Marijuana is the most abused drug and in the last three years the quantity smuggled
has increased dramatically.
Fourth, most of the drug traffic is in the larger cities, though I understand
there is evidence that preparations are being made in the smaller Australian
cities to extend this traffic.
And, fifth, there is some production and manufacture of marijuana and LSD
going on in Australia.
These points give you some idea of the problem here. This course
beginning today will, I hope, be a powerful reinforcement for a continuing attack
on the problem. The course itself came into being because for some time
Commonwealth and State Ministers concerned with health and law enforcement
had been discussing the increase of drug abuse in Australia. They set up a
National Standing Control Committee and set it to work to study this problem.
That Committee recommended a specialised central training course for
officers engaged in the suppression of illicit drug traffic. The Ministers decided
to have that course, and my colleague, Mr. Chipp, offered the services cf his
Department to run it.
Those of you who are here to attend that course are directly involved in
the attack on the traffic. You can be assured that the Governments and people of
Australia are completely behind you in your work. / 4
I at. 
For in Australia it has been-continually emphasised that where there has
been a co-ordinated and co-operative effort by the various agencies here, and in
Asia, and elsewhere this has had a marked effect on the drug traffic. I think this
course will be a good example of the kind of co-operation which will lead to that
effect. It will be up to you to interrupt the sources of supply. It will be up to you to
apprehend the pushers and the addicts. It will be up to the courts to see that those
who peddle these powders of death receive proper sentences so that they, the
courts, can join in the protection which you are giving to the public of Australia.
Now one final point. We recognise that the problem extends beyond
individual countries. Nc one country can hope to combat the problem in isolation.
Th refore, the question of co-operation and liaison, with Asian countries in
particular, becomes essential to our growing efforts to cut down the illicit entry
of drugs. Some activity has already taken place with that object in view, but my
Government has now decided that it will take the initiative in setting up a more
formal international arrangement between the operational bodies responsible for
anti-narcotic control..... between ourselves, New Zealand, and our Asian friends.
The Government will begin discussions on this matter with Governments
in the South-East Asian area as soon as practicable. Preliminary talks have
already taken place on this matter between the Minister for Customs and Exicse
and Ministers in other countries and these talks indicate that there will be a
large measure of support for this co-operative finternatonal action.
And Ministers agree that irrespective of a country's borders, the
operational bodies must work together to cut off supply routes, and if possible,
the sources of supply and to pass on information through an international network
so that against an international conspiracy, there can be an international defence.
Given this more formal arrangement, and given the enthusiasm which I
believe you will bring to this work, I think that we will have taken another big stride
forward in really getting to grips with this dangerous and growing problem.
Now, Mr. Minister, I declare this Seminar open. 



ANNUAL CONVENTION OF THE NSW DIVIION
OF THE LIBERAL PAR'iY OF AUiMTI
SYDNEY, N. S. W. 19 SEPTEMER 1970
Spech by the Prime Minister, MrJohn Gorton
Mr. Attwell, Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen
It is not my intention to speak to you for very long because I hope that tonight,
having spoken to you for a short time, we will be able to spend a much longer time
in a question and answer session, in which those of you who are here and who are the
backbone of the Liberal Party will have the opportunity to raise those matter--which
are on your minds, and to give me the opportunity to try to answer the querieO and
the questions and the criticisms you may have. I feel that that perhaps is the way in
which 1; 2 can get the greatest value from this meeting, and I hope that when the time
comes you will be not at all backward in raising those matters which are foremost in
your mind3. But before that time does come, there are some things I would like to say.
Mr President, we have been in office, as a government in Australia, for twenity-one
years or a little more. They were twenty-one years in which there have been three
wars first Korea, then the Malayan emergency and now Vietnam. And they were
twenty-one years in which there was great national development and un-precendented
industrial progress. There has been a greater increase in the population of
Australia than any other country has had, except Asian countries, in a similar
period of time. It has been a period of greatly expanded trade, a period in which
our exports, particularly our secondary exports, have been greatly expanded, and
a period of growing involvement with that area of Asia to which we finid ourselves
contiguous and which will be so important for future generations of Australians.
It has been, too, a period of improvement of the living standards Of all
Australians and of improvement for the population generally. It has been a period of
greatly expanded social services and of greatly expanded opportunity for the
individual to express himself to the top of his bent. I think we have all helped to
bring this about over this period of time, because of s~ ome basic philoso'phies.
When we came into off ice, we stood for the right of the individual to engage
in the occupation of his choice, and to so conduct himself in that occupation as he
believed best. We stood against the concept that the individual ought to be told by
the state how he could conduct his enterprise or whether he could conduct his
enterprise, because at that time, as now, our opponents held to the idea that there
should be limitations on the individual in conducting his enterprise, that there should
be some fields in which he could not enter that government knew better than an
individual what is good for that individual. We stood against that. 0 0 0 0 / 2 
We stood for the concept that -aie Government shou~ ld create a climate
where individual enterprise was encouraged. We didn't stand for laissez-faire,
and we don't stand for It now. But we stood for a concept that we could create a
climate where individual enterprise was encouraged and where the planning of
enterprise and its expansion was a matter for the myriad individuals engaged in
the myriad enterprises which make up Australian life. And we stood against the
concept that all planning in all fields should be undertaken by a government or
governments and forced upon the citizens of this country.
We stood for a political system where elected representatives of a
party should themselves decide the policies to be followed by that party, and v,, ie
stood against the system which made elected representatives subject to direction
and ins truction from unelected persons from outside. And that we were righit in
these attitudes is, I believe, evident from the results of this past twenty or nearly
twent" t-one years.
And those things that we stood for then, we stand for now. The things
we stood against we still stand against and our opponents still stand for the planning
by governments of all enterprise, for, in cases, the prohibition of individuals
entering an enterprise, and until just recently for the direction of elected
representatives by persons who are non-elected from outside. I say " until just
recently" t because there is an admission from our opponents that in at least ole
State that of Victoria this was what applied. And personally, I do not believe
that they will change this but time alone will tell.
Sir, in the last few years in the last three years many new problems
have appeared for Australia. We have found ourselves in a situation where the
United Kingdom, under whose protection we have, as a nation, lived, is withdrawing
from Malaysia and Singapore, the countries to our North. And although that has
been slightly altered by a change of Government in the United Kingdom, still there
is only a token force left behind compared to the responsibility previously
assumed by the United Kingdom Government.
And we have found ourselves in a situation where the United States o!
America is questioning its approach to, and its involvement in, the problems of
Asia. These two things alone have vastly changed the world in which Australia
lives. And so our defence has necessarily had to occupy our attention in a way
which has not been necessary in the past years of our history.
We have found ourselves in a situation where our involvement with the
countries of Asia, our political involvement and our economic assistance, has
necessarily had to grow because we are contiguous to, and in a sense a part Of this
region, and what happens there will ultimately and inevitably affect us.
We have also found ourselves in a situation where the markets overseas
for our rural products, which had fluctuated in the past,, but had been taken, for
granted as markets in which we could profitably sell for most of the time, are now
threatened by a possible entry of the United Kingdom into the European Economic
Community. / 3 
And we have tound-our selves, too, in Australia In some strange new
situation dt politics. Because for the first time, we have nwny people in our
community who challenge the verdict of the ballot box, who challenge the worl-ings
of democracy to elect a government, who urge that people should take to the streets
if they are unhappy with what a government, democratically elected, does.
And we have an Opposition an alternative government supporting, to a
great extent, those who are taking these new approaches to politics. And this must
not be underrated. I know that our opponents pretend that they do not altogether
support the overthrow of authority as has been urged by Dr Cairns, one ofl the front
bench supporters of the Opposition. I know that they attempt hesitantly to
disengage from those who wish to make the streets the arbiter of political decisions.
But I believe that anyone who looks at what they are doing must come to
the cunclvt'son that they are frightened to come out and condemn what ought to be
condemned. It is all very well for the Premier of South Australia to dissociate
himself irom a moratorium movement which seeks to sit at city inter Cection but
having done that, he then seeks to instruct the head of his police not to prevent
people sitting at city intersections. It is all very well for the Leader of the
Opposition to make soothing noises as to what is going on, but just yesterday wie
saw him speaking to a crowd an orderly crowd but a crowd that had Vietcong
flags flying above them, and above his head as he spoke to them.
And the people of this country, I believe, need, not as a political
gimmick, but as something that goes to the very heart of politics, to make u-.
their minds as to whether they believe the verdict of the ballot box should be
accepted or whether they think it ought to be challenged in the streets. This i~ s a
great new issue between ourselves and our opponents. Let me develo-) it a little.
Some attempts have been made to suggest that we do not believe in a right
of dissent and this is completely and utterly untrue. I believe that we would be
those who, harder than anybody else, would fight to retain the right of dissent, would
fight to retain the right of criticism of a government, to fight to retain the right
of those who disagree to express that disagreement in all reasonable forms. ' Re
do not object to rather do we pledge ourselves to protect~-the right to din en. t.
But equally do we believe t hat there are civil rights of a majority OY^
Australians, that the majority of Australians have rights to use the streets ifI they
wish to without being impeded, that they have the right to use public buildings,
without having those buildings invaded and stink bombs let off as has happenied in
post offices throughout Australia.
We believe that there is a right and a need to protect the individual against
intimidation by those who disagree with what the Government is doing threats
and intimidation. And perhaps if I can encapsulate it in this way, I would say this
we would agree with Voltaire completely when he said " I1d isagree with what you
say, but I would fight to the death for your right to say it". This is our credo too.
0 * 1 4 
But we would not go on, as thc'qe who would seek to take over the streets
would go on, to change that statement to saying " I disagree with what you do, but
I will fight to the death for your right to do it" because there is no rignt to interfere
with the civil rights of the majority of the Australian people. And this will be a
matter engaging the attention of our Government very, very soon, and of the
State Governments, I know.
Sir, there has been this year discussion on the question of the financial
management of this country of Australia and of the Budget for the year in front of
us, and I would like to say some words on that.
We approached the planning the financial planning for this year within
certain fixed parameters. We had already decided, in conjunction with the
Premiers, that there should be, as far as was economically responsible, greater
sums of money available to State Governments than in the past, to enable them to
tackk. those problems of education, of health, of communications, the myriad
problems with which they are initially concerned. And so, at the Premiers'
Conference, we had made a new deal which greatly increased the amount of finance
available to State Governments this year and for the ensuing years over what would
have been available had the old system and the old agreement prevailed-son-ie 12 per
cent increase in the amounts available for expenditure. And this was one parameter
which we had to regard as we approached our planning for this year.
Secondly, we had a need, an obvious need, to ensure, as far as we
could ensure, that the rate of inflation was slowed, and not allowed to continue in
the way in which it corntinued in the last quarter of last financial year. Up until the
last quarter of the last financial year, the rate had been not unreasonable 3 -) er
cent or 3 point something per cent but in the last quarter it had gone to 5, over
per cent. This has got to be stopped. We had to ensure that it was stopped for
if it were not, then the results would have been that increased wages were nothing
but fool's gold, that those in the rural industries in Australia would have been hit
and unable to pass on the cost increases that they would have had to bear; that all
those on fixed incomes all superannuants, all pensio-ners, would have had this
bleeding sore of inflation withdrawing from them their capacity to buy the thi"-gs
they needed to live. And this was another essential element we had to bear in mird.
Then, too, we had said and I think properly said that one of our
objectives would be to reduce the rate of direct taxation on people throughout
Australia. This, indeed, had been recommended to us as the most importa; t thing
to be done in the Budget by the Liberal Party organisations throughout Australia
speaking through their Federal delegates coming to Cainberra. And this, too, we
felt we ought to do, and I felt I ought to do because I had promised to do it. And
this was another necessity we had to meet. 11. 
And so in the result we did this. We increased Indirect taxation and this
has caused some criticism but after all, in all other countrtes of the world that I
know of, significant countries, civilised countries economically speaking there has
been a swing from direct to indirect taxation. And surely that swing must be in line
with general liberal thinking, because there is no need for a person to buy more
cigarettes unless he makes a choice to do it, or to drink more wine unless he makes
a choice to do it, or to use more petrol unless he makes a choice to do so. What
we have done is to reduce the direct tax on the individual and if he then chooses to
buy things which are not essential, that is his choice and we, as Liberals, have
always stood for the right of choice. If he doesn't do that, he has more opportunity
to save, or more opportunity to buy the necessities for his family.
I believe that by the end of this financial year, this Budget will have been
seen to be one of the great Budgets of Australia, provided that that which we have done
to contain inflation is not damaged by organisations we do not control, increasing
wages throughout Australia without paying regard to the productivity increase
which alone can thoroughly justify an increase in wages and make an increase in
wages really valid and really essential.
May I in conclusion before we reach this question time, deal with two
other subjects and forgive me if I may seem self-centred in this, but I would like
to refresh your memory of some of the things which have been done in the last two
and three quarter years, because a great deal in fact has been done.
We have brought in a new oil pricing policy as a result of the discovery
of oil in Bass Strait, subject to great criticism at the time, but which now is
admitted to be working out to the benefit of the Australian consumer in that the price
arranged for Australian oil is now less than would be required to import oil, and
to the benefit of those seeking for oil throughout Australia, for we must find more.
We have taken steps again subject to criticism at first at the times they
were taken to preserve as much as possible for Australians the equity in the new
developments and the new mineral discoveries taking place throughout Australia.
We have not sought to legislate for this in any way because if we did if we sought
to lay down a distinct policy on it, it would be inflexible and it would be inapplicable
to an area where there are so many problems and so many different circumstances.
But we have let it be knovmwn abroad, that as a government we wish to see that
Australians are offered equity participation In the development of this country and
this has had a significant and measurable effect on the offerings that have been
made to Australia. We have laid down the guidelines in which overseas comoanies
can borrow in Australia so that there is more incentive to give equity to Australians,
because the more equity that is given to Australians the more borrowing is allowed
inside Australia. We have brought in convertible notes and we have, on a couple of
occasions you will remember one just last week protected where we thought it
was in the national interest to protect Australian companies. ./ 6 
6.
We hav'e-. ineazsed-soc ial servi~ es in this country to a degree to which they
have never-beeni increased over a comparable time as much as we have done. This
tends to be obscured because in this last Budget there was just a ' hold the line'
pension increase, but fif you go back to 1968 and if you see the rise in the pensions
since that time and compare it with the rise in the coot of living, you will see that
in that 9perlod of time the actual benefits to pensioners of all kinds ha.-very greatly
increased indeed. And there is much more to be done, I know, but let us as Liberals
not think that we have dropped behind when in fact we have, in real terms, increased
these benefits. We have taken away the fear of long-term illness in hospitalS. We still
have to deal with the problem of long-term illness in nursing homes. VWe still have
things to do to help low income families with many children. This was partof our
policy at the last election. This will be carried out during our period ofZ gover-nment.
This I Rm sure you would, as Liberals, wish to see us carry out and indeed we will.
Sir, I have in fact here about six pages of the things that we have done. I
won't read them out for it would take too long. But were it not for this Government,
I do not believe there would be a chance for the development of an alumninium !-ndustry
in Queensland, which could be the greatest development that that State has known in
the Ncrth of Brisbane; if it were not for this Governiment, there would be no
Institute of Marine Science which could make Australia the outstanding country in
the world in relation to marine biology; if it were not f or this Governmflent, there
would be no scheme for the provision of libraries in all secondary schools. I will
stop. But there are many things I think we can be please6d about and you caIn too
For the future, we will carry cut the programme that we put before you.
I do not think we have broken one promise yet and I car, assure you that before the
term of this Goverrment is finished, every promise made at the last election V/ ill
be fulfilled. But these are finite things, these are definite things. What is eve.-, m-, ore
important than that for us is to bear this in mind. At the beginning of my tall' to
you I said what we stood for twenty years ago and what we stand for now, what we were
againt twenty years ago and what we are against now. And I do ask ycu to study
our opponents because they have not changed one whit from the policies they held
twenty years ago. They still believe in nationalisation and it is still in their platform.
They are still swayed by unions affiliated through their conferences, many of them
communist dominated unions. They would still destroy our foreign and our dei~ ence
policy. They would still seek to interfere in the liveG of every single Australia n
in this country. e a s. 7 
There has not been one single bit of constructive criticism put forward
since we have been in government. Wide statements about the need, the very
definite need for-better cities,. statements about the need for more adequate
sewerage, statements about anything which is going to require large sums of money
to implement, and of course the needs are there because no country is perfect. But
there has been no indication of how these would be carried or of what burden.-would
be laid upon Australians to try and carry them out; burdens in the form of increased
taxes or inflation or control by bureaucrats from Canberra. Their objectives-are
still the same, their controllers are still the same. If they come into government,
the results of what they would do would be the same as those results which led
them to be thrown out of government twenty odd years ago.
There is no -alteration there. There is a great attempt to pretend there
is an alteration, to pretend that the nationalisation programme has been~ drorned,
to preand that they are not influenced still by outside bodies and by extreme leftwing
bodies. Look at their actions in the moratorium and I believe you would
agree with me that what they are pretending to be is not what they are. They are
seeking to hide their weapons. They are trying to pretend they are not controlled
from the areas from which they are controlled and trying to come before the
Australian people in disguise. It is up to us to strip that disguise and 1t is up to us
to go forward so that in the next twenty-one years as much progress can be mnade as
has been made in the last twenty-one. Indeed, more, because the opportunities
are there as the result of the last twenty-one. And I think that Liberal Parties
throughout Australia will see that this is done and I know that if they see that this
is done they will be rendering a signal service to their nation.
Q. Mr Prime Minister do you think that a rather over-zealous law and order
campaign along American models could lose more votes than it could gairn, particularly
amongst young people? And if so, what steps would you be thinking of taking in
this direction?
PM I don't know what you mean by " an over-zealous American-tyue campaign
on law and order". I don't therefore know whether that would lose more votes than
it would gain. But as I said in the main body of my address, I believe that the civil
rights of Australians, the majority of Australians, must be protected against
disruption from a minority. And I don't believe that we can or should continue to
allow people to invade Commonwealth Government off ices, to intimidate peorple
working in those offices, to pour ox blood over records in those offices, to esiter
Commonwealth Ministers' rooms and lock them in the rooms and sit around and insult
them. I don't believe we should allow people to enter into such buildings as vie
control such as post offices and interfere with the rights of citizens using those
post offices. These things need to be stopped. Certa inly they need to be sto'; oed
by due process of law. I believe that the penalties that should be applied in these
instances should be such as to prevent people from continuing to do them. w
whether that would lose more votes than it would gain, I couldn't say. I believe 0 0 0 0 ** 8 
8.
that it would gain more votes than it woubi4osebut, more importantly than that, I
believe it to be the right and proper. thing to do and the proper ' way to govern a
country to see that this -was notallo-wed to continue-to happen. Because I thinklthat
all history shows that once a group takes to the streets to try and impose their
will which they can't impose through the sources open to them, then groups which
oppose that group will take to the streets too, to battle them and the streets wil become.
a battleground and this is not the way in which a democracy or a country oughat to be
run when there is a free vote available every so often to elect a government and
to decide these questions, and that's my answer. 



OPENING OF BHP.' ESSO LONG ISLAND POINT
FACILITIES, VICTORIA 21 SEPTEMBER 1970
S2! eechb~ t he Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Sir Ian, Councillor Mair, and Distinguished Guests:
You, I know, are extending a welcome to me here today to perform this
opening ceremony. And I in my turn would like to say what a privilege 1. feel it
to be to stand on this platform with the representatives of two great conipanies
one Australian, one American which have brought into being that which we see
around us here a-nd which have helped this nation to make another giant stride
forward towards its destiny.
We have Sir Ian McLennan, closely associated with this whole enterprise;
Sir Colin Syme, head of an Australian Company which, from the far Western
frontiers where iron is being mined, up to the North in Groote Eylandt where
manganese is being mined, and here where oil is being distributed throughout
the whole of Australia, is building those industrial muscles which we n~ eed and
will in the future need still more.
We have Mr Jamieson, the head of that partner company which I was
surprised to see or rather one of your companies, Sir, that you headed
was surprised to see was only the second largest company in the world an-. d
not the largest. I am sure you won't be satisfied with that for very long, but
since you provide the material which enables that which the largest company
makes to run that's General Motors perhaps you can take some credit for
building up the largest company.':
However that may be, we have here an example of co-operative
development between Australia and the United States which I think can serve
as a blueprint for what we want for our benefit and what the United States
can get for its benefit. We are opening in a place where only 170 years ago
Bass, in a small whaleboat, came through to discovery and which for years
years after that was an area where the whalers and the sealers and the muttonbird
hunters alone were known, we are opening here a fractionation plant. It's a
horrible word fractionation plant it could have been worse, I suppose. It
could have been fractionalisation but what it means, I think, is a Dlant that
breaks things down into fractions.) An-d we are opening it, and it is the last
link in the $ 400 million complex which is going to see flowing to Australian
industry and motorists, Australian oil and which is going to see new sources
of energy in gas flowing to our industries and to our homes. 0 2 
Great risks had to be taken in order to bring this to fruition. Great
amounts of capital had to be found with no certainty of return, indeed with probably
a less than 50 per cent chance of return. At any rate, without any certainty
whatever there would be a return. And this was done because, if it was successful,
great rewards could be won. The risks were equally shared between ap.
Australian and an Amercian company. The rewiards are not so equally shared.
Because close to 50 per cent of profits made, rewards gain~ ed, flow directly to
the Australian people in the form of company taxation or royalties or other
payments. That silent partner gets that at once. For the rest there is-an equal
distribution, which means that of the other half, 50 per cent flowis to Australia,
and our American partner takes, quite properly, anything which matches that.
And in the result we, as an Australian people, will receive what I have
spoken of, the Australian company will receive its share, Australian overseas
ha' ances will be greatly increased it is estimated by some $ 230 million next
year and reduced only by profits repatriated, w~ hich they have every right to
be. And all of this achieved without the Australian people being required to
pay an exorbitant price for their petrol or more than a fair price for their
petrol I speak with some feeling-on this because some time ago, Sir I n
McLennan, the representative of ESSO and myseli sat down to try to work out
what would be a fair price for the sale of Australian oil in Australia and
we worked it out. I was immediately subject to attack by the pun~ dits who said
that we had set the price far too high, that the world price was going to drop
much below what we had agreed it should be. And naturally, because I am a
man who always likes to pay attention to advice, I was disturbed by thisc. But
fortunately, it turned out to be entirely untrue and I think it reasonable to
say that the prize now arranged for the sale of Australian oil is a price which in
many cases would be below the present import parity price for overseas oil....
which I think shows great patriotism on the part of Sir Ian McLennan and
Mr. Jamieson: Well, so, Sir, we are getting all these benefits. We are not paying
for them in any exorbitant way. And I only hope that people throughout Australia
will realise thea risks that have been taken, will recognise the right to the
rewards that comes from those risks, will thoroughly understand the benefit
to this nation which will flow from this co-operative enterprise. I do hope that
there will be no repetition of calls for nationalisation of an enterprise such as
this, as there have been for other great enterprisoes merely because they have
been successful. And I hope and believe that the Australian people would turn
down such calls when they were made. a 0 0 12 
This Bass Strait project, and what will come from it, gives us a
degree of self-sufficiency in Australia for petroleum products, provider, a
new source of energy for our homes and our industries through natural gas, at
least in a part of Australia. But it is not enough. Bass Strait is our largest
known oil deposit. By the end of 1971, it should be producing 85 per cent of all
our locally produced oil.. and from this field and our other knMown fields
we should be drawing 65 to 75 per cent of our total crude oil requirements.
But that won't go on forever.
The Bass 3trait fields we know now should last some twenty years
no more so I am told. And remembering that our consumption of crude-oil
is increasing at about 6 per cent a year, our self-suff iciency from our k-now
fields would drop from the 65 or 75 per cent I have mentioned to 20 per cent
by the end of the decade should no more oil be discovered. So the need f. Lor
contir~ uing search and for new discoveries is very real. I would like to see a
new major oil discovery every two years... and it is necessary for those
who will take the risks in the future looking for such oil to know that if they are
successful they will get the rewards and to know that they will, in a free
enterprise country, subject only to the national good, be able to develop that
which they find and to get the profits from that which they produc.
This has been Australia's great weapon, great argumerxn in seeking
to attract capital from overseas. It must so continue to be if vwe are to continue
to attract that capital we need so much and the results of which are so evident
today in the opening of this plant here, the final step in this great enterprise.
And so, Sir, it does give me very great pleasure indeed to be able
to unveil this plaque and to declare the fractionation plant open. I gather it
has been working for some time, but no doubt it will work better after this
has been done:
Thank you very much. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt Hon. J. G. GORTON, M. P.
ON
RECEIPTS DUTY LEGISLATION
Ministerial Statement
[ From the ' Parliamentary Debates', 1 October 1970]
Mr GORTON ( Higgins-Prime Minister)
-by leave-As a preface to my statement
on receipts duty legislation I point out to
the House that I know of no dispute with
any State Premier other than the Premier
of Victoria on this question of payroll tax.
Honourable members will recall that las,
June legislation was introduced to impose a
continuing Commonwealth receipts duty on
business receipts. The Treasurer ( Mr Bury)
explained that this was being done at the
request of the States, and for their benefit,
the purpose being to ensure that the States
did not lose revenue as a consequence of
the High Court decision which invalidated
their own receipts duty legislation as it
applied to certain types of receipt. The
Treasurer also explained that the Commonwealth
legislation would-again at the
request of the States-apply retrospectively
to 18th November 1969, the date on which
the Commonwealth's agreement to introduce
legislation for the benefit of the States
was foreshadowed. Provision was made,
however, for exemption from duty under
the Commonwealth legislation, in respect
of the period 18th November 1969 to a
date to -be proclaimed as the end of a transitional
period if duty, whether or not
validly imposed, was paid under State
legislation. 23116/ 70 The proposed legislation was approved by
this House but failed to secure the approval
of the Senate. Immediately after the resumption
of the House following next
week's recess, the legislation will be reintroduced
in the House with inclusion of
provisions under which the Commonwealth
legislation will cease to apply to
amounts received after 30th September
1970. The overall effect of the new Commonwealth
legislation will be that business
receipts during the period from 18th
November 1969 to 30th September 1970
will be liable to duty under it at the rate
of 0.1 per cent, but that this liability wil
not arise if the provisions of State laws
in this period-whether valid or invalidare
complied with. One effect of this will be
that, to the extent that receipts are specifically
exempted or simply not dutiable under
State law, they will not be dutiable under
the Commonwealth law. Another effect will
be that receipts which Queensland legislation
has purported to make dutiable during
this period will remain liable to duty at the
lower rate of 0.02 per cent-provided of
course, Queensland duty is in fact paid on
the receipts or has already been paid.
I add that, knowing of the Government's
stated intention to proceed with Commonwealth
legislation to impose, at the States' 
request, a duty on business receipts, many
businesses have continued to pay duty to
the States even though the payment of an
excise may have been involved. In 1969-70
the States actually collected 85 per cent or
more of the total amount they had estimated
they would receive. The essential purposes
of the new Commonwealth legislation will
be to validate the collections already received
by the States and, in the case of businesses
that have refrained from paying receipts
duty in respect of the period to be covered
by the Commonwealth law, to require them
to make such payments.
The Government appreciates that the
1970-71 budgets of the States have been
framed on the assumption that the Commonwealth
receipts duty legislation would
have continuing operation and that the
States would therefore receive the full benefit
of the receipts duty revenue that would have
been payable to them in 1970-71 if the Commonwealth
legislation had continuing operation.
The Government also appreciates that
limiting the operation of the Commonwealth
legislation to receipts up to 30th
September 1970 will have a significant
effect on State revenues for 1970-71 and that something will need to be done to protect
the budgetary situation of the States.
We propose that additional Commonwealth
grants will be payable to the States in
1970-71 so as to make good the reasonable
losses of State revenue resulting
from the termination of the Commonwealth
receipts duty legislation on 30th September
1970. As in the case of other arrangements
for the payment of Commonwealth assistance
grants to the States in 1970-71, our
willingness to do this is on the basis that the
arrangements resulting from the June 1970
Premiers Conference will apply in their
entirety. For the purpose of ascertaining such
reasonable losses I am in touch with the
Premiers with a view to arranging consultations
between the Commonwealth and State
governments as quickly as possible. We
have in mind that at such consultations
there will be discussed the question of the
future of receipts duty in the non-excise
area under State legislation against the
background that the Commonwealth legislation
will cease to apply to amounts received
after 30th September 1970.
Printed by Authority by the Government Printer of the Commonwealth of Australia 



SIXTEENTH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE
LUNCHEON AT PARLIAMENT HGUO3E, CANBERRI OCTOBER 1970
Seechby the Prime Minister, Mr. john Gorton
Mr Vice Chairman, , arliamentary Colleagues all
It falls to my lot to propose the toast of our distinguished guests. Sir, it is
my privilege today, both as Prime Minister and as a member of the Australian
Branch I hope a financial member: to preside at this Luncheon in honour of
Delegates to the Sixteenth Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference. We are glad
to have you meeting here in Australia and here in our National Capital, and we are
glad that you are meeting in Australia for the second time.
I know that many of you came early to our country in order to have the chance
to look around it a little before settling down to the business at the corference table.
I hope you have found this time well spent, interesting and enjoyable. We indeed
are glad that you took this opportunity to see us while you are here. But now you
have business to do, and I see from the agenda that you will be discussing a wide
variety of topics, ranging from co-operation in development to the challenge of
dissent. This Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is unique. With 7, OC0 members
and 80 branches, it's certainly representative, and it touches at some point or other
through its members, its affiliated branches and its associated groups, just
about every part of the free world. And I believe it serves two broad and im; ortant
purposes. It provides continuing links between members of the Commonwealth of Nations,
the greatest multi-racial association of free nations the world has known. And it seeks
to preserve, for the world to see, the image of parliamentary democracy as we
know it, and as we oractice it in varying degrees today.
Let us look at this Commonwealth of Nations for a moment. It has emerged from
an empire of dominions, of colonies under the Crown, an empire that has now passed
down the corridors of history. And in place of that empire, there are free and
independent nations, some owing allegiance to the Crown, some not, but all having
inherited the principles of parliamentary rule, based on the Westminster model.
Some have abandoned that model, others have abandoned it and returned to it,
but whether it be a Westminster system or a Presidential system, the root is the
same, and that is what is sought to be preserved by the members of this Association. / 2 
It would be unrealistic, Sir, to pretend that all is smooth sailing all the time
amongst the members of the Common% ealth of Nations. It would be dull if that
were so. No great historical development such as this can come to this point
and see in front of it the future it can follow without there having bee-i some
problems, some controversy, without there being able to be seen in the future
other problems and other controversy. And I think the Commonwealth has still
to find a way in the future through many problems. But the fact that it will fi-nd
its way through those problems with success is, I believe, attested to by the
evidence of the problems which it has already overcome in its existence so far.
This Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is the Association that provides
a strong and continuing link between the members of the Commonwealth. There
are other links, of course, the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conlerence,
other Conferences of one kind or another, but the Parliamentary Association is
the most representative because all of us, as members, are directly concerned
in our varying ways with the practice of parliamentary democracy in our own
Houses of Assembly, or Congresses or Senates or whatever the nomenclature
may be. And that, I think, is one reason why the Association is growing in
strength and that is why I hope it will have a long and a useful life, not only for its
members but for the world as a whole.
Now I mentioned a second purpose for the Association, and that was to
preserve the image of parliamentary democracy before the world. And this, I
think, is of immense importance today, perhaps of as great importance as we
have ever known in history. All around the world in, I suspect, all the countries
represented here, there is a clamour for dissent. Our. parliamentary systems
and the rule of law they all have in trust are under test, in all our countries, and
are on trial in many ways, particularly in the eyes of the younger generation.
Let none of us be dismayed by this. Dissent, of itself, is not only not a bad
thing but a good thing. It can be healthy. It can be part of the cleansing process
in a democracy and in the institutions of a democracy, and our institutions I
speak collectively not only allow it, but specifically provide for it. That is why
in so many of our countries here represented, we have an official Cpposition,
a free press, a ballot box. And that is why the Commonwealth Pad iamentary
Association itself puts contentious measures on its agenda and delegates can
speak with heat on this and disagreement on this, and dissent with each other
on this, but each point of view is thereby heard.
But in this goodness of dissent, however, and clamour for it, there can in all
our countries be dangers. There are dangers that in searching for a change for
the better, we may let the legitimate ways of bringing that about become
illegitimate and fatally weaken our system. We should never forget that urbridled
dissent on the part of Hitler's brownshirts led to the overthrow of the parliament
in that country and the world into the bloodbath which followed. a a / 3 
I believe there is no better syst . n than parliamentary democracy. I think
it is the only system which has validity, if we are going to speak of -man's right
to be free and to choose for himself t he way of life he wants and who vwill direct
those public affairs which so impinge upon the way oZ life he wants.
There are many drawbacks to democracy, but I repeat -, It is the best
method of obtaining these ends yet discovered.
The laws which govern our lives are laws we all in our parliaments mk
for ourselves. They are laws we can change in an orderly fashion by exactly
the same process we used to bring them into existence. There are many vilo
consider in one country or another that a law is a bad law, and that can be
changed. There are in many countries good laws, in themselves, but laws whiich
have become out of date. And they can be updated. But if we are to retain before
the world, all of us, that image of parliamentary democracy of which I spokle,
then changes of that kind must be made in a constitutional and parlia-mentary way.
Dai -Yers arise as soon as we reject this course. And, indeed, on this*,-subject,
that great parliamentarian, Edmund Burke, put it quite clearly two hu:ñ idred
years ago
" The only liberty I mean is a liberty connected with order; that
not only exists along with order and virtue, but which cannot exist
at all without them.
That was true then, that is true now for all who espouse parliamentary democracy.
And that, because those gathered here today are throughout the world showing
a method of government different from a totalitarian government, that is why I
really meant it when I said it is a privilege for me today to welcome you to our
country so that you can continue this great work. This, I think, is the spirit in
which the Parliamentary Association meets, and it is, in that spirit that I welcome
you all here and trust that your deliberations will further advance the cause.-
of all those countries here gathered. 



OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE SIXTEEINTH CONFERENCE OF
THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION
CANBERRA, A. CT. 2 OCTOBER 1970
Spech y~ the Primne Minister,. Mr. johln Goto
Your Excellency, Mr President, Mr Vice-Chairman, Leader of the
Obpoosition, Mr Premier of Queensland, Mr Speak-er and Parliamentary
Colleagues: Yesterday at a social occasion I welcomed you here to Australia and
extended wishes for the success of this Conference. Now that you are met in the
Chamber in which your deliberations will take place, I extend again on behalf
of the Government of Australia, and I believe I can say on behalf of all Australians,
our best wishes for the success of your deliberations in our country.
You have much of which to speak, and yesterday you had to listen to much
of what we had to say. I think that on this occasion, so that you can get on with
what you will make your business, I will merely say some few sentencesa in
welcoming you to this Chamber and to your work in it. But if those sentences are
short, that is not to be taken as an indication in any way that the streg1 of feeling
behind them is not strong and that the welcome is not very genuine.
It is not for me to repeat what was said yesterday, and what Hi0 Excellency
expanded on today, but I feel that at this and succeeding conferences much will
depend that will affect the future of the world.
In all the diverse nations of which His Excellency has spoken and which
meet here, there does lie hope. And I believe this Conference and this Commonwealth
Association will be successful as long as it never seekis to turn itself into a
mini-United Nations, as long as it never seeks to pass resolutions which purport
to be binding on all the members present, as long as it ' keeps to its charter of, bringing
together Parliamentarians for discussion of problems and for meetings of people
from the various countries of the Commonwealth.
And now if I can say this without anybody seeing any political implications
in it I quote " Let observation with extensive view
Survey mankind from China to Peru"
And thiC., indeed, is what this Commonwealth of Nations will be doing, spread as it
is across the world, and the possibility of being a force for good across the world.
Welcome. 



Edited Transcript ANINUAL CONVENTION OF THE 14. S. W. YOUNG
LIBERALS SYDNEY, N. S. IN. 17 OCTOBER 1970
Speeh b ! nim ister, Mr. on Gorton
I think you will agree that this is neither the time nor the place for a long
dissertation on political matters. I am here primarily to express, on behali of the
Government, our gratitude for the assistance we receive from the Young Liberal
Movement throughout Australia.
I don't agree with the speaker who said that we are a pretentious country, or
a country with an inflated idea of our own importance. We may be a little brash, perhaps:
and brashness is a good thing in a young country. We have got something to be a little
brash about, when you consider that in such a short space of time as far as history
goes in the blinking of an eye a harsh continent has been translated into one which is
giving as . high a standard of living to the people in it as any other country in the world
and as great an opportunity as any other country in the world. Now this is something
of which we need not be ashamed.
We also have frontiers and there are not many countries left that have them.
I will admit that too many young Australians stay away in droves from the frontiers.
I am talking of the mining towns in Western Australia, I am talking of the new
developments in Queensland, I am talking of going out where something new is being
built and something new is happening and people can work very hard and get very
high rewards. Well those are frontiers and they are there for those who want to take
advantage of them and the very fact they are there is, I think, of sign~ ificance, in our
national life. So I don't think we are pretentious, and I do think we have ar. agportunity
here as a community of people seeking the answer to the age-old questions of how can
a community best be run.
We have an opportunity to present to the world a pattern which might be
better than any pattern so far devised and therefore I don't think we are pretentious,
though we may be brash. I don't think we have an Inflated idea -of our own importance
because although we haven't got great physical power,, we do have enormous opportunity
and I think the achievements we have already made augur well for the future for the
Young Liberals and the other young members of the Australian community coming
on with them. Nor do I think the Young Liberal movement is without a cause. After all,
there has been a history now of some twenty years of Liberal rule, and of course
all the decisions made in that time were not right and of course some opportunities
during that time were missed. But by and large, most of the decisiorns were
reasonably correct and most of the opportunities were seized and the advancement
that has taken place In that period of time is probably unparalleled in a similar period
of time in any other nation's history. e. a. / 2 
We have reached in this nation towards giving to the individual more opportunities
to express himself in whatever field of endeavour he may wish to engage. Vie have
advanced our material development enormously, and that is important, because only
by advancing materially can you take resources to help the poor and the under
privileged and advance other non-material requirements of a nation. And it not a
reasonable cause to want to continue, and to improve, what has been, I think on any
impartial observer's judgment, very successful indeed. Surely we viould riot be able
now to have ten thousand members of Young Liberals throughout Australia if there
were not achievements to which they could look and which they would seek to better in
the years ahead. So there Is a cause, a significant cause to defend Australia, to
advance Australia, to improve the material benefits of Australia, and to further advance
the non-material requirements of a nation.
I have heard, from time to time, talk of something which is described as a
generation gap. And people who have spoken about it have spoken as if this is some new
phenomenon just suddenly discovered, never having occurred before in the history of
the world. Well, I don't think, for myself, there is a generation gap. I disagree
violently with a lot of young people and a lot of young people disagree violently with
me. But then a lot d-young people disagree violently with a lot of other young people,
and so it is not a matter of a gap between generations. It is a matter of argum-. ents
advanced and arguments rejected and discussion on those arguments.
I can't see myself that there are any new theories advanced which can't be
discussed between the generations. I haven't discovered that, and I hope that by and
large, you haven't discovered that either. There has always been Some difficulty of
communication between parents and children. Always-, Because parents have got into
the habit while the children were very young and while they were growing up, of telling
them what they ought to do instead of sitting down and discussing with them whether
they ought to eat their supper or whether they ought to go to bed at seven'. They have
got into the habit of telling them what they ought to do and it is a little difficult
sometimes for parents to realise that children have reached an age where that no
longer obtains. But this has always been so.
It has also always been true that at a particular period of development young
people thought that their parents knew absolutely nothing, understood absolutely
nothlng, were as dead as a dodo, And then it has also been true that a little later on
when young people have grown up a little bit and when parents have mellowed a little
bit, it has been possible for discussion to take place and for young people to say,
" My gosh. My parents have learned a lot in the last ten years, or five years".
I think it's nonsense.. that's all I want to say about the generation gap. Surely
whatever age anybody is, it is their mind that counts), their ability that counts,
the capacity to analyse that counts and there ought to be able to be a dialogue between
somebody of sixty and somebody of sixteen, given those circumstances. 9 e. / 3 
And there are many things on which dialogue should take place in this country.
Many think now that all that is required is questioning of the society in which they live
criticism, which is quite proper and questioning. B-ut that can't go on for too long,
because the very passage of time itself means that before long, those who today are
questioning, and having the luxury df questioning,. will tomorrow be saddled with the
sometimes agonising discipline of providin,; the answers to the questions they are now
asking. I think it augurs well for Australia that there are groups Of young -people such
as this who now question, but who in questioning are learning because they wiant to be
able to contribute the answers tomorrow will demand. And this again is a reason why
I am so pleased to be here. I will sketch some of the problems that I see will need
to be answered in the years ahead, and these are just some briefly touched on samples.
We hear much today about the question of dissent and the question of how far
dissent should be allowed to go. For myself, I would suggest that dissent mnust be
protected, that there must never be any interference with the right of people to object
to what a government is doing, to attack what a government is doing, to march i~ f they
want to, in order to bring attention to their objection to what a government is doing.
Thbis is a freedom which is essential. But freedom can degenerate into licence at some
stage, and for myself, I don't believe this right should be extended to licence. I don't
believe such a rights of other people are invaded and rejected by those who, wish to
dissent. I think people ought to be able to use the post offices if they want to; I believe
people ought to be able to use the streets if they want to. I believe they should be able
to drive cars and walk-along footpaths and indeed what I am saying is that there are
civil rights for the majority, and those civil rights are as important as are the rights
of a minority to dissent.
This may not be easy and simple finally to clarify. Nevertheless, this is a
question before us now. It will be before us in the future, and we must in this nation,
I believe, reach a solution which will enable both rights to exist and which will prevent
a repetition of what we have seen in other countries o! people in brown-shirts taking
over the streets as bully boys, and people in red-shirts fighting them in the streets so
that all that happens is a difference in the colour of the shirt, and riot a reasoned
argument.... but a situation where the decision goes to those with the greatest muscle
rather than those with the greatest right or the greatest capacity to persuade their
fellow citizens. We will have in the years ahead, problems concerned with what some people
claim to be a racist approach by Australia in the field of immigration.
And this is not a simple or an easy matter. We have a restricted immigration
programme. A policy under which it is easier for a p.: erson with a white skin to enter
Australia than it is for a person of a different colour.
That policy is under attack. I cannot justify it on moral grounds. F'or the
kindniess or cruelty, the competence of incompetence, the worthiness or unworthiness
of man can surely not be judged by the colour of their skins. / 4 
4.
Yet though I cannot justify the policy on moral grounds, as I look around the
world I see that wherever there are large communities of different racial origins in
a country, racial problems in that country are greatly increased.
These racial Droblems are not jut betweell those with white okins and those
with black, as in America or Britain but between, -for example, Chinese and Indonesians,
Chinese and Malaya-0. s, Tamils and Ceylonese, Kenyans and Indians,
If it is true that in these circumstances, racial policy is exacerbated and racist
stresses increased, then I do not wish to import these problems into this country; as
I am sure I would do if large communities of different racial origins were established
here. Indeed I think that it would be more immoral to do this than to continue with cur
present policy. I think that it would lead to a growth of racist feeling in Australia whereas we
do not have such feeling now.
But there is a difficult moral problem on which, in the fulniess of time, it will
be for those who are now young Liberals, and young Australians ger. erally to decide.
As for me, I make it clear that I am not going to chiai'ge our present liberalised policy
in any way. And then we will have in the years ahead many, many discussions as to what is
the proper role of a central government and what Io the proper role ofi' a state government.
I have found myself that on this particular problem, the Young Liberals seem to be
more conservative than the people who formed the Party in 1949, and on the whole, adopt
the conservative attitude without giving very many reasons for it as to why that attitude
is adopted: Well, fair enough.
I offer no solution -here, none at all. But I do say that for the proper running
of this nation in the years ahead this is a significant question and one which ought to
attract the attention and the analysis of the young people of Australia who w~ ill, before
long, be in a position where they will have to take sonrie real stand Oan it. I won't
develop that, but I do believe that it is of significance for our whole future.
So all these things those are but some samples all these and many others
will be before us in the years ahead. Many problemo have been overcome and many
more, I think, shortly will be. But there will be no nation ever, and Australia certainly
will never be a nation that has not got new problems before it, new answers required.
And it will only get those answers to the problems now and in the future if there are
sufficient numbers of young people prepared to devote their minds and their efforts
and their attitudes to trying to work out what the best answers in the interests of
the nation may be.
I think I will finish as I began, having given you I hope some indication of why
I am so happy to be with you tonight and having given you I hope some indication that you
really have a cause and that that cause is significant and more significant to you than
it is to me and more significant to your children generally than it will be for me.
Thank you for having me. 



OPENING OF BOTANIC GARDENS
CANBERRA, ACT OCTOBER 1970
S-) eech by the Prime Minister, MrjhnGoton
Mr Minister, Distinguished Guests, Lad; s and Gentleamen
You have heard from my colleague, the Min-: ster for the Interior somiething
of the history of these Gardens, which have indeed been unofficially open for somle
three years. And I have no doubt that many of you over the weekend have wallked, as
my wife and I have walked through these gardens when they were unofficially c.-eil, and
watched them taking shape and -watched the imaginative use of running w.. ater, of native
stone and of groupings of native flora in this lovely area.
It is, as Mr Nixon has said, an event of special relevance in our Cook
Bi-Centenary Year because these gardens are, in a sense, a tribute to Joseph Banks and
the naturalists and botanists who have followed in Bank.-s' footsteps. Because it was
Banks, even more thar. Cook, who urged on the British Government the foundation of
the first colony on our east coast, and it was he and his scientific team who were the
first to take home to England specimens of Australian shrubs and plant.-, collected
when that team came ashore from the " Endeavour" in Botany Bay and at other Doints
along our coast two hundred years ago.
Banks was important in his time, a wealthy young squire who spent on
fitting up in the " Endeavour' for his team of botanists twice the amount a~ money
that the " Endeavour' itself as a ship cost. To give you some indication of the
thoroughness with which he did his job, when he got home with his collection ai
Australian flora, it was described by a world-famous Swedish botanist of the day
as " a matchless, and truly astonishing collection, such as has never been seer.. before,
nor may ever be again. I don't know what Linnaeus, that Swedish botanist woculd have
said had he seen the matchless collection which has now come before us -for its official
opening today, and if this collection here in these gardens is not thoroughly matchless
although I think It probably is but if not, and if it is not unique of its kcind, then I
have no doubt whatever that under the guidance of Mr Shoobridge it very shortly will
be if it isn't already.
This has taken, much work, much effort and much planning. I think it was
Kipling, was it not who wrote " The Lord God made a garden, and gardeas are not
made by saying ' How beautiful' and sitting in the shade. And that is true of any
garden, but particularly of Botanic Gardens such as this, for they spring as do almost
all things of significance and enduring importance, from hard work, hard thinkcing, hard
planning, a genius for a feeling for nature, and then really solid hard sweat as well.
These are the ingredients of gardens. a o. / 12 
4 I 2.
We have here, as Burley Griffin was told to make in Canberra, in his brief,
a garden city, and I think he has made one in C-inberra because we have in the city
generally brought together exotic plants from other countries and I may be permitted,
perh aps, to call the oak and the elm an exotic plant as far as Australia is concerned
mixed with our own flora, and they make a delightful combination for the~ eye. But
here in this garden within a garden is a part of Australia of Australian trees alone.
I hope that there will be many such gardens as these throughout Australia,
and I hope that we will never reach a stage when our flora is confined to gardens such
as these, for we would all want to see them growing wild and free around the
countryside. And it is a part of community responsibility to protect flora so that this
can happen. This I believe, is becoming far more ingrained into the consciousness of
Australians. And also, perhaps, it is a task, a simple task that many might tak,-e up
to do what Johnny Appleseed did through the Mid-West of America when he wallked through
just planting apple-seeds as he went, in places he might never see again, hut they
grew -For the benefit of other people. And so could plants and trees and shrubs be
planted, perhaps as a return to what this country gives to those who live in it, -planted
by individuals for the benefit of other individuals later.
Sir, it is my great pleasure to welcome you all here to this official
opening and to say how pleased and proud we are in Australia to have So many
delegates from the International Congress of Parks Administrators. VWe are glad
that your First Congress in the Southern Hemisphere was here, and equally proud
that your new President is our own Director of Parks and Gardens, Mr Shoobricige.
So we are happy to have you in Canberra, and especially glad to have you with us on
this occasion when I now declare these Botanic Gardens open. 



ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE VICTORIAN WOMEN'S
SECTION OF THE LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA
Melbourne, Vic. 26 OCTOBER 1970
a~ ech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Madam Chairman, Distinguished Guests and all those present here:
We are meeting on the eve of a Se.-, ate election. We have far too many
elections, I know. That is not my fault: You will have to look further back than that.
We have far too many, but this is one, and I think a very important significant one,
particularly in the State of Victoria. Because the results of this Senate election caci ld
they could, I don't think they will, but they could result in Labor being able to obtain a
blocking half of the Senate 30 Members, and if they did, then they would be able to
do nothing constructive, but they would be able to do everything obstructive to frustrate,
to delay, on occasions to throw out measures brought in by the Government to fulfil the
promises it made for a three-year period only a year ago. And it could frustrate the
Government achieving the objectives which it has over and above the specific promises
made.... objectives of which I hope to say something to you a little later.
It would be a tragedy for Australia if this election were to result in such
capacity for obstruction and frustration and delay, and that is why it is of such
importance that we should, particularly in Victoria where we can win a seat from
Labor, do everything in our power to see that in fact we do so win.
Let me tell you some of the reasons necessarily briefly why I think
this is so. There is a vast gap between the approach of the Government and the approach
of the Opposition in the fields of defence and Australia's security; i the fields of the
need to see that any gains made by the community are real gains and not merely illusory
monetary gains which buy no mnore; in the attempt to approach the tasks before us
responsibly and not to make a myriad of irresponsible, undocumented promises Vhich
can't be carried out.
Let me advert to those few headings for a start. I believe that a good deal
of discussion at the election will centre on the question of whether Australia and
Australian troops should or should not remain in Vietnam, and wie -, 7ill be called
immoral because we are in Vietnam, and we will be told it is feutile to be in Vietnam,
and we will be told we should at once withdraw. May I examilne in tha light of history
and of present events those matters?
There was a time, after the Geneva Conference to 1954 or thereabouts, when
the people of North Vietnam had their Government and lived under it cand the people of
South Vietnam had theirs. There were no incursions by the Governent or people of
South Vietnam into the North. There were, during that period, no significant incursion
from the North to the South. Both those peoples could have lived in peace. Both of them
2 
2.
could have lived with independence. One of them at least, South Vietnam, could have
chosen the kind of government under which it wished to live anid that was the situation.
But then there was incursion from the North, there was invasion of a country which wished
to be left alone. There were kidnappings and murders of the people of S,, outh Vietnam.
And if I may paraphrase a former great statesman, the people there were living in peace
but the North was prepared to resort to war rather than to leave the people of the South
to choose their own government, and the Soi'th was prepared to accept war rather than
to have a government imposed on it by force -from the North, arnd sothe war came, and
so South Vietnam asked for help. And President Kennedy, no great reactionary, provided
that help, and we had an alliance, and we also provided that help. But who is immoral
in that situation? Those who are prepared to wiage war rather than let a country live in
independence or those who are prepared to accept war rather than let the independence
of a country be overthrown? Let us think of that.
And then, over the long years, we have had a growing crescendo of attacks,
on South Vietnam, and America, and ourselves. We have had allegations of immorality
lovellbd against us; allegations of immorality for what we have done, but over those
years too, the situation has dramatically improved. We have grown us-ed to hearing 1h e
spokesmen for the Labor Party saying " This isa dirty war" of course it is, all wars are
dirty. We have grown used to them saying " This is an unwinrnable war". Yet, as I
hope to show, it is being won. We have grown used tothemsaying that " There Is no
chance of deciding this matter by military meas". But during all that long period, it is
only the spokesmen of the Labor Party and their friends who have said this. You have
never heard the spokesmen for North Vietnam or the NLF saying there is no chance of
deciding this matter by military means because they know there is, andae they are seeking
to continue and always have been using military means to gain their political ends, and
they will go on doing so until our use of military means convinces them that they are
destined to failure. And so just recently, because we had stayed. in South Vietnam, and the
United States had stayed in South Vietnam while the Sauto. Vietnamese built up their own
capacity to look after themselves, to a point wh~ ere we could begin to withdraw
and that point would not have been reached had we not stayed but because we have done
that President Nixon has been able to offer a cease-fire so that thelkilling can stop,
and negotiation-s so that the objective of the South Vietnamese choosing their government
can be attained. We've offered that. And the cease-fire has been reJected by the North
Vietnamese and the negotiations have been rejected, and yet we who oi~ fered that ceasefire
are held to be immoral while those who rejected it and wanted the killing to continue
presumably are moral. I don't think that Australians will accept that.
And I don't believe, having reached this point where that offer can be ma de,
where the South Vietnamese have so built up their own strength and their own capacity
that Australians would want now to betray those people to whose help we went, to render
useless the sacrifice already made, to render in the future the position of Australia
more vulnerable. Rather do I believe that they would have the resolution to finish what
they have started now that the light at the end of the tunnel grows brighter and would
wish to see that that which was begun was finished and that those people of South Vietnam
had the right to choose their own government, with communists standing for election
if they want to. This will be a matter, I think of significance im this Senate campaign
and it is a matter, I know, of great significance to Australia and to its -future. 3 
That's only one aspect of the defence and security of Australia which is likely
to come up, because if Australia were to ado-ot the Opposition's policy in Vietnam, then
there would be no credibility at all to any offers of help to arty other nation in South-East
Asia and we would see threatened not only Laos and Cambodia, whomn we now find being
overrun, but Thailand threatened and probably invaded and the tide moving closer to the
borders of Malaysia.
And having done that, for that wuuld be the result of a Labor policy, it NO uld be
compounded by withdrawing all Australian military assistance to the Five-Power Pact
a Pact designed to try and help those countries even nearer to us Mvalaysia and Singapore.
Having inzreased the threat, the next step wie are told is to withdraw assistance to the
newly threatened areas. Surely all can see whatfeffect that wiould hava on the security
of Australia, we having taken up a position at the request of Malaysia and Singapore and
as a result of' us taking up that position, Britain having come back to t'his area of the
world, we turn our backs upon it and say " Sorry, you can go away. We won't help you.
We are -retreating to our own boundaries alone And Mr. Whitlam can't even pretend
to justify this by " conscience" unless he argues that his conscience will allow him to
have air and naval forces in the area but not ground forces.
Havir g done that, the next step we are told, is then to abolish National
Service Training altogether and reduce the size of a standing Army vie would need far
more in those circumstances than we have ever before needed a standing army in
Australia's history. These are not insignificant matters for a Senate election to
affect. But then I turn to the home front. Here, I think I can say that in the period
we have been in Government, we have made promises and we have carried out more
of those promises in that period than any government has carried in a like period
before. We have heard much lately on the subject of pensions, but on the subject of
pensions generally, ladies, the payment of the pension has increased by 50 wh ile I
have been Prime Minister, and the cost of living increased by 7Th3re has been a
steady improvement in the buying power of the pension in that time, but this is only one
fraction of what has been done in the field of social services. Let me from this bulky
tome of things we have done in all kinds of areas, tell you some of the other matters
that we have done in this particular field.
We have, as you know, provided subsidies to the Meals on Wheels Scheme
ten cents to one dollar and for many living alone, unable perhaps to get out to shop,
if they can get out to shop, paying more for food than is paid by the Meals on Wheels
people who can buy it in bulk and cook it finding it difficult to cooic these Meals
on Wheels cheap, hot, nutritious, are of great benefit indeed, and I am happy that
we have been able greatly to assist this particular organisation because there we have
a marrying of governmental finance and private work which ia this field should never
be lost. 4 
We have I speak of some relatively minor things first set up an employment
training scheme for assistance to married and single women previously restricted by
domestic responsibilities. We have had quite a significant number of applications for
training under this scheme, and one of them, I think, you might find of interest. There
was an application sent in to us by a woman and she said to the person she was writing
to " I am forty-two years of age, but when you read that, don't think ' ah, an " oldie".'
Think, by George, this woman is the same age as Liz Taylor, Sophia Loren and the
astronauts. She was accepted.'
We have brought in the increases in pensions generally of which I have spoken,
brought in, as you know, a tapered means test, provided capital for homes for handicapped
children, brought in hearing aids for pensioners, helped the FlyiIlg Doctor Service,
provided help for nursing homes from $ 2 a bed to $ 5 a bed for people requiring heavy
care, given greater assistance to homes for the aged, increased tuberculosis
allowance, helped in the case of deserted wives, increased grants to the Australian
Council for the Ageing, increased the age allowance which is the level at which
taxation begins on old people's salaries, advanced vocational training for widows, helped
widows . idowed overseas, paid pensions to persons absent from Australia, increased
unemployment aid sickness benefits. We have introduced a Health Scheme which costs
the patient less and provides the patient with more than the discredited Labor Scheme.
I don't want to go on, there are too many things here. I believe there are thirty new
approaches which have been made in this one field, and of that no one of us needs to be
in any way ashamed.
But this area this area of social help is the other great area to vh ich I think
we must direct our own attention. There are still some promises to be fulfilled.
We stated, just a year ago, that we would provide more help for low-income earners
with large families. This we will do. But there are other objectives not yet clearly
stated, not yet clearly put in the form of promises, but objectives which we have before us.
One of these is to further help those who have long-term illnesses, not in
hospitals because we have helped them, but long-term illnesses in nursing homes. Some
help has been given, but yet there is still a great and unsolved problem which is a
weight, I knovw, on many families.
Another of them, another real objective, must be to set up throughout
Australia, or to help with the States to set up throughout Australia kindergarten-cumchild-
minding centres, because now so many families are both working and so many
children do not have areas to mh ich they can go and be properly cared for an perhaps
be taught a little while their r -s are away. This I would regard as of very high
priority. 
May I touch very briefly on twio other great
objectives because I think perhaps I have spoken long enough already. But there are
new problems now which are not yet solved but are crying for solution. I think indeed
that in the last two and a half to three years there have been more new problems, and
more old problems, greatly exacerbated than has occured in any similar time. Some
of them in the Defence field I have touched on~, but one of the really sgiicant
problems for us all whereever we live is the problem faced by many a! our rural
industries, problems brought on because tne world either will not buy what they produce
in the quantities in which they produce it, or 4-f they will buy it, are not prepared
to pay for it sufficient to enable it to continue to be produced. There is no simple
answer to this. But that it is a problem of immense significance, I am sure you will
agree. My Government believes it is and believes that it is one of the great tasks
before it in the ensuing period of its office. And I know this that the problems of
the rural industries, the difficulties which they face, will be greatly exacerbated and
their economic position will greatly deteriorate if the Opposition and Mr Hawke, with
whom ' the Leader of the Opposition works so closely, can bring in a 35-hour week in
the rest of industry, and can unrestrictedly increase wages in the rest of industry
without any regard for the productivity of the economy as a vhole. This will hit
rural industries more than anything else, for this will raise the costs to them which
they cannot pass on. And this is what we seek to avoid. We want to see insofar as it
is possible, that all those working in this country in whatever jobs, get wages as high
as they can be, provided they are real wages which will buy real things and not
merely figures on a sheet of paper which will not improve their real wages oxtheir
living standards at all.
After all, what is earned by an individual, or what is earned by the companies
for which those individuals work is not the end of the story. ' That is take-home pay, if
you like, for the worker take-to-investors pay, for the company. But then out of that
there must come all the requirements that the community wanits. Cut of the company
profits must come half or virtually half, at once, for the schools vie need and the
hospitals and the social benefits I have been talking about. And out of the pay packet
taken home must also come some of the cost of these amenities which, looked at
properly, are in fact part of the take-home pay for all people in AuStralia. Ncw, if we
are to develop as we can, provide the things wie need, one of the es senitials should be
that we do it genuinely, that we do it without so inflating prices that what looks as though
it is going to be done is not done, that we work with real money and not fool's gold,
and this is the other great objective before this Government. That's what I meant,
when I spoke of a responsible approach instead of an irresponsible string of glittering
promises. So this is important, this election. The matters which can be affected by
it are important. There are many others I can't touch on now, but I thank you for
having given me the time to touch on those I have, and I look to you all to see that in
Victoria our three Senators are elected for the good of Victoria and -for the good of
Australia. 


AU2TMALIAN INT= OF MANAGEMENTTWELFTH GENERAL MANAGEMENT CONFERENCEHotel Canberra, Canberra, ACT 29 OCTOBER 1970peeh ythe Prime Minister, Mr. John GortonMr. President, Ladies and GentlemenIt is not my intention tonight to dwell on election issues. But ratherI will talk about some of the developments and some of the challenges that Australiafaces and therefore that you and your Institute face. These are the direct concern ofmanagement, whether it be management in government which, in terms of economicmanagement, seems to run in tandem with another organisation outside whichsometimes makes things diff icult; or management in private industry. Theopportunities ahead will only be fully seized and fully utilised by the proper exerciseof management in all spheres.And this year, Sir, is an important year. In a sense it is Year CneYear One of the decade of the Seventies. Sir, those seventies hold for Auztraliamore opportunity if we have t1-will to grasp it if we are prepared to put in theeffort required to grasp it than ever before in this country and possibly in any othercountry. We are getting now the people we need to populate the continent. Indeedthe results of twenty-five years of immigration 1policy, uncomfortable as it m~ y havebeen from time to time because immigration policy is inflationary unless you aregoing to do it the way the United States did in the 1890' s when they shipped peo,' le inand said " Fend for yourself" and we don't but the results of twenty-five yearsof immigration policy, population-wise, are beginning to pay off.We have discovered here recently, and are still discovering, and will,I am positive in the future, discover more, deposits of. mineral wealth greater ' thanour fathers could never have dreamt of and which could well result in our beingthe envy of the other nations of the world.And, thirdly, we are still creating and attracting, through goodmanagement, both governmental and private, capital to keep our people at work, tobring in still more people and to develop those resources we are discovering. Andif you cast your minds, not o~ nly over minerals, but over the new industries, suchas wood chips, such as fisheries, such as the manufacturing industries which haveexpanded so greatly, you will, I am sure, have the same concepts as I have of whatthis country can be turned into by good management. I don't by that mean that labouris not the basis of all production, because it is. But I do mean that no matter whatthe labo~ ur force in a particular industry, no matter how well and efficiently that forceworks, the results and the productions from that force will only be fully effectiveif proper management is brought to bear. And this is why I think the Lstitute is soimportant. o. v a / 2
All of these things that have happened in Australia, including, Sir,the new developments in education which you referred to, the advanced training formanagement which I think was generated when I was Minister for Education andScience. All these things have not come about by chance. They have conie about, Ithink, by reasonably good management at every level and they will be acceleratedby that better management at every levol which is the objective of this gatheringhere today. And as we get bigger, and as we get stronger, as our responsibilitiesincrease, so the demands on management will grow; for just as a new order ofschools is going to be required to deal with the technological revolution going onaround us now, so we will need a new order of management, highly specialised andhighly trained. For this purpose, to help towards this, this proposal formanagement training was introduced.I do not know, or pretend to say to this Institute, just how thisadvanced management training should be coiiducted. Most of the argument at themome-nt is where it should be conducted whether in New South Vkales or inVictoria. That we can leave to one side. We can have a centre of excellence. Weneea-not get rid of other good business training schools We cart have two centresof excellence as we grow. The location is not significant. The curricula andthe philosophy of approach are, and it may well be that there should be not postgraduatemanagement following directly on from graduate management, but thatthere should be required an interval of practical experience in the world of businessand of commerce. It may b. 3 that there should be required " sandich courses" wherefor a while a man works in the business world of commerce and industry and thengoes to academia and then comes back. Whatever it may be, I do hope, with you,that we will not see from this Institute turned out the theoretical people of whomyouspoke, but the practical people who will require this additional ability inorder to i ke the full use of their management potentials. And this is the objective,and this is what you are concerned with and this is what will be worked out in thiscountry as other things are worked out by discussiDn and by experience.Sir, our population now has passed the 12-4 million mark and,continuing my theme of what is possible in this country, our natural growth andmigration being at some two p. er cent a year, we, I think, will see, short of war,which I discount a major war an economic depression which I also discounta doubling of our present population by the end of this century. And that is fairlygood going, and that will make us by the end of this century a population of thesize of Canada today. Sir, there are great prizes, there are great opportunitiesfor service, not only to one's industry but to the nation in which one lives.And this being so, I think there are two questions posed for the future.What kind of a society will it be as it increases in size? And how, then, will wecontinue to develop it" I am sure that it has the opportunity again given goodmanagement to be a society which will provide, to those citizens who malke it up,a better life than any other society in any other country in the world has yetprovided. 3
3.There is an oppo~ rtunity to see that the individuals who make a country andwho are the most important components of a country, will be given the oyportun ityto develop their own desires, their own aspirations. whether it be to be a topmanager of a great firm, whether it be to be an opera singer, whether to be a farmer,whatever it may be, there will, I think, be an opportunity here because I believe wewill have the material resources which will enable governments to divert thoseresources to give opportunities to the citizens of its nation. And this is the sort of sxmietythat I expect we will see in this country in the years ahead.But how then can we provide those material resources* You, Sir, spokeof the theme of this conference as being the outlook for international business forAustralia. The outlook for international business for Australia must, in the ultimate,depend on the capacity for Australian industries of all kinds to produce at a costwhich will enable that which is produced to be sold in competition overseas.If this is not able to be done, then there is little outlook for the future ofinternational business. If this is done, then the outlook is almost limitless, exceptof course, when countries suddenly change trade treaties and put impediments in theway of 6a primary produce.But leaving that to one side, Sir, we have not done badly in this countryin this field over the last decade. Our rate of inflation has grown at a slower ratethan any other significant trading cuuntry but one. But I am sure you will agree withme that it is essential that it should continue to grow at a slower rate, arAd it wouldbe better if it didn't grow at all, cr grow only very little. And the deciding factorin this matter is not entirely gowernmental action but the action of arbitration courts.What ' world destroy, in my view, the opportunity -Zor international businesos inAustralia, would be the introduction at this time of a 35-hour week which must eitherreduce the amount produced for a given sum of money or, if the irlea is to workhours and have five hours' overtime, must produce the same amount of goods at amuch greater cost. This we simply cannot afford to do if we are concerned withinternational business and growth.But there is also the question of national business to be cons-idered andhere, I think Australia faces a priblem which in a sense is new, and certainly isgreater than it has ever been before. We have had periods in the past when we have hadtrade recessions, when we have had depressions. But when that has happened in thepast, all sections in the community and all kinds of businesses have been affected bythat trade recession or by that depression. But today we face a situation where a greatsegment of Australia, the rural area is, unlike other sections of industry, hit hard bythe fact that the world either will not buy what it produces, or will not pay for whatit produces the price that is required to allow production to continue. 4
And this is not a matter which just affects the rural sector..... not at all.Because let that sector be affected and it will not be long before all sections areaffected. These are the people who buy the machinery, who buy the refrigerators, themotor cars, the trucks, who keep the demand in the country towns for the manufacturersto fulfil. And what happens in that section of this country will inevitably affect allother sections. And so here too, because, in the case of manufacturing industry, whatcan be sold internally affects the price of what can be sold externally, and thereforeinternational. business here, too, there is a problem which we as a Governmentwill tackle. I think we must tackle it by seeking to help with long-term finance forthose who are, in banking terms, worthy of long-term finance, for reconstruction ofproperties, and with help for those who have to leave a rural industry to establishthemselves in other areas. This we can do. But if on that section of industry whichcannot pass on any cost increases there is to be imposed again the additional cost ofthis 35-hour week, then whatever we may do for that industry will not prevent it goingto the wall. And if it does, because of what I said, it will affect all industry andinternational trade. And these things, Sir, I am sure your Institute would have well inmind. Sir, I would finish on this note. If we can restrain the cost of whatwe produce, if we can restrain any rises, if management will-see that the increasesin productivity which management can bring are shared between those who labourand those who provide the capital, if management can see that with costs stable, pricescan drop and this is possible if that can be done, then there is, as I said, analmost unlimited prospect for international business from Australia.We will only do it, I think, by keeping the spirit of competition aliveand by that I don't mean by allowing laissez-faire to run rampant, but by keeping thespirit of competition alive. I am sure those of you who are in management willagree with me or some of you will that the spirit of competition is a littleuncomfortable sometimes for people in private enterprise. Because it is competitionit does require harder work, it does require to go out and sell, it does require tomake a better product and it is easier and simpler to avoid this if possible byhaving a merger or by arranging for price controls applying through an industry. Thisis not what I mean by keeping the spirit of private enterprise alive. But I thinkthere will always be enough individuals in this country who will see that truecompetition does remain and if it dGes, and if government can be orevented fromintervening too much and just provide guidelines, then, again, Sir, this Institute,if it can see that this happens, will have served a great national cause.One more thing. I have opened my mind to you as to what I thinkis possible for the future of this country, as to the growth which is attainable, as tothe riches which are there. I reiterate something that I said perhaps two and ahalf years ago or more. I want to see as much Australian control as possible ofthose riches as they grow, of those resources as they are discovered and developed.I can say this now with more confidence, perhaps, than I could before, becausebefore, at once, I was attacked andpeople said, " If you say this, there will be no
capital inflow from overseas. If you say this, it will dry up and there will be nodevelopment. But we said it, we said that was what we wanted, and the overseascompanies of significance understood that and have responded to it. And then wesaid we would put down guidelines for borrowing fixed capital inside Australia,and the more Australian equity there is in an enterprise, the more fixed capital willbe able to borrow from abroad. And people said, " If you do that, you will, frighten off overseas capital. It is a very skittish animal. It won't come. But wedid it and overseas capital has continued to come.Then we thought it would be helpful to do something about con~ vertiblenotes so that a class of investor who required an income could invest in Australianequity, could invest in Australian companies and change that to equity when thecompanies were profitable, and that was another step. And the2n we put up and someof the bankers here still don't like it the AJDC, in order to help to see that ifcapital was able to be borrowed overseas at fixed interest for Australian developmentit should be done, and then paid off and the development remain in Australian hands.The capital from abroad is still flowing in, in spite of all these steps. And I saythis to you. Sir, quite urepentantly, I think they were good steps, I thin-' theywere good management and I think that in a few years' time, people will lookback and say so, and that there will be more Australian ownership of Australianresources than there otherwise would have been, which in my view i s goodmanagement. But ask me back in a few years and see whether you agree w~ ith me onthat. For the moment, I agree with you in your objectives and in the way you areseeking to attain them and I thank you for letting me come and talk to you tonight.



E M B A R G 0 NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
8.09 PM, WEDNESDAY 4 NOVEMBER 1970
SENATEC A M P A I G N
OPENING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. JOHN GORTOi\ N
MALVERN TOWN HALL, MELBOURNE
Wednesday 4 November 1970 
EMBARGO : NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
4 OEBR-97-
Tonight I want to talk to you about the coming Senate Campaign.
I shall report to you on our achievements in the last year.
I shall touch briefly on the further objectives we have in mind and I shall point
out the great differences between Labor and ourselves in defence, foreign
policy, and responsible non-inflationary internal government.
The result of a Senate Election does not usually affect Australia's
future. But it is possible that this election could result in Labor's gaining
a blocking half in the Senate that is 30 Senators.
If that happened, Labor would not have power to do anything
positive. But it would have the power to obstruct, frustrate, and delay all
the processes of government. It could refuse supply, or defeat a budget.
And I believe it would use that power, as it would use any power it could
gain, to damage Australia's Security, to destroy Australia's alliances, to
disrupt Australia's economy ard to affect Australia's future very greatly.
Nevertheless, important though it is, the election is not really an
occasion for us to advance a lengthy programme of new policies, or make
new specific promises. The occasion for that was one year ago, at the
General Election, when we put before you a programme, policies, and
promises for a three-year period. And you elected us.
I can report to you that in the one year since then we have carried
out most of the promises we said we would carry out over three years. I shall
not weary you with a detailed list in this short address. But we have brought
in a vastly improved health schemle. We have reduced the burden of direct
taxation in one year by the amount we promised to do in three years. We have
continued to protect and advance greater Australian ownership of our developing
resources. We have greatly increased spending on education and on new
initiatives in social services. And we have given the States a new financial
deal by greatly increasing the funds they require for their own responsibilities.
These are only a few of the year's achievements. The complete
list is much longer. For example, at the last election, we made 43
promises and already 3 1 have been carried out. I think that I can justly claim
" that which we promise, we perform". " While they talk, we act.
We have additional objectives. We shall attain them as we can
do so with financial responsibility. I shall refer to them later in this
speech. And they are important. 
But even more import. ant is the harm which Labor would do to. our
security. Let me first discuss with you the question of Vietnam. Why I think
it was right, and in our interests to go there to help. Why I think it is right
and in our interests to remain there until the Vietnamese are organised enough,
and strong enough, to defend -themselves.
May I remind you how this WE began.
For a number of years after the Geneva Accords of 1934 the people
of North Vietnam lived under their communist government and the people of
South Vietnam lived under their non-communist government. The people in
both sections lived in relative peace. That peace could have continued.
B ut the Government of North Vietnam was prepared to wage war
rather than let tI~ e people of the Souti retain the right to choose their own
Government and way of Ife. And the people of the South were prepared to
acctept war rather than have their right of self-determination taken from them
rather than have an alien government imposed on them by force.
And so the war came.
It came at first through an uprising armed and directed by the North
and then through an invasion of the South by the North Vietnamese Regular Army.
I do not ask you to accept this on my statement alone, for the present Deputy
Leader of the Labor Party, Mr. Lance Barnard, has endorsed what I say.
In May 1967 after a visit to Vietnam he. reported publicly that there was a
large-scale invasion of South Vietnam by North Vietnamese troops. " I am
satisfied", he said, " that this is more than just a guerilla war and I suppose
it can be compared with the earlier conflict in Korea".
So there was invasion. And the object of that invasion was to destroy
self-determination in South Vietnam; to take away the people' s right to
choose how and under what government they would live.
Again, I do not ask you to accept this on my statement alone. For in
his Evatt Memorial Lecture of 1966 the present Leader of the Opposition, Mr.
Whitlam, wrote:
" it is, however, quite clear that victory by the VIietcong and Hanoi
would destroy any hope of self determination in the South as it has
destroyed it in the North".
And this invasion was accompanied, as Mr. Whitlam has admitted, by
" Vietcong brutalities and cruelties in Vietnam". 3 
Don't you think it was right to help fight that aggression? Wvere we
immoral to do so as we are now told or were the invaders immoral? Should
we follow the dictates of Mr. W* hitlam's present conscience and cease to resist
invasion, the imposition of communist dictatorship, and the brutalities
perpetrated, or should we continue to resist and finish that which we began.
Well, the invasion was resisted with the help of the Americans and
of ourselves and other countries9 It t is been resisted for six years. And
in that time the strength and purpose of South Vietnam has so grown that it is
now able to take over more of its own defence; it has so grown that the
Americans and ourselves have been able to reduce our troop numbers without
endangering the objectives we sought.
It is possible for us to make this reduction because we stayed and
fought when Labor was clamouring for us to withdraw. And because we stayed
and fought it is now possible for President Nixon to offer a cease fire, an end
to the killing, and negotiations designed to allow the South Vietnamese to
ehkct their own government from the candidates of any political party including
the communist party.
Who then is immoral? We, who offer an end to killing or they who
insist on continuing the killing to achieve military conquest and who refuse a
cease fire? What does that present conscience, of which Mr. Whitlam speaks
so much, suggest we should do? To continue to resist brutal and unprovoked
invasion? To help a small nation retain the right to govern itself? Or to
withdraw all our troops now as Mr. Whitlamn presently demands.
If we did that we would betpy the people of South Vietnam. We
would negate the heavy sacrifices already made. We would be recreant to
the hopes for future universal peace because future peace can only endure if
small nations are not threatened with invasion and conquest.
We would destroy the confidence of the other small countries in
Asia, and by doing that, we would increase the possibility of future danger to
Australia itself. We look forward to the day when, with South Vietnam able to guard
its own independence without help, we can withdraw all our troops, That day is
coming nearer as the military war is being won. But ui~ til it does arrive I suggest
that morality, conscience, and self interest all require that we should finish the
task we began. But Labor under Mr. Whitlamn would renege in Vietnam. / 4 
Having done this -mand thereby increased the danger to other
Asian countries including Malaysia they would then withdraw from the Five
Power Arrangements designed to help Malaysia and Singapore and at the same
time they would drastically cut the strength of our own army by abolishing
National Service. We would be alone, with our alliances shattered, regarded as
accepting no responsibility to help mr-ntain peace in our region. And with
our own army halved.
That is what I meant by saying Labor would damage Australia's
security and destroy Australia's alliances.
And that is one reasn I ask you not to give them the chance to
do this damage.
RURAL INDUSTRIES Australia has a new problem new in scale to solve. That
problem is the plight of many of our rural industries.
Some have been hit hard by drought ( in many sections of the
Nation) particularly by the tragic drought in parts of Queensland.
This has drastic impact on many individuals but it will eventually
pass. It is not new. And we can take measures to help those who are hard
hit. In fact we have, during the past five years provided some $ 94
million for drought relief freight concessions, restocking loans, assistance
with shire rates and so on and we stand ready to support the States further
whenever the cost of approved drought relief measures is beyond their resources.
But the problem of selling our produce on world markets now and
in the future is far more serious. Many of our rural industries now find either
that the countries of the world do not wish to buy their produce, or: that they
will not pay enought for it, to provide a living to the producer.
We have had hard pressed rural industries before. But what is new
( about the present position) is that where rural industries were hard pressed
before so was every other section of industry. Now rural industries alone
are hard pressed while other industries, and other sections of the community,
are not. a 0 
This does not come about through lack of help and support by
Governments to rural industry in Australia-
* We have increased the superphosphate bounty to $ 12 per
ton: We have extended taxation concessions-
We have introduced a drought bond scheme:
We have raised exemption levels in relation to estate duty:
We introduced devaluation compensation payments following
the devaijation of steriing at the end of 1967.... and to the
3) June i97.), payments made to rural industry totalled
million: In the last Budget we provided $ 30 million for payments to
woolgrowaers whose income from wool fell by more than 8
per cent between 1968/ 69 and 1969/ 70 and who received at
least 50 -er cert of their gross income from wool.
We have increased the funds available to the Term Loan and
Farm Development Loan Fund and made arrangements for
the e xei-r-. tion of primary producers in adverse financial
circumstances from the increase in the maximum overdraft
rate approved by the Reserve Bank in March 1970.
The Government has under consideration at this moment a
proposal for a stabilisation plan for certain exports of fresh
apples and pears.
All this we have already done.
The result of the squeeze on rural industry is not a matter
of concern to those industries alone. The country towns which depend on their
prosperity are hard hit. And because those on the land are buyers of cars,
machinery, chemicals, and a maltitude of consumer goods this recession will
be increasingly felt throujih the whcoile fabric of industry ' And commerce in
Australia. Further, because the salle of rural products earns over 50% 0
of our foreign exchange a decline in earn ings will severely affect our overseas
balances. This is a national, not a sectional problem.
The solution must lie not in a withdrawal of the kind of help which is
now given. 
Rather does it lie in seeking new and different methods of assistapce.
Methods designed to ensure that the highest price which buyers are prepared to
pay is in fact paid. Methods designed to increase the efficiency of handling,
where possible, and reduce the costs of marketing.
Methods designed to help reduce the cost of production to the
individual, efficient, grower and not by means of subsidy.
An example of this approach is the Government' s action to help
wool growers to help combat the disistrous fall in wool prices.
There we have secured legislative authority to set up the Australian
Wool Commission. The function of this Commission is not to set a -high reserve price
which buyers will not pay, and which could result in huge stock piles of wool
and in manufacturers switching to synthetic fibres.
Its function is to operate a flexible reserve price, determined from
day to day, in order to ensure that if buyers are prepared to pay a certain price
they will in fact pay it and not be able to buy moire cheaply because of the
vagaries of the auction system.
Its function, too, is to regulate the flow of wool onto the market; to
encourage the adoption of technological aids to wool selling such as pre sale
objective measurement, ultimately selling by sample, and reduction in handling
costs thas ensuring the highest possible return to the grower without trying to
defy the market. My colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry has been working
energetically on this. He has already chosen, after consultation with me, the
members of the Commission. He will announce the names tomorrow.
We expect the Commission will hold its first meeting this week.
We hope and believe the Commission will be operating the flexible reserve scheme
within a few weeks.
This will help. But more is needed.
It would be a1a enormous help to many farmers and it would remove a
constant worry from their minds, if they could be assured when their
circumstances justified it of guaranteed long-term finance. If they had a loan
for a term of years, instead of short-term loans or overd~ rafts on call, they could
plan better for the future and would have a security they, now lack.
We therefore propose to discuss with the appropriate financial
institutions the setting up of a Finance Insurance Corporation to insure long-term
loans to rural producers and to act in much the same way as the Housing Finance
Insurance Corporation acts at present.
But I must emphasise that the key words in what I have said are" when
their circumstances justify it". This is not a proposal to advance long-term
credit to rural producers who may be in a hopeless financial position or who may
not be a good credit risk. / 7. 
The Bureau of Agricultur al Economics has been examining this proposal
and has reported to the Minister for Primary Industry on it. We believe that it will
work, that it will be of assistance of a new kind, and that it will be in the national
interest. There is an additional problem. That of existing farm debt. In a number
of cases a load of debt is crried which is greater than the farmer or property can bear.
This will require a programme of debt and property readjustment. I do not mean by
this that we should adopt the slogan " get big or get out" because bigness is not of
itself any guarantee of eonomy or efficiep'y.
But I do mean that the harsh realities of the world will require a policy of
" oget to a stage where you can produce at a cost that meets the market prices or
accept a lower income or leave the industry.
And if this is so then it requires that the community should help in the
retraining and rehabilitation of those -who, for one reason or another, cannot meet this
criteria, and that the Commonwealth should work with the State to bring about that
structural readjustment. just as I asked you not to give Mr. Whitlam the chance to damage our
security and alleances so I ask you not to give him the chance to wreck our national
economy. HOUR WEEK I have been speaking of the rural industries and of what has been done, and
can be done, to assist them.
But one thing is clear. With their costs already high and their returns
already fallen they wiould be dealt a crippling blow if Australia introduced a
week. Under the Whitlam-Hawke partnerslip there is a real danger that this would
happen if they had the opportunity.
And this would not only hit rural industries.
Introduction of a thirty-five hour week must mean one of two things.
Either those who now work forty hours would work only 35 and the volume
of production would therefore drop, and the cost per unit of production would therefore
rise, Or those who now work forty hours for a given wage would work 35 hours for the
siame wage and an extra five hours at overtime rates. In which case the cost per unit
of production would therefore rise.
in either case the end result must be greatly increased costs. This would
hit all those on fixed incomes; all on superannuation, all living on the income from
investments, all pensioners.
It would raise the price of everything the housawife buys, and the
transport and other public facilities she uses. 
It would place Australia at great disadvantage in trying to sell our products
on the competitive export market. It would raise the cost of building schools, hospitals,
roads, houses, and the other services the community needs.
It * would damage overseas confidence in Australia's future and impede the
inflow of capital to helpa in our needed development. And even though this damage
would have been done th worker himself would be no better off.
The most he could gain would he higher money wages which because of the
higher prices for everything he bought would not be higher real wages and would buy
no more. It Is hard to think of any action whicliwould more damage Australia and
Australians. Yet Mr. Hawke of the A. C. T. U. has announced that 1971 will be the year
of the ' 5 hour week. That is his stated aim. And Mr. Whitlam is bound, by the
platform constitution and rules of the Labor Party to do all he can to help Mr. Hawke.
For the platform, constitution and rules as adopted in August last year state " That
conference considers that an effective political campaign be undertaken, in conjunction
with the A. C. T. U. to achieve our objective of a 35 hour week.
Typically, Mr. Whitlam is now evading all questions on the marter. But
he is bound to support Mr. Hawke by " an effective political campaign". I belileve that
if he had the opportunity he would.
He could do so by permitting statutory bodies over whom the C3overnment
had control to take the lead in introducing the shorter week. He could do so by exerting
political pressure on those who determine the hours orl public servants.
Above all he could do so, should a case be put to the Arbitration Court,
by intervening and urging the Court to do what he is bound to do.
Well, we will not. We will use all means open to us to point out tile
disastrous consequences of such a step.
Whether or not the question is pending before the Arbitration Commission
we shall publicly point out the economic consequen ces of the proposal. We shall
publicly urge that it ought not to be entertained.
Mr. Whitlam and Mr. Hawke think it terri: ble that we should do this. I
reply by paraphrasing the words of Mr. Trudeau " Nf your hearts want to bleed over
this, go ahead and bleed. It is better that you should than that the country should
bleed economically because of you.
It is true that because of automation and the use of new machinery the
same amount can be produced with fewer men, or in a shorter time by the same number
of men. But surely this does not mean we should seek to work less for the same
amount of production. 
Surely what we need is greater and greater production from the same
number of men, made possible by increased automation, so that real wages can be
increased and so that the needs of the community the public works and services of
all kinds which depend on production can be the more quickly and the more ch~ eaply
supplied to the community.
The time for less work has not yet nearly arrived.
Both the individual and the community have too many pressing needo. and
these needs cannot be met unless they ar--worked for.
That, at any rate, is our approach. And that is a point of difference
between us and the Opposition which I ask you to consider at this Election.
SOCIAL WELFARE AND EDUCATION
Let me now speak of that field in which my Government has done much.
The field of Social Welfare and of education. There are two promises,
made at the General Election last year, which have not yet been fulfilled. I
make no apology for this because no one could expect mie to carry out all of a three
year programme in one year.
Those promises were
To pay special attention to the needs of the low Income family with
young children.
To tackle the problem posed because many. people after paying health
insu~ ance contributions f3r many years, find that they are obliged to spend
long periods under intensive care in nursing homes as distinct from hospitals,
and do not receive hospital benefits.
I renew those promises and reiterate that as promised we shall act on these matters
during tIe life of the Parliament.
The Minister for Health has been discussing with the Funds the question
of long illness in nursing homes. And the Minister for Social Services has been
studying the varying means by which our promise on the needs of the low income family
can best be carried out.
In the field of education direct Commonwealth Government spending has
increased from $ 192 million in 1968--69 to $ 312 million this year. And by providing
a new financial deal for the States we have indirectly assisted the States to raise
their spending on education to an expected one billion, three hundred and eleven
million dollars this year or almost 15% more than 1969-70. 
9a,,
I now announce a new objective to which wie give very high priority. That
is, the establishment of child care centres for children of pre-school age,.
In Australia, as in other advanced countries overseas, married women
including those with children of pre-school age are entering regular em ployment in
increasing numbers. Thus, in the decade 1960-1970 the number of married women
in the work force almost doubled from 9. to 18. 3% 7.
We wish to ensure that the children of there women have every opp) ortunity
for the fullest development in both the et.. otional and physical sense. Studies made
by the Department of Labour and National Service show that existing facilities to
ensure this are woefully inadequate.
We therefore announce as an objective our desire to introduce a Scheme
to assist in the establishment and operation of child care centres of approved standard.
In consultation with the organisations at present concerned with such child care
that is the State, Municipal and voluntary bodies which now maintain such facilities,
we hcoe to work out guidelines and standards covering the nature of the accommiodation,
the equipment required, the staffing required, and the training requirements oZ staff
needed for the effective conduct of these centres.
Further, wie will discuss with employers the most effective means of
providing incentives to employers to induce them to provide child care facilities.
Overseas experience has demonstrated the value of the participation of-employers
in such schemes. In the discussionswe propose with State and Municipal and volunuary
organi sat ions we will be helped by the liaison already established by the Women's
Bureau of the Department of Labour and National Service with many ofL the
organisations to whom we shall be speaking.
A programme of this kind cannot be put into operation overnight but we
shall begin it, and shall discuss with the States methods of increasing the numbers
of pre-school teachers to staff the centres.
This does not mean that we believe the need for pre-school teachfing
centres generally is not important. But it does mean that we think the proviston
of pre-school centres for children of working or sick: mothers should be the
first steps we take in this area. 
OFFICE OF THE ENVIRONMENT
There is a mounting, and justified, concern in Australia at the risks
of environmental pollution.
Such pollution is not the inevitable by-product of advanced technology
and popuiation increase, but it does represent a failure to take fully into
account the environmental consequences of our actions, and of the disposal of
waste products by individuals and factories.
The results in Australia are not yet approaching the catastrophic
results which are threatening to occur in the more heavily industrialised and
more heavily populated countries.
But the time to begin to correct present pollution and to prevent
increasing pollution is now.
The State Governments are showing an awareness of this and the CSIRO
has Leen carrying out a wide range of investigations into environmental quality.
It has indeed been engaged in some 48 projects concerned with such matters as
studying biological control of insect pests as distinct from insecticide control
methods of treatment of factory effluent, control of the ash content of coal.
But in many cases pollution can best be tackled by a National Body
since, for instance, pollution of a stream in one State can lead to pollution of e
river in another State.
WNe therefore have taken the decision to set up a Commonwealth Office
of the Environment under the control of the Prime Minister' s Department.
This Office will be responsible for advising the Commonwealth and
recommending to us action that should be taken to prevent or reduce pollution
arising out of the activities of any Commonwealth Department or Authority.
We shall also approach the States to seek the formation of a National
Advisory Council to advise the Commonwealth, and the States, on action
to be taken in areas where co-ordination can properly be achieved.
LABOR AND WHITLAM
You will no doubt have noticed Mr. Whitlam' s a ccusations that we
are divided and divisive.
Divisive, one of his favourite words, seems to mean refusing to do
what he wants. But I am surprised he would even use the word " divided". 
11.
For we have against us a Labor Party openly divided as it has not been
since 1954. The Victorian organisation is in a state of cnaos, more concerned
with internai squabbling than with anything else.
A meeting to protest against Federal Labor intervention recently
att racted twice as many people as Mr. Whitlain attracted to the opening of
his campaign. This Vict orian meeting was tu be declared bogus one week and
given Federal Labor Party blessing the next.
The group of extreme left wing unions which has for years ruled the
Labor Executive the Trades Union Defence Committee and those
characterised by Mr. Whitlam as a monolithic, junta-ridden, and undemocratic
group have not been defeated.
The struggle still goes on and the odds are that Mr. Calwell' s
pro~ hesy that nothing will change will be proved right.
They are in dissaray so complete, and so publicly evident, that one
would imagine that the word division was the last word their so-called
Leader would use.
As to their Leader I propose to leave snide personal attacks to him.
It suits him. After all who can forget the sophisticated wit and generosity
of spirit he displayed, when, on Mr. McEwen' s last day in Parliament, after
a recorc' career of real achievement for the Nation, Mr. Whitiam' s
contribution was to call out " let the lame duck waddle off".
But I bel ieve it fair to say this. Mr. idhiclam has begun his campaign
with a string of false statements.
Hie stated in his opening speech that we had placed unprecedented
reliance on indirect taxation. This is false.
He said we had a 5% O cost of living increase last year. This is
false. He said the Treasurer had " admitted" this. This is false.
He said our approach to the care of the sick aged is discriminatory
and unplanned. This is false.
He said that Labor had proposed to recognise the National Liberation
Front as a party to negotiations and that this had been accepted. This is false. 
Labor proposed the N. L. F. snould be recognised as a Principal
party to negotiations, this has not been done, and the N. L. F. are regarded
only as part of the Hanoi delegation.
He has since accused me of breaking a promise to legislate for
portability of pensions this is false. The legislation has been introduced
into the House. He has accused me of doing nothing to implement the
construction of railways in South Aus~ ralia. He states no money has been
provided for this in the 197J/ 71 Budget. This is false. The Port Pirie!
Adel aide Railway is held up, at the request of the Premier of South
Australia, who has asked for further discussions. But the Budget contains
an Appropriat ion of $ 3 million for the Port Augusta/ Whyalla Railway. It
is contained in Appropriation Act No. 2, Division No. 890/ 2/ 05. At the
moment tenders have been called, received, and are being considered.
I have not dealt with all his false statements. It would be
w , arying to do so.
But the credibility of the man, and of his campaign, might
perhaps be judged by these tactics. Genuine grounds for criticism must
be scarce if he is driven to invent them.
One thing more I gould say.
Mr. Whitlam accuses us of judging the Australian people to be
selfish. Yet it is we who ask the Australian people to accept that
there should be an obligation for National Service.
It is he who urges the easier course of abolishing it.
It is we who ask the Australian people to accept the burden
of completing the task in Vietnam.
It is he who urges the easier way of immediate withdrawal.
It is we who ask the Australian people to accept the need to
join with Britain, Malaysia, Singapore and New Zealand in a pact to help
bring stability to our North. 
14
It is he who urges the easier way of retreating to isolation.
It is we who place the defeat of inflation, and responsible
management of the economy, amongst our highest objectives.
It is he who pursues the popular path of promising to do everything
that anyone wants at once. Regardless of whether there are the men and
materials to keep the promises, regardless of the effect on prices.
Who is judging the Australian people to be indolent, and selfish?
I suggest that we are not and that he is.
Which does not seem a proper course for this self appointed
custodian of the national conscience to follow.
CONCLUSION I have shown some of the differences between us and our opponents.
In Defence and Foreign Affairs and concern for the future security
of Australia we are poles apart.
Domestically we are pledged to fight inflation and rising prices.
Every utterance they makE-whether political or industrial supports action which
will inflate prices. We know the importance of rural industry to the economy and of the
personal suffering which many engaged in some rural industries now face.
Labor's leader devoted two lines of his opening address to this subject and,
so far as I know, he has not spoken of it since.
We are pledged to preserve the right of dissent, except when that
interferes with the civil rights of the majority, which we shall protect. A
leading spokesman for Labor has stated that authority has had its day.
I believe that if these differences are understood you will give us
the right to govern this nation in rhe years ahead as those of our persuasion
have done in the years past. That is the right to govern in such a way that
Our security against attack will be advanced, our
internal economny will continue to provide full
employment and rising living standards.
The war against poverty will be pursued until it is finally
won.
The industrial and commercial strength of our nation
will continue to grow.
Within a broad framework of governmental guidelines
decisions will be left to individuals and not dictated
by politicians and public servants. 
15
We believe that in this decade Australia can make great
advances towards freedom from fear:
Freedom from fear of aggression from without.
Freedom from fear of being old, unwanted and
uncared for.
Freedom from fear of unemployment.
Freedom from fear of being unable to meet the
cost of illness.
We will not gain all we want at once. Nor will we gain it
without working for it. But we have advanced towards the goal and given
effort by Australians, and responsibility by Governments, we will advance
still further. We ask you now to let us take further steps towards this goal
unimpeded by obstruction from a Labor Senate. We ask you give us
Government Senators and let us get on with the job. 



7. 15 PM. MONDAY 9 NOVEMBER 1970
SENATE TV AND CAMPAIGN 1970
RADIO TALK NO. 1 BY THE PRIME MIIISTER
MR_. O HN GORTON
( To be broadcast on ABC Radio 7. 15 pm E. S. T. Monday 9 November
and TV 8.30 pm local time Tuesday 10 November).
G 0
TV AND
E M A 
Tonight I want to talk with you on the relative merits of our Health Scheme
and the scheme with which you are threatened by Mr. Whitlam.
For with a Certain sullen obstinacy, Mr. Whitlam is still threatening to
introduce his scheme if he can. Thbis could hurt every hIousehold in Ausotralia and
the facts about it should be known.
Further, an examination of the statements made to justify his scheme provides
a test of his credibility.
Now his first intention is to take away from you your freedom to choose which
fund you want to join. All the existing friendly societies and other closed fujids, as
well as all the open funds, would be abolished under his scheme You wiould be
compelled to deal with the single, monopolistic fund which would be the 2py fund he
would allow to operate.
He justifies this by an incorrect statement. That statement is that " the
existii. g funds squander or retain $ 1 out of every $ 4 they receive in contribut ions."
Now the independent Nimmo Committee found no support at all for the claim
that a number of different funds adds to the cost of the Health Scheme. Indeed, it
recommended that the friendly societies and closed funds should be encouraged. to
continue. And it published tables showing the cost of management of closed funds
to be, on the average, 6 cents in the dollar, not 25 cents in the dollar as-Whitlam
claims. And it showed tables showing the cost of management of open funds to be
on the average 12 * cents in the dollar not 25 cents in the dollar as Whitlam claims.
So Mr. Whitlam-s statement Is quite untrLra and you lose your freedom Of
choice for nothing.
His second intention is to make most of us pay more in contributions than we
now pay. At present tax deductible contributions . paid by an unmarried person,
insuring for medical benefits and public hospital ward treatment vary from State to
State. But in every case, in every State, Mr. Wh-itlam's threatened levy of 1-1 per cent
of an unmarried person's taxable income would cost that person more in every
case in every State.
At present the contributions paid by a married man also vary as between
States. But in this case the Labor Scheme would cost him less until his income
reached about 000. But this would only be true if his wife were not earning or in
receipt of income. For if she were she would also have to contribute 1' per cent
of her taxable income and the combined contributions would most likely cost the famili.
more., e 9 / 2 
To sum up. Mr. Whitlam's Scheme
Would cost every unmarried person in Australia earning $ 50 a week and over
more It would cost every married man in Queensland more
It would cost all married men in other States more if their income exceeded
about 000.
Ik would cost many married men in other States with incomes less than
000 more if their wives were &amp;. so receiving income.
This is described by Mr. Whitlam as a scheme which costs the citizens of Australia
less. The third intention is to alter the benefits now payable. For small payments
for V" 3itS to a general practitioner the Labor Scheme would give the contributor a
few cents more. But for minor operations it would reduce the benefits now payable
to a patient and for major operations it would reduce them very greatly.
Mr. Whitlam calls this increasing benefits.
Well, think of this and think of the credibility of the statements that have
been made to justify a scheme which in practice would cost you more and in
most cases provide you with less. 



12 NOVEMBER, 1970
SENA T E C A M P AI G N 1970
TV AND RADIO TALK NO. 2 BY THE PRIME MIiISTER
MR. LOHN GORTON
( To be broadcast by ABC and commercial TV channels at 8. 30 p. m.
local time on Thursday 12 November and by the ABC Radio Network
at 7. 15 p. m. E. S. T. Friday 13 November.)
EMM B A R G 0 8. 30 PM. THURSPAY 
When I becamne Prime Minister a little less than three years ago, I spoke of
my wish to help the old and the ill and the handicapped. Now it is undoubtedly true
that a great deal remains to be done in this field, a very great deal. Bu* It it Is also
true much has been done.
We have done a number of things, and if you will bear with me ! or a moment,
I will outline some of them.
We have removed the fear of the cost of long illness in hospitals. Our Health
Scheme has removed the fear of the cost of expensive operations, or expensive
specialist attention.
It is a scheme, moreover, which provides that the community will pay insurance
for low-income families, and it is a scheme under which the contributor pays, in
general, less, and receives, in general, more, than was offered under Labor's
scheme. We have brought in the Tapered Means Test, under which pensioners who can
earn, or who have saved, can receive some of the benefit of their self-help
without losing their pension entirely.
We have brought in a Home Care Programme for the care of aged persons, or
others with special needs, in their own homes.
We are providing $ 5 million a year to the States to build low rental housing
for pensioners. We are providing capital for buildings and equipment for homes for
handicapped children.
We have raised pensions for TPI repatriation pensioners by $ 8 a week, or
more than 25 per cent.
And we have increased the base rate of penisions by $ 2.50 a week for a single
pensioner and $ 4 a week for married pensioners, during a period when the Cost
of Living Index shows a rise of $ 1 a week.
In fact we have raised benefits, or taken entirely new initiatives in more than
different areas of social welfare.
As a result, social welfare now makes up the second greatest item in our
Budget, and will cost this year 800 million, which is a 25 per cent increase on
the Budget of two years ago.
But we still must overcome the problem of long-term illness in nursing homes
as distinct from hospitals. We still must redeem our promise to help low-income
earners with young families. We need to initiate a scheme for pre-school care for
the children of working mothers. And we must continue to improve the lot of the
base rate pensioner, but without losing sight of the needs of other area-" of social
welfare. / 2 
2.
We will do these things as soon as they can be done with financial responsibility.
I have not changed the aim I had when I became Prime M. nister, and I believe
that what we have done in a short time is evidence that we shall continue with the
task. Australia must and will win the war on poverty. We shall not win it in one
battle or in one year. It must be fought on many fronts. It will take time and it
will take effort from all Australians, for after all, it is only from the production of
Australians that Governments can divert resources to these ends. But my
Government is determined we shall win it, and I believe I can claim that the record
shows we have advanced.
Indeed, in this as in other fields, I think that I can truly say to you what we
promise we perform.
Goodnight. 



E M B A R GO NOT FOR RELEASE BY ANY MEDIA BEFORE
7.15 PM, WEDNESDAY 18 NOVEMBER 1970
SENATE CAMPAIGN
SUMMING UP BY THE PRIME MINISTER
MR. JOHN GORTON 
EMIBARGO: 7. 15 pm, Wednesday 18 November, 1270.
The Senate Election is nearing its end. And it is time to sum up the
matters at issue. The results of the election will not change the Government, But
it is, not like an ordinary by-election. For if Labor were to wvin they could frustrate
the Government's programme, delay legislation inordinately, and even refuse supply.
That is why it is just as important to vote for the Government at this
election as it would be to vote for it at a general election. The election itself has
not been an occasion for new policies or new specific promises. For as I said to
you fourteen days ago, when the Campaign opened, the occasion for that was at the
general election last year.
Rather has this election given to Australians the opportunity to consider
the great differences between the Government and the Opposition on matters which
affect Australia's future. Those matters ar-defence, th e makitenance of our
alliances, the management of our economy, and the future of our rural industries.
The differences between us in these fields have become even more
marker' as the Campaign has progressed. For the Opposition would withdraw from
Vietnam regardless of whether or not the South Vietnamese had sufficiently built up
their strength to defend themselves. They would quit as we are in sight of our goal.
We will not. They would withdraw from the Five Power Agreement with Britain, New
Zealand, Malaysia and Singapore. We will not. They would reduce the fighting strength
of our Army by a half by abolishing national service. We will riot. They would
damage the AINFUS Treaty by refusing to have joint Australian/ U. S. Defence bases
in Australia. We will preserve and strengthen the Treaty for the sake of our owin
security. They would seek to bring in a 35-hour week. We will not. Our concern
is to raise real wages and living standards, and to get production from which the
requirements of the public in schools and hospitals can be met.
They have no policy to assist rural industry. We have. And we have
spelt it out. There has been some attempt, during the Campaign to put pressure on
me to give specific promises on pension rises. I think it would be wrong to do that
in the course of an election campaign.
Elections are not auctions. / 2 
And I have not once commented-on-the mater of -whether or not pensions
Will be raised in the near future. But I think I can fairly claimi this.... our record
in improving social welfare is better than that-of any other Government over a
comparable time. On that record I believe it fair to ask you to conclude that
improvement in social welfare is important to us and improving it is a course we
will pursue in the future, as and when we can responsibly do so.
Besides the diff erences in policy there is another difference between us
and the Opposition. I have tried, in the course of the campaign, to state clearly
and unequivocally our policies on defence and internal economic management.
I believe Australians are entitled to unambiguous statements of policy
from both the Government and the Opposition. That is surely essential to the
proper working of a democratic system. But Mr. Whitlam will not adopt this
course. He has evaded, and refused to answer direct questions on matters of great
moment to Australia's future.
He has refused to answer questions as to whether he favours a 35 hour
week and on whether he will conduct a political campaign, in conjunction with
Mr. Hawke to bring it about. The honest answer he could give to that would be to
admit that he was bound to conduct such a campaign and that he would do so.
But he evaded giving that answer.
He has refused to admit that he would withdraw from the Five Power
Agreement and Agreement entered into for the defence and sta,-bility of our near
north. When questioned recently he evaded the issue and talked instead about the
value of having Indonesia as our defence umbrella. And a bulwark against
Communist China.
Again an honest answer he could have giver, would be that he would
withdraw from this Agreement, because Labor's policy would force him tq. But
he avoided giving the direct answer.
He began this campaign with a number of false statements. I publicly
branded them as false. He has not tried to sustain them. Since the opening he has
made additional false statements. For instance one was that we had provided no
money in the Budget for railways in South Australia.
He began to post late in the campaign as a champion of higher
pensions. And we were at once told by Mr. Griffiths, a Labor Party Member -that
when he, Mr. Griffiths, sought a programme of higher pensions in caucus, Mr. Whitla
rebuked him and said Mr. Griffiths was trying to featherbed the pensioners.
All these matters, taken together, must surely raise some doubts as
to our opponent's credibility and as to his readiness to deal openly with the
Australian people. // 3 
31.
1 believe this, too, should be carefully weighed by electors.
I was asked, at one stage in the Campaign, to tell Australians what I am
for. And I am glad to do so. I am for an Australia which keeps its alliances, and which
helps to maintain stability in its region, an Australia which is not left friendless and
isolated. I am for an Australia which will provide adequate defence for itself. I
am for an Australia which will develop its resources and retain the greatest -possible
Australian owinership of those resources while it does so.
I am for an Australia whose citizens will seek more production, reder
than more leisure, so that prices can be kept down, real wages can rise and the
public facilities required by Australia, including adequate social welfare can be
provided. I am for an Au~ stralia which will continue the war on poverty, and seek
to relieve the neglect and loneliness which some old people who may not be poor,
may row feel. I am for an Australia where ordinary citizens can exercise their
civil rights to use the streets and other public facilities without having those rights
denied them by a minority. I am for an Australia where the performing arts are
encouraged to develop.
And in this and other fields my government has acted to achieve the goals
for which we stand. But I am against a political Party which would destroy our
alliances and our own defence. I am against a Party which seeks leisure rather
than production. I am against a Party whose Leader must follow policies
dictated by an outside body which has never faced the electors.
I am against a Party which is so deeply influenced by communist elements
as is our opponent. I am against a Party which mocks at the maintenance of law and
order, whose Leader advises young servicemen to refuse to obey a legitimate military
order. I am against a Party whose every utterance ignores the danger of inflation,
and urges courses which must create inflation. I distrust a Party as openly and
deeply divided as is the Labor Party today.
We have policies before you we believe in We think that no nation1-which
puts ease before effort can be great. We think no people which talks only of its rights
and not of the duties and the responsibilities that go with rights will ever be secure,
and we do not think Australians are this kind of people. And so at this crucial
election we asIk you to, give us Government Senators and let us get on with the job. 



VISIT OF POPE PAUL VI
FAR EWELL AT SYDi" L-Y A IRPORT
peech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Your Holiness, Your Excellencies, Mr. Premier, Ladies and
Gentlemen No words of mine are necessary, Sir to let you
know how welcome you have been, for the warmth and sincerity
of the crowds that have flocked to see you have made that manlifest.
This, the first visit by a Pontiff, is something we
shall long remember. It has been specially significant to our
Roman Catholic community, but it has had a wider significance
and one that touches all of us.
Your visit, Sir, has come at a time when there is
a growing spirit of unity among Christian peoples, arid your
1flessage of peace and goodwill, based on fundamental Chris" tian
principles, has universal appeal.
We admire the way in which you have managed
to cope with the many demands and the constant demands upon
your time and energy while you have been here.
You have met many Australians, people-from
various walks of life the old, the young, the native-born, the
migrants but all Australians. And in addition, through radio
and television, the message which you brought has been transferred
to the remotest parts of this great continent.
Now you are to continue your journey, and as you travel
on, I hope you will have with you in your heart warm and happy
memories of our nation.
We are glad you came. We wish you Godspeedl and
a safe journey home. And we thankc you. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER AT THEB
AUSTRKE 9NEGRWN99-T
IN SINGAPORE 18 JANUARY 1971
Members of the Australian Alumni:
I found the introductory speech absolutely full of interest. I listened
with great attention to the suggestion that there should be much more Australian
investment in Singapore.
But you know there is Australian investment here. I think I have heard
of the Hume Pipe Company. Perhaps, Sir, your remarks which I have taken note
of might also be directed to a number of investors in Singapore, because there
is great investment in Australia from people in Singapore. They are constantly
building buildings, buying land and indeed, I met a gentleman the other night who
had such foresight that he had invested not in Australia but he did own 90 per
cent of the brewery in New Guinea. This indicates that there is a flow of
investment and investible funds generated from Singapore, which could well
perhaps be used here if the requirement for investment is so great.
But I don't know that the requirement is so very great. I come here from
time to time, and every time one comes, one sees immense changes in the skyline,
and onle sees a city really growing and growing apace.
I don't know whether there is unemployment but I gather there is very
little unemployment, particularly as far as the young is concerned. I gather there
is a shortage, indeed, of skilled labour and unskilled labour.
I had thought of Singapore as one of the success stories not onl y of this
part of the world but one of the success stories of modern times, comparable in
many ways with Venice of old a city state, a state dependig largely on commerce,
on export and on import, situated where the trade routes of the world cross. But
with this great distinction, that it has no danger of sinking beneath the waver.. but
rather is demonstrably day by day reaching for the skies.
And this is the feeling one has of Singapore.
It is possible I put it no higher than that it is possible that Australia
itself may have contributed a small amount to the capacity which had led to this
success story. I think that you members of the Alumni are living illustrations of
what I hope will be an enduring link between our countries though we may from
time to time criticise each other, as the previous speaker criticised me and as
I propose to criticise him later on but also I hope and believe that it is an
illustration of one very successful means of international co-operation. / 2 
In the last twenty years, Australia has welcomed more than 10, 000 fellows
and scholars from Asian and African countries under the Colombo Plan and such
Government aid schemes alone not counting private students. Six hundred and
forty-two of these scholars have come from Singapore. Australia provided the
facilities for training of all kinds. But Singapore students took advantage of those
facilities with diligence, with success, so that in 1969, 96 per cent of Singapore
Colombo Plan students doing undergraduate courses in all years passed their
examination 96 per cent.
N1ow anybody who has a knowledge of the normal pass rate of Australians
and others in Australian universities would realise what an unusually excellent
result this is. We tend to have a 40 per cent failure rate i the first year, of
Australian students, and yet 96 per cent of the people from Singapore Colombo
Plan people passed their courses.
I think that this is a compliment to the calibre of the students that have
been selected by their Government to come to Australia, and I think that it is a
compliment to the students themselves that they have taken: full advantage of the
opportunities so provided. And it is clear proof that the cost of the Colombo Plan
courses, which now totals some $ 40 million, is being fully productive which all aid
schemes are not and is fulfilling the purpose for which it was designed, which all
aid schemes do not do.
As an illustration perhaps of this, I am informed that that magnificent
c-onference hall in which the Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference is now
being held was in fact designed by an architect who took his first degree in
Architecture in Melbourne, in Australia. He then went somewhere else, I gather,
to do a postgraduate course, but clearly because of his undergraduate course, was
able to design a building of such excellence.
Apart from the Colombo Plan itself Government-sponsored students, those
of whom I have spoken so far there were some 10, 000 privately-f inanced students
from Asia, Africa and the Pacific in our schools and universities and colleges last year.
I haven't got the figures on the pass rates of the privately-financed students but I do
kno v that they are not as good as the figures of the Government-sponsored Colombo
Plan students. Nevertheless they do come back and they do practice as accountants,
lawy ers, doctors, and engineers with a technical knowledge which must be and
obviously is of advantage.
This kind of operation seems to me to be one which stands high in any
attempt at international co-operation to raise the economic and living standards of the
countries of the world. For the aim of econorrc assistance, and this I believe it
is important to understand, the aim of economic assistance should never be to
provide a hand-out. It should be to provide resources, it should not be to provide
resources for consumer spending or for dissipation. Because if that were to be the
concept of international aid, then it would merely result in a requirement for a
continuing dole, and that would be as repugnant to the receiver as it would be to the
donor. And it would do nothing whatever to tackle the real problems of underdeveloped
countries. 
The realI aim, surely, ought to be to provide capacity in the form of
technical expertise, professional expertise and capital, so that industries can be
developed, or when insufficient is produced in any country for its internal
consumption agricultural production can be increased. In fact, the aim should be
to provide developing countries with the means to produce and to try to see they
have the opportunity of selling any such increased production.
VWhat better way can there be to provide the means to produce than to see
that the elite of a country, as I believe you intellectually are, have the greatest
possible training in all those fields which, if applied to the growth of a nation, can
accelerate that growth and see that it goes in the proper direction. If,' when this
has been done, when this kinad of assistance has been provided, the resulting
improvement and there-always is a resulting improvement the resulting
improvement is swallowed up by an unrestricted increase in population, then I am
sorry, but that is a problem for the country aided to solve.
It is not an argument for more and more aid from donor countries. And
there is no place in which this is more realised than in this State of Singapore where,
I do not have to tell you, measures have been taken to ensure that increased
production, that increased prosperity is not dissipated . by . an unlimited increase
In population. So when we say that t he gap between the richer and the poorer countries
shou' I be reduced and this is something I have heard a considerable amount about
in the last couple of days I believe that that means that the richer countries should
provide the poorer with the means and the opportunity of closing that gap, and it
is then up to the less developed countries to use those opportunities to close that gap
by their own efforts.
And cau you find a better example of that being don-, e thatrds evident in
this State of Singapore? As your own Prime Minister so cogently said :" The
richer countries cannot be expected to adopt the role of beinig forever their
brother's keeper". And some of those in the less developed countriec. will have to cease to
adopt the role of expecting as a right that somebody will keep them no matter
what they do. But though we may not and should not be our brother's keeper, we
must be, and we try to be our brother's helper and then it depends on the brother
who is helped what the end result will be.
So in providing the advice and the technical education which we in Australia
are now able to do, and in seeing the graduates of these courses contributing so
greatly to their countries' own advance as we see it here, we have in action a proper
plan of assistance properly used by its recipients and resulting in that economic
advance and that self-reliance which must be the real, ultimate aim of all plans
of assistance. And I believe, quite genuinely,, that I can congratulate Singapore because I
think the principles which I have enunciated have been understood and applied and that
such assistance as has been given has been used to the full and that the results of
that use can be seen all around us. So I congratulate you. / 4 
But the benefits of this kind of international co-operation don't stop there.
Thlere is the advantage to students, and let us again take Singapore, of being educated
not only in one country, not only in Australia. Some go there, some go to Canada,
some go to the United States, and some stay in Singapore. And this leads to the
opportunity for a cross-fertiisation of knowledge for people studying particular
practices with slightly different systems in different countries, and then coming
back and being able to marry the best of what they have got from each of the countries
in Which studies have taken place.
Over and above that, there is, think, the enduring advantage that people
who live in any country for a number of years come to know that country in which they
live. If they don't know a ccuntry from personal experience, they may read about it
and they may get a completely false picture. But if they have lived there, they know
it. Some don't like it. Most of them do. And knowledge of a country is the beginning
of understanding, and understanding between countries will be a most significant
"~ spin-off from the educational facilities provided.
Later, in the years ahead, one may hope for a cross -fertilisation of students
Australians coming to Singapore, Singaporeans coming to Australia, and so on.
This is perhaps, at this stage, a dream. And yet we are at the moment in the middle
of a Commonwealth Prime. Ministers' Conference where Heads of Governmenzt are
meeting to try to see if they can overcome the exigencies and exacerbations of the
present and keep together in order to have a chance of making ideals and dreams come
true. I believe that it will be useful if this Heads of Government Meeting says
what the Commonwealth is. And I hope they will say it properly and that means
they will say what I believe. I believe that the Commonwealth is an association
of free, independent nations with some common tradition,. meeting without decisions
being taken by vote there are no majority opinions binding on any member of the
Commonwealth, there is no consensus which has any binding effect whatever on an~ y
member of the Commonwealth who does not agree with the majority who have a
consensus. Rather it is an association through which people can exchange their ideas
of what should be done, and in what fields it should be done. And there has developed
during the course of this Conference clear indications of what all members of the
Commonwealth feel are the fields in which action should be taken.
Looking forward through this decade and into the -future, what are the
problems likely to face not only the Commonwealth but nations generally? It appears,
and I agree with this, that most believe that one of those problems is the maintenance
of peace in the world. Some think peace is threatened by a disparity of wealth in
countries. I beg leave to differ. I do not think Cambodia was invaded because she
was poorer than the invaders. 
I do not think that the wars we have seen since the second great war resulted
from a disparity of income. I do not think that the Five Power Pact which we Britain,
Singapore, Malaysia, New Zealand are to enter into is designed to try and protect
this'region from an attack by people who are poorer.
Rather do I feel it is an ideological urge for conquest, then that ideological
urge will be able to be met, and more importantly, more hopefully, that those who
may have such an ideological urge or nationalistic urge will see that the game is not
worth the candle. At any rate the maintenance of peace is one of the items which the
Commonwealth Association sees as significant for the future.
Anoth, 7r is the freeing of trade. I-don't . want to go into this in any great
depth because &amp; early every country is thoroughly in favour a! freeing trade and reducing
tariffs except for the commodities which they manufacture. But they can see the
unarguable principles in favour of doing it for the commodity other people manufacture.
But there still is a need to see what can be done so that new countries who
are pulling themselves up by their bootstraps, who are using the technical knowledge
they get to produce more, will have an opport unity at least of selling their produce.
And this is another matter which all those sitting around the conference table in
Singapore believe it will be difficult to solve Mks, as I thinktc it would be difficult
to solve it. But does that matter so much if the problem is first isolated and then,
difficult or not, attempts are made to seek to overcome it.
There is next the question which I have touched before, the provision of
aid between country and country. I don't think I need to add anything to what I have
said as to how I and my country approach this problem. But it is not one-sided. And
as an illustration of this, may I give you a brief anecdote of what happened this
morning during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference. ( I shouldn't
do this, I know. I am breaking secrecy but there is nothing much in it, as you will
see when I have finished.)
But it was suggested by a great friend of mine from a Caribbean country
that sometimes donor countries came to these conferences with a rather patronishing
kind of approach you know, " What can we do for you sort of thing, one that I
thoroughly understand. But it just so happened that Australia is a sugar-producin-g
country, as the Caribbeans are sugar-producing countries, and England is going
into the European Economic Community and is going to seek, I think, to look after
the interests of Caribbean sugar-producing countries, but not necessarily Australia
as a sugar-producing country.
But the Caribbeans are inclined to help us. So I was able to point out to my
friend that we didn't go there with a patronising air at all. What we went there for
really was to ask him and his Caribbean brother to help this brother within the
Commonwealth, and was able to paraphrase those remarks of the late President
John Kennedy that we do not come here to ask what we can do for Barbados, but
rather to ask what Barbados can do for us. / 6 
.6.
And this is an illustration of the tW07way traffic which can take place in
this field of trade.
Another matter which wil occupy the Conference for long is under the
heading of racism, which I think you described, Sir, as the White Australia Policy.
Heads of State are prepared to say, as I am, that racism is an unmitigated evil, and
it is. I am prepared to say and mean that we will abolish racism within Australia.
I don't think that those of you who have been there will have noticed
any racism unless you were extraordinarily unfortunate while you were livig
in my country. There is legal discrimination still in some Australian States
against Aboriginals, but my Government has told those States that those laws will
be repealed by those States within two years, or if they are not, we will move in
and repeal them. So there will be no Governmental discrimination inside Australia.
I am prepared to say that and to mean it.
I think there are other countries where racial discrimination may be
more pronounced than it is in my own. I know people always tend to talk on this
subject as if it were just a matter of Negro versus European that was involved
in the word " racism", but I think all of you will know that it is not. I think that
all of you will know that there are grave strains in a com munity when there are
two races or more each forming significant proportions of the population.
You are a lucky State. You are able, quite properly, to call yourself
a n-. ilti-racial society, and get the good feeling that comes from being able to
say that. And if one replies and says yes, but you are 90 per cent Chinese or
per cent Chinese and therefore Singapore is homogenouc" as we will keep
Australia homogenous, that nevertheless still enables you to say you are a
multi-racial society.
Well, we are moving a little bit that way. There were 6, 000 non-
European people who became Australian citizens last year we probably have a
little higher percentage of homogeneity than Singapore but there is a good deal of
similarity, I do assure you.
As far as the application of an immigration policy is concerned, I have
no hesitation in saying what I am now going to say, and I propose to make no
apology for saying it.
Looking around the world, I see social problems between Negro and
European in England, I see grave danger to normal living in the split between
the races in the United States. I read not long ago, of some riots between races
not far away from where I am standing now, riots which could easily have spread
to Singapore. I am not going to allow that kind of danger to occur in Australia. There
are racial tensions, and whether there ought to be or not doesn't matter. We live
in a world of reality. We don't live in a world which would be different if we could
shatter it to bits and then remould it nearer to our heart's desire. And in reality,
there is thought there ought not to be tension between races when there are / 7 
large numbers of different races living in one country, and terisions between peoples from
different regions. Sir, in reply to what you said, I can only say this. As far as I am concer.-ed,
any Governmental discrimination of any kind on grounds of race will not exist in
Australia. It will be abolished. I cannot say that feeling won't exist because that is
not under the control of Governments. It will take time aid education for the vast bulk
of a population to have no difference feeling whatever when they are talking to a Negro
or somebody with a different colour skin. It will take time.
At the moment, there are brighter people from any race you care to mention,
and less intelligent people from any race you care to mention. The bright ones have no
trouble, have no difficulty. They are on the same wavelength. They get together, but
it will take some time before we attain the ideal which I think I share with you in common,
where even those who are not so bright will not feel -prejudice towards people who
are different. I think that the coursa which we are following holds great chances of achieving
real racial tolerance. I think it holds better chances than, if we were to risk the ' Kid
of racial conflict that other countries have. I think that if wie build up gradually i-nside
Australia a proportion of people who are not of white skin, then, as that is gradually
done, so there will be a complete lack of consciousness that it is being built up, and
a complete lack of consciousness of difference between the raceg. And if this can be done,
as I think it can, then that may provide the world with the first truly multi-racial
society ;. ith no tensions of any kind possible between any of the races within it. At
any rate this is our ideal.
And if we are misguided in the way in which we, anre seeking to attain it, then
all I can say, Sir, is that we have got the responsibility to try and do it. We have got
the responsibility to try and explain it, and for my own part, I don't propose to
apologise for it.
Now I think I should finish where I began by sayig once again what an honour
it is for me to be here with you who have, I hope, happy memories of my Own country,
who have a true knowledge of my own country, who may assess it differently from me,
but who I hope would have a friendship for Australia, as I have got a friendship for
Singapore. When I first came here there was no wall that was not pock-marked with
, shrapnel. When I first came here, my friend the Australian High Commissioner to the
United Kingdom had close aquaintance with Changi when it was quite a different building
from that which it is now. From that time I have been here occasionally not often
enough met many people from here and steadily grown to admire and like this State.
It prcyides stability. It provide~ s a success story.
And for all those reasons I thank you greatly for this opportunity to talkto
V, 6u tonight. 



Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference 1971
" COIV'. OiPWLALTH IN T11-1' 7' EVE3' TrIES AND CoMIIYoir'JEALTH DECLARATIOil
õ p4eech by~ the Prime Minister,. Mr. John Gorton
Before I actually discuss the Commonwealth in the Seventies and President
Kaunda's Declaration which is intimately bound up with the Commonwealth in the
Seventies, there is one thing which I think it is rather appropriate to say.
I think it was Mr. Forbes Burnham who in his set speech earlier in this
conference jokingly remarked on whether Great Britain went by the name of Britain
or went by the name of the United Kingdom, which is sometimes confused, and he
thought it might have something to do with the place around the table at which the
representatives from that nation sat. I think perhaps I might add to this.
It is really quite immaterial which place at the table the representatives
of Britain occupy, because if it were not for Britain there wiould be no table at all for
anyone to sit around. We are all of us former colonies and we were, all of us, governed
by former Governments in Great Britain. We all achieved independence sometimes
given more reluctantly than at others but we all achieved independence. And having
received it, we were able to form an association which I thinky no former colonial
power -would have been able to form with those whom it had previously governed.
And as we look forward to the seventies, and as we look forward to what the
Commonwealth may do or may not do in those years ahead, we may perhaps spare
just one brief moment to look back with some appreciation of the acts which made the
Commonwealth possible.
There is undoubtedly going to be in this new decade further problems with
which the Commonwealth must concern itself in all areas. And it is because we are
at the beginning of a new decade that I thought it was appropriate for President Kaunda
to set down, as he did, statements as to what the Commonwealth was, how the
Commonwealth can operate, and what the Commonwealth saw as the major problems
facing it in this coming decade of the seventies. And I was therefore able to support
fully in principle the unusual course that such a declaration z-hould be made by this
Conference. But I would like first to express Australia's opinion of what the Commonwealth
is and as to how we think it should operate.
It is, as the proposed Declaration quite clearly says, " a voluntary association
of independent sovereign States" and it comes from the six continents and the five
oceans and it has certain positions in common and certain aims in common. It may
be that in the achievement of those aims and in the working o: Z the Commonwealth as
it meets together, there may be required to be changes of some kind in the way it
operates in future. 
But 1 believe that in other cases it is vital that there should not be changes
but there should be retention of the way in which the Commonwealth has operated in
the past. In that way the nations Of the Commonwealth come together to exchange views,
to listen to the point of view of those who come from other nations, to get to know
individuals which is of quite some importance. But it never operates in the contejt
that there should be decisions made by Commonwealth members that are binding on
any single member of the Commonwealth, and it never operates on the concept
that a general consensus of view should be in any way binding or taken seriously
and acted upon by any constituent member who does not share in that consensus.
I believe, Mr. Chairman, and I wish it to be clearly stated in the record,
that Australia believes that that principle must be retained. It is utterly essential
that there should be no attempt, conscious or unconscious, to turn the Commonwealth
into a mini-United Nations. Because as I see it, if that course is followed, then the
Commonweal th itself will tend to disintegrate. It cannot be a gathering of people
seeking to impose views on any single member.
And that goes for all those sitting around this table. Certainly that is the
concept that Australia has of the role of the Commonwealth. Those are the ideals,
those are the concepts which we seek in the Commonwealth, and I would like all to
be aware of that.
VWe ourselves do not, and will not, seek to impose our point of view on
anything on anyone else. Similarly, we will not accept the concept that there could
be an imposition on us of a point of view with which we do niot agree.
And so that, Sir, is whAt I would hope the Commonwealth would continue
to be in the Seventies a voluntary association of independent sovereign states, each
state retaining complete independence, no state, either alone or in conjunction with
others, seeking t o try to make decisions binding on any other member of the
Commonwealth. I think, perhaps, that it is not altogether a good development that we have
been so concerned with seeking to get forms of words which can meet with general
agreement. The end result of that is very often there is a form of words to which
everybody says they subscribe and views which everybody says they hold, but a form
of words which in fact does not fully set out completely the views of anybody. And
I think it is much better for the Commonwealth to operate i future without worrying
about different views being expressed. / 3 
For our part, we would be perfectly happy to be the only nation sitting around
this table who disagreed with what everybody else wanted to do or say. And we would
think none the worse at all off any other nation should they alone differ from the viewis
of others. This, of course, is an extreme example, but it ic~ put to underline v-hat
I believe to be the principles on which the Commonwealth should operate as it approaches
the . problems of the seventies. Those problems have in my view, very properly been
isolated in President Kaunda's Declaration. I would like to see them stated as: problems
with which the Commonwealth must concern itself and not go any further in indicating
how the Commonwealth or members of it should concern themselves with overcoming
thlem. But there is a value to my mind at this stage, at the beginning of this decade,
in saying what the problems are and, in the old traditions of the Commonwealth,
exchanging our views on those problems and the methods which might be adopted to
tackle them. In the Declaration we have before us, which deal-c with the Common., wealth
in the Seventies and I think the study of that and the Declaration are indivisible
there is properly first set down the need to maintain peace i the prosperity of all
Commonwealth nations is to proceed without interruption. There could be few, if any,
who would deny that this was a major task, and that this was something which vitally
concerns us all.
I don't myself believe that peace is threatened, others generally do, by
a difference in wealth between one country and another. That may exacerbate tensions,
but I do not believe that that is a maj or threat. Rather I tMA that the threat comes
from conflicting ideologies, and that, I would suggest, mighnt be recognised by all as
the major cause threatening the continuance of world peace. It was not a difference
in living standards which led to North Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia. It wias not a
difference in living standards which led to Laos being subject to military aggressioni.
It was a difference in ideology.
I would have liked this Declaration to contain within it the words that " the
Commonwealth condemns any armed attack made by any nation upon any other nation."
I cannot myself see why there should be any objection to that. If peace is to be
maintained, and there is a basic need to maintain it, there Should not be aggression by
any nat ion upon another, and more particularly perhaps there should not be any
aggression upon any small state.
It is quite properly stated later in this Declaration that the independence of
all the countries sitting around this table is of concern to all others. Any armed
attack made on any small state anywhere puts in jeopardy all small states everywhere.
I hope a recognition of that might be a contribution towards the maintenance of that
peace which President Kaunda so rightly put at the head of his Declaration. A 
The other problems which we must meet, the ones we all have, include
the question of providing international aid to countries which are developing but
still have much scope for development. May 1, for emphasis, say in regard to that,
that, comparatively, Australia is a rich country. Comparatively, if one takces other
comparisons, it is not a rich country. I don't feel that we are doing any injustice
to anybody by being a comparatively well-off country. We have been lucky we
Work hard. But I don't think that is doing any injustice to anyone, and I am glad
to see that that phrase does not, as I understand it, appear in the declaration now.
That is not to say that there is not a need for those who are better off to
assist those who are not so well off, and that is not to say that it is not to the self
interest of those who are better off to try to assist those who are still growing.
I do not see-the aim of international aid as being a handout, rather must it be a
well thought-out attempt to provide to those nations who are in need of further
development the capacity for that development, to provide the capital -for a
particular project, for industrialisation, for improving agriculture, for providing
the means by which such countries can assist themselves. And certainly, as-the
Chairman of this Conference so cogently remarked several days ago, no nation
is its brother's keeper. It isn't. But it must be its brother's helper; it can help
its brother to help himself. And in that way there can be no obligation. Obligationo
are nasty things. So I would say, in approaching the problem of aid, what is needed is a
clear understanding that what is done in this field is done to provide the capability
and the capital to the nations who are developing so they can raise themselves to an
economic position where they will no longer need such help. This will take some
time but this is the basis of the approach to this problem.
I would add one thing to my remarks on aid. This is provided, and I
hope it will continue to be provided, and we are playing our part in international
aid, but let us all listen to those other words of the Chairman of this Conference.
That is that while it is necessary to assist the growth, to assist the people of
developing countries to help themselves throughout the world, there can be no
obligation to do this indefinitely if every advance so made is swallowed up by an
increase in the population of the countries being helped. This is a matter under
the control of the countries concerned and this is of as vital interest to the real
economic growth of the countries as is the amount of aid of one kind or another
that is provided. Those statements in themselves are not enough to deal with this second
point which President Kaunda made. Supposing this is done, supposing nations are
helped to industrialise, are helped to increase production of various kinds so that
internally perhaps the standards of living may rise. Yet that will not be enough
unless we can somehow devise outlets in other countries for the products which
are produced as the result of such industrialisation. The two mtters go 
absolutely hand in hand, and -the.-two matters are ones. with which the Commonwealth
should concern itself, with which vie-. axe bappy to concern ourselves. The solutions
are not easy because there are vested interests to stop the filow of manufactured goods
not only from less developed countries but even from such countries as Australia.
These will need to be matters which we must seek to overcome in the sever-ties" and
proper matters to which we might direct our attention.
Another matter in this Declaration which I believe to be of great moment Li
the Seventies is the question of feeling between different races. It is of no use, I
think, pretending that in general there are not, in many countries at any rate, racial
feelings between people with different coloured skins. There ought not to be but there
is, and we must start from that premise. Let us try and do one thing that is-. reasonably
easy, and that is that each one of us say as I am prepared to say and mean that
we will, within our own country, abolish all governmental discrimination of any kcind.
That we can do, that each nation here can do, and that each nation here has not yet
completely done. If we could do that, and I1a m prepared to do it I will do it anyw~ ay
that would be one advance. But not enough, because that after all is onlyjr governmental
discrimination and there would still remain the areas in which governmental
discrimination was not a factor.
And can we perhaps seek to diagnose this illness of racialism? For only by
proper diagnosis can a proper cure be worked out. I think there is not a feeling
between countries when those countries contain people of different races. There is
not, I hope, a feeling against Australia by Zambia, and certainly no feeling against
Zambia by Australia. I don't believe that the people of any nation feel objections to
other nations on social grou nds. That would be my first attempt at a diagnosis of
the problem. But we see that within nations this problem is hard to eradicate and it is
hardest to eradicate if in any nation there is a large proportion of people with a
different skin colour from others. That is why, I think, we see more evidence of
racial feeling coming to the surface in a country where such a situation exists.
If that is so, how is that overcome? Well, a beginning, I think could be
made, by making sure that, if there are in any countries large groups of people ofdifferent
race, there is not, to reinforce that racial feeling, economic differences
affecting any particular race. Such differences reinforce any racial feeling that
there may be, and we must give our attention to that.
And, secondly, we should try to see, all of us, in such ways that we can,
that in the circumstances I have outlined, there should not be a reinforcing GIf racial
feeling by religious feeling because that again reinforces and makes it difficult
for this whole problem to be overcome. And perhaps in these 1970' s, we may be
able to take some steps along this road. e / 6 
It will take a long, long time -in my opinion for attitudes of the masses
completely to change. There is no such attitude among intelligent people, but it is
largely there in the masses. In the circumstances I have outlined, it will take a
long time to change, but if each of us in our own countries seeks to do what we car-,
then gradually this change will take place.
I don't think it can be forced, I don't think it can be a forced change but I
do think there should be a constant attempt, and I do think that attempt can well be
successful. We believe that the Commonwealth, as it is at present constituted, and
without any changes, is of value and has proved itself to be so. We also believe
that the potential value of the Commonwealth is much greater than at present. This
value is slightly vitiated, as we have seen in this conference, by us all spending
most of the time talking at enormous length about the things on which we disagree.
I don't say that we shouldn't talk about things on which we disagree. We should.
We should each put our point of view and others should say they agree with it or
disagree with it and then go on to something else. Something else, I would hope, on which
we all agreed and could work on with a common goal.
So we see the Commonwealth as of value, provided it operates on the
principles I have enunciated. We see it of an even greater value in the future because
it is likely that if our efforts are successful, then the areas of disagreement will
contract", the things on which we have discussions from different sides can be
reduced. If this happens, there will be a bigger opportunity to work on matters
on which we agree, and we might have more constructive results in the end.
It has been suggested to me from time to time you might have even
diplomatically hinted at it yourself, Mr. Chairman that Australia tends sometimes
to be rather an intrangisent country. But in declarations, which I hope will not
become a practice, or in resolutions, or in other matters, we do not think that we
should put our name or give our support to statements that we do not thoroughly
agree with or say we will take courses of action which we will not, in fact, adhere
to. And we will not do this. 



TRANSCR IPT PRIME MINISTER'S ADDRESS TO THE NATION
( NATIONWIDE RADIO AND TELEVISION)
THE ECONOMY 2.9 JAN~ 19,11
You have all read much lately on the problemr, of inflation..., the problem
~ f ent rises in costs and prices and the prospects fo the future, In some
ways the matter has been a little over-diamatised perhaps, but there is nevertheless
a very real problem for discussion.
The disc-ic'sioi1 itself has resulted from two developments. First, tile
rise of 1. 9% in the Consumer Price Index during the last three months of-1970
the largest rise for some fourteen years. And secondly the likely effects on the
economy-of the Arbitration Commission's award of a 6% increase in wages an~ d
salaries a much greater increase than anyone had thought possible.
Cabinet has met this week to discuss the problem and I want to tell you
briefly how we see the present situation, and the approaches which we believe sh-ould
be made to attack the root causes of inflation. But first let me refer to tile rise
in the Consumer Pr ice Index.
We believe that too muc h has been made of this single quarter's f igures.
Much ofi the rise was due to the once-and-for-all inclusion of cost increases due to
indirect taxes imposed by the Budget on such items as cigarettes, wine, petrol and
so on. Without them the Index rise would have been about 1. 1% or a little more.
So the real rate of increase was not nearly as great as the figures suggested.
But, having made allowance for that, the rate of increase was uncom~ fortably
high and reflected a too rapid underlying rate of price increase. Now, in that
situation, of a too rapid underlying rate of price increase in that situation we are
faced with a 6% wage and salary rise which will add perhaps $ 900 million a year
to wages and salaries arid therefore purchasing power in a full year.
We will not, at the present rate of production, produce sufficient additional
goods and services to be exchanged for that additional money at constarnt pricec. It
would be fine to give buyers an extra $ 900 million a year if we were going to produce
$ 900 million worth of extra goods to sell. But we are not. Therefore, unless some
action is taken, there will be a boost to inflation. And growing inflation is one of
the worst ills from which a nation can suffer.
In considering what action should be taken Cabinet sought first to discover
the areas in which demand seemed to be growing most strongly. It appeared that
consumer spending was not growing strongly. A high rate of growth in demnand has not,
at any rate as yet, shown up in this field.
The areas in which demand is growing strongly are in the public sector
that is spending by Governments in private investment in new plant and machinr~ ery
and fi non-dwelling building construction that is on. such things as the new blocks
of offices now growing up in such profusion in twe cities of Australia. / 2 
We therefore believe our first line of attaclk should be to ensure
not only a restraint on Government expenditure but a reduction in Government
expenditure this financial year.
Before I went to Singapore I issued instructions to all Departments and
to the Public Service Board that action must be taken to restrain the growth in the
number of public servants.
We are now working out reductions in the Government's budgeted
expenditure in other directions. Implementing these reductions will be
uncomfortable. Australians will not get as much as they had hoped to get
in the way of new public amenities of various kinds. But the reductions are
necessary. By reducing the demand of Governments, more is mrade available to
meet the demand of private persons.
Secondly we believe that the rate of growth of new private investment
in plant and equipment and machinery should be reduced.
And thirdly the rate of growth, and the demand pressures of new nondwelling
building construction must also be reduced.
A considerable proportion of this latter demand is said to be due to the
inflow of overseas capital for the specific purpose of building such buildings.
The Government wishes it to be known that it would prefer overseas investors
who are considering financing non-dwelling construction of this kind not to do so
until they have first discussed their plans and the dates on whichi they propose to
b . gin construction with the Treasury.
We have considered taking monetary and fiscal measures at this time.
That is restricting credit or raising interest rates still further or increasing
taxation. We do not believe that the present situation requires a lift in interest
rates, already high, and we would prefer to look forward to a future time
necessarily indefinite when other measures we take might permit a reduction
of such rates. Nor do we think that the present situation calls for a rise in taxation.
I have already said that the rate of growth in consumer spending is
not growing significantly as yet.
To increase indirect taxes at this time would therefore be to further
increase prices in an effort to reduce demand in an area where demand is not
excessive, and by adding to the Consumer Price Index it would quite possibly
stimulate an inflationary psychology. 
To increase income taxes at this time would, again, be to tackle demand
in an area where demand is not now excessive. It would not strike at the root of
the tzouble, and its financial effects over a quarter of a year would be minimal.
We do not reject these economic weapons and say we will not use them
at some future time if it is necessary. If it is necessary, and useful in tackling
the problem, we will use them however unpopular that may be. But we do not
believe that to use them now would be of help. And we do not believe indeed that
at any time the use of this-Tclassic weapons against inflation would of itself and
alone solye our problems.
Having said this, and having indicated some of the actions the
Government will be taking to reduce demand in the sectors which are growing too
rapidly, I come to what constitutes the major threat of inflation.
No matte: what action a Government takes no matter how severely it
taxes or how ruthlessly it cuts Government spending no matter how it seeks to
redirect resources if that is what it wishes to do it will not be able to beat
inflation if wages and salaries rise more quickly than production. Demands for
over-award payments, for extra holidays, for additional holiday pay, for shol-ter
hours can only be met in one of two ways. Either the amount of goods and
services producei is increased sufficiently to enable these requests to be met
without inflation or the requests are met at the cost of inflation which ultimately
destroys the benefits sought and leaves us all worse off.
Price control, imposed by Governments, is no answer to this problem.
It is superficially appealing, but in fact all our advice is, and our beliefs are, that
it is not an answer to the problem. There is a limit to the extra costs which
et: . ployers can absorb before passing on cost increases by increasing prices. The
inexorable fact is that if we try to pay higher wages without providing an
equivalent increase in production we will have inflation. And yet this course is
the one that Australia has been following and this approach is the real inflationary
threat to Australia. Given our present Arbitration system and State Wages Tribunals, control
of this situation is not now entirely in the hands of Governments. Yet Governments
can do something to combat the over-award payments now being negotiated by
employers. At present, employers are able to buy industrial peace by conces * sions,
the cost of which they know they can pass on to the consumer. it can be made more
difficult to pass on extra costs.
Increased internal competition wouild help. And internal competition can
be increased if the High Court upholds the validity of the present Trade Practices Act,
both interstate and intrastate. If it does uphold the validity, the Act can be
strengthened and lead to more internal competition. If the Court holds the Act in part
invalid, then we will have to consider approaching the Australian people and asking
them to give us more power to make the Act wholly valid.
Further, external competition with industries in Australia when internal
prices rise unduly in those industries because of costs, due to over-award payments
and other concessions negotiated by employers in those industries, will have to be
considered. 
And now I sum up. There has been a tendency to over-dramatize the
present inflationary situation. But there is a real threat of inflation inherent in
the underlying demand and in the recent Arbitration Commission Award, in State
Wages Tibunals Awards, and in increased over-a-ward payments which might be
expected to flow on from that.
We propose to take action against demand inflation by reducing
Government spending, by encouraging postponement of private investment in
plant, by discouraging the present rate of construction of non-dwelling
construction such as office buildings and by other ancillary actions of lesser
importance which we have in mind. We will seek to increase internal competition
and to examine cases where competition from external sources might be justified,
so as to make it more difficult for employers to concede union demands.
We are prepared in the future to take any further action which may be
considered necessary to play our full part in beating inflation. But unless wage
fixing authorities, unions and employers, also play their full part, our actions in
the future by the classic weapons of taxation and reducing demand could impose
more hardship than would otherwise be necessary and not have the oorrective
effect -which they would otherwise have. What we seek in Australia is production
which increases yearly and wages and salaries which also increase yearly but not
faster than production, so that there can be a real increase in living standards.
In the present employment situation full employment with the
growingr public demand for more Government services, it will be'uncomfortable
tc achieve this. Many things for which an admirable and persuasive case can be
made out may have to be postponed. But in the long run we will all be better off.
We all have a part to play in attaining that goal. And for its part, within the
Lirnitations the law imposes on it, the Government will play its full part. 



FIFTH COMMONWEALTH EDUCATION CONFERENCE
CANBERRA, ACT 3 FEBRUARY 1971
2n~ ing LA : S bthfe~ Prnim Miite, Mr. L h~ rton
Your Excellencies, Honourable Ministers, Mr Secretary-General, Ladies and
Gentlemen It is an honour for me to be opening this Conference and to be welcoming
to Canberra so many distinguished educators from so many parts of the world.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I extend a warm welcome to our
overseas guests and to our owfl State Ministers and leading educators from within
Australia. This is the first time a Commonwealth Education Conference has been held
in Australia and there will be stimulation and benefit for mainy of us in what you discuss.
I am sure that a sound basis of co-operation already exists among all those present.
In many ways, this F ifth Commonwealth Education Conference is a more
accurate reflection of the benefits of the Commonwealth of Nations than the recent
Heads of Government Meeting in Singapore. It is the co-operation that takes place on
the practical level in education and in countless other fields that gives this unique
free association of nations its durability and its strength.
It is not realistic to expect thirty-one diverse nations to be able to reach
a consensus of opinion on highly controversial political issues, nor is it realistic
to assume that if they do reach a consensus it in any way affects those who are not
part of that consensus. But 1. would further say that unanimous viewpoints and attitudes
are not necessary for a successful Commonwealth reiationship.
Unftortunately, though understandably, it is the periodic Heads of Government
Meeting and the inevitable political stresses and strains that attract most publicity.
To many people these summit gatherings are the Commonvwealth. Well, they are
certainly important and I suppose they represent the ultimate in the Commonwealth's
political activities. But it is the many practical strands running beneath the surface that form
the basic fabric of the Commonwealth. And that is why I am particularly glad to be
here, because this Conference, less than two weeks after Singapore, helps to put the
whole concept of the Commonwealth in perspective.
It is in the field of education among others that a great deal has been done
which has been of mutual advantage for Commonwealth members. And this Conference
is a tangible demonstration that the Commonwealth of Nations does work, that it is
of practical value, and that when we get together, our meetings aren't always political,
but are often designed to come to grips with issues of common concern, such as the
education of our various peoples. 
After all, so much of the future of all our countries depends on education.
When we remember that one in every four people in the world today lives in a
Commonwealth country, it comes home with dramatic force, I think, that the
Commonwealth of Nations as a free assembly can do much for the common good by
such exchanges of views and experiences at practical levels as will take place here
during this Conference.
In that particular field of education, the Commonwealth has a really
worthwhile role to play. It is an activity which goes on year in and year out, important
to all our welfare as individual countries, and to the Commonwealth itself, concerned
as it is with democracy and liberty.
And liberty is more than the freedom of the market-place. Liberty of
the mind is perhaps ultimately the key to our survival. And to allow liberty of the
mind to have a full flowering is the-task, the ideal of the educator in all countries,
for education is the great liberator, and from properly educated minds flows
understanding which is the basis of co-operation and progress in so many other
fitelds. We I4ave our problems in Australia, as you have yours. There is in this
country, an endless pressure on our education systems. More of our people are
wanting more education, and more are wanting higher education, and more of our
young people are staying at school longer. In fact, the number staying on beyond
the compulsory age has doubled in the last decade.
There is a ceaseless demand for more teachers, and for teachers w~ ho are
said to require much higher qualifications are said to require. And on top of it all,
there is a questioning of old methods, and a searchin-g for new ones, as our society
at all its levels recognises great changes resulting from technological progress and
from different attitudes of mind, particularly among the younger generation different
attitudes of mind, different desires as to what will provide a good life, a questioning
of whe ther purely material things are as important as perhaps they were thought
by past generations. So no longer are the old methods and the old standards good enough. The
times are too demanding. The challenge is real. We are constantly endeavouring
to match needs to resources which I note is your theme at this Conference but, at
any rate in Australia, we also have to bear in mind the need to match resources to
needs and this may not be quite so easy or lead to quite so quick a progress as we
would like. But we have made a lot of progress in expanding our education systems
in Australia. Under our Federal system, the prime responsibility for educations ic
with State Governments, but the Commonwealth Government is deeply involved,
directly and indirectly. And I have considerable first-hand knowledge of this
involvement for I was the first Minister for Education and Science in the Commonwealth. o / 3 
We are spending on education more than fIive times as much per head of
population as we were spending a decade ago. It has gone up from $ 4-2 per head of
population to $ 25 per head of population.... a much bigger population.
This year, just over four per cent of total Federal Government expenditure
is specifically for education, while on top of that, the Australian States are now
committing about one-third of their total revenues and loan expenditure to this field.
They have more than doubled their expenditure per head of population in the last
decade. So while there are always newspaper headlines which tell us there is
a " Crisis in Education", we are, I believe, making progress. We don't measure
progress simply by the increased amount of money. It is how, where and why it is
spent that matters. And here the need for flexibility is, I think, of very great
importance. None of us can freeze old systems of education in a world in a ferment
of change. So here in my country, we are seeking new ways of co-operation with
Australian States. With them we are looking at the standards of the curriculum in
our schools, to see where jointly we can do things better. Wie have looked, and hellped,
in science education and in technical education, and in the building of teacher colleges,
in such things as the teaching of Asian languages, and in other fields. This is goixng
on all the time. It is not goi:-g on as quickly as educators would like probably not
nearly as quickly. It is perhaps not going on nearly as quicly as the population would
like, but it is going on, and improvements are made year by year.
At the tertiary level, we now have here colleges of advanced education as an
alternative to universities not as institutions which provide a lesser brand of
education, but as institutions which are alternatives in that they provide a slightly
different approach to studies in tertiary fields. They are geared more directly to
the specific needs of industry and commerce, and I think they will prove to be a most
signicant development in tertiary education in Australia in this decade.
And for ourselves, -we have in our Budget this year to assist in
Commonwealth educational co-operation, a sum of some $ 890, 000.
Now, Sir, I think I have said quite enough. You will no doubt hear much
more of these matters from the experts here as your Conference proceeds. And
so all that remains for me to do is to wish good luck and success to the Conference
and to declare it open. 



YOUNG-LBERALCONVENTION,
CANBERRA, ACT FEBRUARY 1971
Speech by the Prime Minister, Mr. John Gorton
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity-of making a short
apetoch , nt the beginning of the Convention.
It is greatly hea rtening to a Party to see 200 delegates of Young Liberal
organisations from all over Australia coming here to Canberra to discuss those matters
which they feel are of importance to the Party now, and which they believe will be of
importance to the Party in the future. They are matters which, in the short term
comparatively short term they believe, as I do, will lead to a Liberal victory in
1972, and in the longer term, will be of great benefit to the people of Australia in
the decade ahead.
So it is significant and important that this meeting chould be taking place.
But having said that, Sir, I confess to a little disappointment at some of the motions
which are to be discussed by this gathering from all over Australia perhaps more
disappointment at what is not down on the Conference agenda than at what is.
There are many suggestions that taxation in one form or another should be
reduced, that death duties should be abolished, that other taxes should be , looked at, but
there are few constructive suggestions I hope you will forgive me for saying this thetare
few constructive suggestions for really tackling the major problem which faces
Australia now, and yet this is that which above all else I thin:: should be engaging the
minds of Young Liberals.
There can be no doubt that what Australia must do first is to beat the threat
of inflation which now faces it. I don't think that it faces us in a stark way as yet, but
as I said when speaking to the nation, the underlying rate of growth shown in the
last Consumer Price Index, coupled with the large wage and salary increases we can
expect as a result of Arbitration Court and State Wages Tribunal decisions and
over-award payments, make it necessary to ensure that the underlying threat does not
become a real threat. For if it does, then we inside Australia will be the poorer, all
of us. We will not be able to build the number of schools, the number of hospitals, the
number of public amenities which we otherwise would be able to build.
-For if you have a school which is estimated to cost let us say, half a million
dollars and because of direct wage costs and because of indirect costs then the same
school, the same size, the same quality, turns out to cost $ 700, 000, we wilt not be
able to build the same number of school and tht is self-evident. Unlress, of
course, we so mulct, we so ax iL.-private sector in Australia that it loses all incentive
to produce those things on which ultimately the public sector depends. So this inside
Australia is an immense threat to u3; outside it threatens . hat export programme
which is now so well under way in manufactured go. Ils. It poses ' ragc choices to the
primary producer and it bears down immediately and heavily on the pensioner, on the
retired man who is not a pensioner and who is too ofaen thought about too little. / 2 
So this, I believe, is one of the significant the most significant first task
which we have before us. I hope you will discuss this, and I hope you will put your
views as to how this should best be attacked at the root.
There are some things which one can do which ameliorate, which take away
some off the causes, some of the causes in some of the areas where the pressure of
demand is growing most. But what we need is a community agreement of those who
earn wages, who earn salaries, who pay wages, who pay salaries, who consume that
while there is a need and a requirement to increase the living standards of all by
increasing the true wages of all, and that while that must and will be the requirement
of a Liberal Government, yet if one seelks to go too fast and raise wages at a greater
rate than production, then one is self-defeating and doing no good to anybody in
Australia. Well, as you know, we are talking steps in this direction, not the least
being steps let us call them self-denying steps in reducing tile public sector
expenditure that the Commonwealth is to make, And we are also taking steps to see
that State expenditure also does not grow and is reduced.
You often hear this is by way of a parenthesis you often hear attacks
on Commonwealth spending. You read it in leading articles ( Interjection It is
on the agenda:) Well when the matter on the agenda is being discussed, I do hope
that there will be many here who realise that Commonwealth spending at least as
to approximately one-third of the total is not Commonwealth spending at all but State
spending, because it is reflected in the grants, the reimbursemnent grants made to
the States and by the direct purpose grants made to the States.
Too often, and this is really the only point I wish to make, people forget
when talking of the volume of Commonwealth spending, and how it has grown, that in
fact a third of it is not actually Commonwealth spending at all, but the sort of spending
that so many State branches so often say should be increased. The figures, no doubt,
you will all have at your fingertips: But in both these areas, steps are being taken
now. And on the question of reducig the amount which the Commonwealth would
otherwise have spent for its own purposes not for State purposes in this year, there
will be an announcement very shortly showing a significant reduction in what would
otherwvise have been spent. I emphasise " in what would otherwise have been spent"
b ecause while we brought in a Budget at the beginning of this year, we have since
been faced with an increase-of approximately $ 110 million as a result of wage and
salary determinations by the Arbitration Court and by the Commonwealth Public
Service Board. We have been faced with the decision of one of the Houses of Parliament
that during this year the money for the States Receipts Tax should be made available
to the States without there being a tax, and various other costs rising as a result of
increases in costs of materials. / 3 
But that being so, there-will stll-be a very considerable. reduction in
Commonwealth spending, and this has., 1 believe-two advantages, I hope you would
agree with me. One, it does show that we are in; earnest when we talk about the
need to tackle this problem, and, two, it does leave for the private sector more
chance-to get labour and materials for the purposes of the private sector which
again and let us not forget it is that sector from which public spending ultimately
must come. So these will be matters for your concern and your recommendation
and your advice. And other ira tters pale into Borne insignifican~ ce until this is dore
But I hope that we will not let ourselves be swayed by what I think is the
entirely fallacious argument put forward by the ACTU. That is, that wages and salaries
have no effect, or very little effect at all on rises in prices. fLaughter). The
only I know it is almost laughable, but it is seriously put. The only way in
which that could ever be true would be if the additional cost to a manufacturer of rises
in prices and salaries were entirely taken out of the profits that manufacturer was
making. That is the only possible way in vii ich this could happen.
Yet manufacturers and our big firms are not making. excessive profits.
We look at a newspaper and we see a profit for BHP, let us say, which is an enormous
aggregate amount of money. But when you check what the returns on the funds invested
are, you will find, in the form of that company, it is about 6_ 2 ner cent. And you
cannot expect people to invest in this kind of growth in this kin~ d of company at much
less than 6 per cent, If they have saved it, then we believe they should get a proper
benefit from investing it. While I wouldn't undertake to say exactly what a proper
benefit is, I am quite sure that if you look at the returns of our major companies
on funds invested, you will not think they are excessive. And, indeed, if some
organisations, some opposition were to seek to attack these further, then I believe
the danger to Australia would be that people would stop investi-ng in such companies,
that they would look for an easier way to earn their money, that they would go into
tertiary industries, service industries, some other way which ira de it easier and less
destructive and less distracting.
So these are again all matters for your consideration. They will be, I have
no doubt, debated at great length in the Parliament when it meets, and I hope wAth some
benefit. But in overcoming, we will do as we have already done, one or two unpopular
things. I hope that all the Liberal Party and all the Young Liberals will realise
the necessity for such unpopular things and will realise that a transient unpopularity is
as rnflhing compared wm the popularity which would flow to a government which
successfully overcame the problems now before it and,, more importantly than t hat,
is as nothing to the benefit which would flow to the country from such action by such
a government. Sir, you told me to speak for ten minutes or so, and this I have done.
You did indicate that you would like me to speak on the Commonwealth Conference
at Singapore, but there is little more to say on that. I think you have all read about
it and heard . aebout it, may have seer. me speaking on TV about it. It would be
rather a rehash, I think, if I were to sliend any time on this other than to say one
thing. / 4 
The Commonwealth of Nations, in my view, wilil only survive if all those
in it accept the fact that it is not an organisation which can pass any resolutions
binding on all its members, that it should not try to do this, that it should not claim
a consensus binding on all its members, but should continue to be a loose voluntary
organisation, spending most of its time on those areas in which it can agree, rather
than seeking to become a small United Niations. This 1 have said before, ard this
I think I will not labour now.
So, Sir, having put before the Young Liberals what I think the major
problem in Australia is today, I now leave them to debate. May I make this plea?
If people are to come from as far as you have come, many of you, if you
are to debate motions of significance to Australia's future, then it is essential
that you should debate them with knowledge and with facts and Seek to arrive at
a conclusion through discussion, not seek to impose a conclusioin through having
made up your mind before you start. J say this because,, again, in this agenda, there
are matters such as people saying that Australia has not attempted tozaise an
Army by other than National Service. This is not so. 1 am sure there will be people
here who will know it is not so and will be able to argue about it. And, similarly,
there are other matters of the kind.
But looking at the second point on the agenda
" That his Convention calls u~ ion the Federal Liberal Government
to emulate the policies of the British Conservative Government to
substantially curb public expenditure"
I'm not sure about the social services, I will put that aside,,-
" and limit expenditure to all Government Departments to stop the
uncontrolled growth of bureaucracy"
I can only say, Sir, that I must have had a little prescience before this was put
on the Agenda. This was something likze the prescience I apparently had when I
got a telegram from Bert Kelly saying " We urge you strongly to export the rams"
and they went that night!
Sir, I now declare this Conference of tie Young Liberals to be open. 


